<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880920-0232 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-09-20-88 2311EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u i AM-Haiti 3rdLd-Writethru   09-20 1147</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Haiti, 3rd Ld-Writethru,a0808,1180</SECOND><HEAD>Avril Appeals For Calm As Mutinies Spread</HEAD><NOTE>Eds: SUBS grafs 2-3 pvs `Avril, who ...armed forces.'' with 2grafs to UPDATE with government announcing retirement of eightgenerals, including Regala; PICKS up 4th pvs `But reports ...';SUBS 13th graf pvs `Nine other ..' with five grafs to conform,include names of commanders ousted in mutinies; one more dead,demonstration planned; PICKS up 14th pvs: Soldiers who ...; SUBS28th pvs `On Monday ..' with 1 graf to conform; PICKS up 29th graf:Soldiers of...; DELETES grafs 33 to bottom pvs `Opposition leaders...' to conform.</NOTE><BYLINE>By PIERRE YVES-GLASS</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) _ Soldiers mutinied and civilianworkers in three state-run companies went on strike Tuesday in whatappeared to be a popular uprising against the vestiges of Lt. Gen.Henri Namphy's ousted regime.   Radio stations said the revolt spread after the newly installedgovernment of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril failed to expel armycommanders who had been left in place.   Avril, who declared himself president Sunday after Namphy wasdeposed in a military coup, appointed a new armed forces chiefTuesday and appealed for an end to the unrest. The government alsoannounced Tuesday night that eight generals were retired.   Avril said the government was taking steps to satisfy ``the mosturgent demands of the members of the armed forces.''   But reports of reprisal killings, demonstrations and militarymutinies grew.   ``I'm afraid we're on the eve of another insurrection,'' agovernment official said privately.   Soldiers around the country mutinied Monday and Tuesday andremoved their commanders, many of whom had served under the threepreceding governments of Namphy, Leslie Manigat and Jean-ClaudeDuvalier.   ``We will chase out of the army all supporters of Namphy,Manigat and Duvalier,'' a policeman at a station in downtownPort-au-Prince, where soldiers removed their commander, said onindependent Radio Inter. The army runs the police in Haiti.   On Tuesday, civilian workers at the state electricity company,port authority and flour mill went on strike to force the removalof their state-appointed managers, radio stations said.   Workers looted and tore apart by hand the house of Jean-ClaudeSouriac, head of the electricity company while two armed soldiersstood by, witnesses said. The flour mill manager also was removed,radio stations said, but the port authority manager still held hisjob late Tuesday.   The fate of the three managers was not known.   Radio stations said gunmen killed four people in apparentreprisal for the Sept. 11 massacre of 13 people during a Mass at aRoman Catholic church and other atrocities linked to Namphy'sgovernment.   Ten other people have been reported killed since Avril seizedpower. The coup was led by non-commissioned officers andlower-ranking soldiers in Namphy's own presidential guard. Namphywas exiled to the Dominican Republic, which shares the island ofHispaniola with Haiti.   In apparent attempt to quell the uprising, the government issueda communique on state television Tuesday night announcing that ithad retired eight generals and promoted four other officers.   The government said among those retired were Maj. Gen. WilliamsRegala, who had been ousted as interior and defense minister afterthe coup and has not been seen since, and Brig. Gen. Carl MichelNicolas, former army chief of staff.   Earlier, radio stations reported that mutinying soldiers hadousted the commanders of the navy, Col. Hebert Valmont; port andairport security, Col. Fritz Romelus; the crack 300-man LeopardsBatallion, Col. Abelard Denis; and Col. Gambetta Hypollite of theArtibonite Department, a region north of Port-au-Prince.   The Confederation of Democratic Unity, a leftist coalition,called for demonstrations Wednesday in support of thenon-commissioned officers outside the St. John Bosco Church, wherethe Sept. 11 massacre took place.   Soldiers who staged the coup had demanded of the militarycommand that Avril be put in power, that the military bereorganized, and that democratic reforms be brought to Haiti,including free elections, sources said.   During the ceremony outside the National Palace Tuesday, Avrilsaid he was aware of ``numerous problems'' within the armed forces,but urged his troops ``to stay calm, not to adopt attitudes whichmay expose the institution to wanton criticisms and affect thespirit of unity and solidarity which the new government isseeking.''   The president, shown on state-run television wearing a dressuniform, spoke from the palace steps to a gathering of about 200soldiers representing all units of the 7,000-man Haitian army.   At the ceremony, Avril announced the appointment of a new armedforces commander-in-chief, Maj. Gen. Herard Abraham, who wasforeign minister under Namphy.   Abraham's appointment confirmed speculation that Lt. Col.Jean-Claude Paul, commander of the dreaded 700-man DessalinesBattalion military unit, would not assume command of the army.   The United States is seeking Paul's extradition to face federaldrug charges in Florida.   Namphy led a junta that ran Haiti for most of the 2{ years sinceDuvalier was forced into exile in February 1986.   There was no announcement of an army reorganization duringAvril's address. The announcement had been expected Monday, but agoverment official said the high command was hesitating to make it,fearing a loss of its authority.   It was unclear if that spurred the unrest among soldiers lateMonday and Tuesday.   After a night of gunfire and violence in Port-au-Prince,non-commissioned officers and troops of the 4th Company in downtownPort-au-Prince on Tuesday arrested their commander, Maj. RenaudSymbert, and deposited him unharmed outside the downtown armyheadquarters, radio stations said.   They said gunfire was heard at the army compound in Mirebalais,about 25 miles northwest of the capital, as soldiers mutiniedagainst their commander, Lt. Simeon Francois. The lieutenant fled.   Radio stations said soldiers revolted at the ToussaintLouverture Barracks in Gonaives, 100 miles north of the capital, onTuesday, chasing out their captain and demanding the ouster of themilitary commander.   It was reported that thousands of people demonstrated inGonaives in support of the mutiny.   Soldiers at the National Penitentiary in downtown Port-au-Princealso mutinied Tuesday, expelling the warden, Lt. Paul Joseph, whomthey accused of misconduct.   On Monday, troops of the Leopards Battalion handcuffed theirleader, Denis, to the entrance of army headquarters. Firingautomatic weapons triumphantly into the air, they sped in vehiclesback to their compound, near the wealthy suburb of Petionville.   Soldiers of the 160-man Aviation Corps also briefly detainedtheir commander Monday before expelling him from their base inPort-au-Prince.   Meanwhile, Radio Metropole said unidentified gunmen on Tuesdaykilled police Detective Henri Toussaint and three other men.   Toussaint was widely reputed to have been a member of Duvalier'sdreaded Tonton Macoutes secret police force, which terrorized thepopulation during the 29-year Duvalier regime.   Avril told the nation Monday he had appointed 11 civilians andone army officer to the Cabinet ``for the definitive installationof democracy.'' He made no mention of plans for free elections.</TEXT></DOC>