<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880604-0127 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-04-88 1411EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r w AM-DemocraticRadio-Text     06-04 0812</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Democratic Radio-Text,790</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of the weekly Democratic radioaddress, delivered Saturday by Senate Majority Leader Robert C.Byrd, D-W.Va.:   Good afternoon. This is Sen. Robert Byrd, speaking to you fromCharleston, W.Va. At the invitation of President Reagan, I attendedthe summit meeting in Moscow this week along with Senate RepublicanLeader Bob Dole (of Kansas).   Our presence at the summit served to demonstrate our uniquesystem of shared powers. Presidents negotiate treaties; the Senategives its advice and consent. Only then does a treaty become the lawof the land.   Summit meetings are valuable in forging a better understandingbetween the American and Soviet peoples. President Reagan receivedunprecedented exposure. The Soviet people were impressed by hispersonality and willingness to listen.   Now there is talk of further progress on arms control at thestrategic arms reduction, or START, level. Compared to a STARTtreaty, however, the (Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces) INF treatywas a simple matter.   Senate consideration of the INF treaty consumed four months. Itwas time well spent. The INF treaty is now a better treaty becauseof questions raised by the Senate. There's no substitute for thepainstaking work by our negotiating experts in Geneva. When theSenate raised important questions on the INF treaty, our expertsreturned to the negotiating table to do the work they had leftundone.   With arms control agreements, the devil is always in the details.That's why it would be unwise to rush negotiations on START.Headline-grabbing summits are one thing. But rushing to meet adeadline on a treaty as important as start would be irresponsible.The INF treaty covers about 2 percent of all nuclear weapons; theSTART agreement would cover 50 percent of all strategic weapons.   Now may be a good time to reduce the fanfare of the summit andlet the negotiators do their important work in quiet. Further, witha change of presidents on the horizon, I do not believe it would bewise to lock the next president into a hasty agreement, be he aRepublican or a Democrat.   Another priority for America and her allies is to work hard for areduction in conventional weapons in Europe and a complete ban onall chemical weapons. The Soviets enjoy a huge advantage inconventional forces in Europe, an advantage that we can't allow themto have forever. Now is the time to push hard at the conventionalarms control table.   U.S.-Soviet relations are entering a new era. And there areopportunities in addition to arms control for our two nations towork together to solve critical problems.   I suggested to President Reagan in Moscow that he propose a newprogram of cooperation with the Soviet Union in the war on drugs. Idid so after hearing Mr. (Mikhail S.) Gorbachev's proposal for ajoint effort to send astronauts to Mars. Why fly men to Mars whenmillions of American and Soviet citizens need help right here onEarth?   The Soviet Union has a serious problem with alcoholism and hereat home we are under siege by the drug lords. We must attack theplague of drug abuse on two fronts. We have to educate our people tothe dangers of drug abuse to discourage the demand side of the drugproblem here at home.   We have to fight the supply side of the drug war on everyinternational front. The Soviet Union's worldwide operations andinfluence could be of help to us and to them as we grapple with thedrug tide crashing in our shores. And we can help the Soviet Unionwith their alcohol abuse problem and their own growing drug problem.Both sides have experience, knowledge and resources that we ought tomarshal. If we can make progress on eliminating arms together, whycan't we make progress on eliminating drug abuse and the plague ofalcoholism?   The apostle Paul said, ``Where the spirit of the Lord is, thereis liberty.'' I close by saying that glasnost may be growing in theSoviet Union. Mr. Gorbachev has authorized the distribution of100,000 Bibles in his country. One hundred thousand Bibles won't gofar in a country that has 280 million people.   I wrote to Mr. Gorbachev to commend him on this step. I urged himto expand that number and to see that translations for the manylanguages in his country are available to the Soviet peoplethroughout the Soviet Union's 15 republics.   Mr. Gorbachev has shown courage in moving his country into thesunlight. But glasnost will not be real until human rights,including freedom of religion, are granted to every Soviet citizen.If glasnost is ever opened to a renewal of freedom of worship, then,in Paul's words, there will be liberty in the Soviet Union.   God bless you and thank you for listening.</TEXT></DOC>