<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880629-0131 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-29-88 1221EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u w PM-Scotus-IndependentProsecutor 5thLd-Writethru a0647 06-291397</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Scotus-Independent Prosecutor, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0647,1380</SECOND><HEAD>Court Upholds Independent Prosecutor Law</HEAD><NOTE>Eds: Inserts graf 12, A White House statement, with quote fromstatement.</NOTE><BYLINE>By JAMES H. RUBIN</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court, in a setback to the Reaganadministration and some of its key former officials, today upheld alaw that allows independent prosecutors to investigate allegedcrimes by high-ranking government officials.   The 7-1 decision dispels crucial doubts about the convictions offormer Reagan aides Michael K. Deaver and Lyn C. Nofziger andclears away a possible stumbling block in the prosecution ofex-White House aides Oliver North, John M. Poindexter and twoothers indicted in the Iran-Contra affair.   The decision also allows an investigation to continue into theactivities of Attorney General Edwin Meese III, accused offinancial improprieties and conflicts of interest.   The court, in a momentous constitutional decision, said thespecial prosecutor law does not violate the separation of powersbetween the executive, legislative and judicial branches ofgovernment guaranteed by the Constitution.   Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, in his opinion for thecourt, said, ``We observe first that this case does not involve anattempt by Congress to increase its own powers at the expense ofthe executive branch.   ``Similarly, we do not think that the act works any judicialusurpation of properly executive functions.''   Rehnquist continued, ``Finally, we do not think that the actimpermissibly undermines the powers of the executive branch ordisrupts the proper balance between the coordinate branches.''   Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel investigating theIran-Contra affair, said in a statement moments after the decisionwas announced:   ``The independent counsel statute provides a workable solutionto a difficult problem. We are gratified that the Supreme Court hasupheld the constitutionality of that statute.''   President Reagan, queried about the court's decision as hearrived in Miami for a speech, said, ``Nothing's changed. I can'tcomment.''   White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the decision ``willhave no practical effect on the administration's implementation ofthe independent counsel act or on the ongoing investigations.''   A White House statement said that despite ``doubts about theconstitutionality of the Independent Counsel Act, theadministration has faithfully and consistently complied with all ofthe act's requirements.''   The chief justice acknowledged that the law limits presidentialpower to investigate and prosecute some alleged crimes.   But he said there are adequate safeguards to protect againstabuses.   For example, Rehnquist said, the law permits the attorneygeneral to decide when a special prosecutor is warranted and allowsthe attorney general to fire a special prosecutor for ``goodcause.''   ``Notwithstanding the fact that the counsel is to some degree`independent' and free from executive supervision to a greaterextent than other federal prosecutors, in our view ... the actgives the executive branch sufficient control over the independentcounsel to ensure that the president is able to perform hisconstitutionally assigned duties,'' Rehnquist said.   The chief justice read parts of his 38-page opinion from thebench, speaking for five minutes.   Underscoring the importance of the case, Justice Antonin Scaliaread a portion of his lone dissent for nine minutes.   Scalia said the balance of powers and the separation of powersare what make the U.S. Constitution a unique and enduring document.   ``In dictatorships of the modern world, bills of rights are adime a dozen,'' he said.   The decision was the last to be handed down by the high court onits last day of the 1987-88 term.   In other action, the court:   _ Made it easier for workers to prove their bosses are guilty ofillegal discrimination.   In their most important civil rights decision of the year, thejustices by an 8-0 vote expanded the way employees can usestatistical evidence to prove bias.   _ Made it easier for millions of non-union workers to withholdfinancial support from the unions that represent them in collectivebargaining.   The court, by a 5-3 vote, ruled that non-union employees ofprivate employers may not be forced to pay the equivalent of uniondues if some of that money is used for activities not directlyrelated to collective bargaining.   _ Severely limited state efforts to shield young sex abusevictims when they testify at criminal trials.   The justices, voting 6-2, overturned the conviction of an Iowaman sentenced to 10 years in prison for sexually molesting two13-year-old girls.   _ Struck down an Oklahoma man's death sentence but stopped shortof ruling whether capital punishment may be used for convictedkillers who committed their crimes before reaching age 16.   In what had been expected to be its most important capitalpunishment decision of the year, the justices could not muster amajority of votes to resolve a key question: Does execution ofteen-age killers violate the Constitution's ban on ``cruel andunusual punishment'?''   _ Ruled the federal government may give money to religiousgroups to promote chastity among America's teen-agers.   The 5-4 ruling said a 1981 federal law that funnels taxpayermoney to private groups to counsel adolescents against premaritalsex is not unconstitutional on its face.   _ Barred states from placing sweeping, strict regulations onprofessional, for-profit organizations that solicit contributionsfor charities.   The justices, by a 7-2 vote, ruled that a North Carolina lawthat imposed such regulations violated free-speech rights.   Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, the newest member of the court andone of three justices appointed by Reagan, did not take part in theindependent prosecutor decision. Kennedy disqualified himselfwithout giving an explanation.   The court overturned a 2-1 federal appeals court ruling lastJan. 22 that declared the Watergate-era special prosecutor lawunconstitutional.   Congress passed the law after the scandal that led to PresidentNixon's resignation to provide an independent mechanism forinvestigating alleged high-level government wrongdoing.   Opponents and supporters of the law, a key portion of the Ethicsin Government Act, cited the Watergate case to buttress theirposition.   The law's advocates said it was essential to assure the nationthat crimes in high places would not be covered up.   But opponents pointed out that Nixon was forced out of officebecause of public opinion and the threat of impeachment, withoutany need for an independent investigation.   The law empowers a special federal court to appoint independentcounsels, or special prosecutors, at the request of the attorneygeneral. The attorney general first conducts a preliminary probe,generally lasting up to 90 days, to determine whether chargesagainst a government official warrant appointment of the outsidecounsel.   The law was challenged by Theodore B. Olson, a former assistantattorney general accused of lying to Congress in 1983 during adispute over the Environmental Protection Agency's cleanup programfor toxic waste sites.   Alexia Morrison, a Washington lawyer, is the special prosecutorinvestigating the case.   The Reagan administration supported Olson's challenge, arguingthat the independent counsels violate constitutionally mandatedseparation of powers between the three branches of government.   Among the defenders of the law are the Senate and the Democraticleadership in the House.   The immediate stakes in the case involved some of the mostprominent figures of the Reagan presidency.   Deaver, convicted of lying to a grand jury and a Housesubcommittee that investigated his lobbying activities, is awaitingsentencing. Whitney North Seymour was the independent counsel whoprosecuted him.   Nofziger, prosecuted by independent counsel James C. McKay, wassentenced to 90 days in prison and fined $30,000 for illegallobbying. McKay also is conducting the investigation into thecharges involving Meese.   North, a former aide to the National Security Council, wasexpected to go on trial in the fall in the Iran-Contra case oncharges he conspired to divert profits from the sale of arms toIran to the Contra rebels fighting the government in Nicaragua.   His co-defendants _ Poindexter, businessman Albert A. Hakim andretired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord _ are to be triedseparately.   Some said the Iran-Contra prosecution, the Nofziger convictionand the Meese probe would survive any adverse Supreme Court rulingon the independent counsel law because Walsh and McKay receivedbackup authority from Meese to conduct their investigations.   But there had been uncertainty in those cases as well becausethe investigations began before the backup authority was conferred.   Ms. Morrison and Seymour did not receive such backup authorityto conduct their respective investigations of Olson and Deaver.   The case is Morrison vs. Olson, 87-1279.</TEXT></DOC>