<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880714-0147 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-14-88 2023EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Airliner-BushExcerpts     07-14 0929</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Airliner-Bush Excerpts,0945</SECOND><HEAD>Excerpts of Vice President George Bush's Remarks to U.N. SecurityCouncil</HEAD><DATELINE>UNITED NATIONS (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Mr. President, members of the Council:   I have come here today to represent the United States, at therequest of President Reagan, because of the importance of theissues at stake _ not just the terrible human tragedy of Iran Air655, but the continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq and itsimplications for international commerce in the Persian Gulf.   Having been my country's permanent representative to this body,I know what a grave responsibility the council bears and the goodit can do when it acts with realism and wisdom. We are in urgentneed of realism and wisdom now.   Mr. President, the Persian Gulf is a region of vital importanceto the United States and the economy of the world. American andEuropean forces are in the gulf, with the support of the states ofthe area, to meet a vital need _ to help ensure the unimpeded flowof oil and to keep neutral commerce moving in the face of a veryreal threat to innocent shipping. This is our legal right.   Iranian mines, deliberately sown, have disrupted innocentpassage and damaged unarmed merchant vessals and a U.S. Naval shipin international waters. Iranian smallboat attacks onnon-belligerent merchant ships continue unabated. These actions arein blatant violation of international law. They give the lie toIran's assertions that it supports freedom of navigation in thegulf.   We have increased the size of our forces from traditional levelsto protect U.S.-flag shipping and to assist other neutral vesselsunder unlawful attack, when they request assistance. Five Europeannavies in addition to our own _ a total of some 43 ships _ are nowin the gulf to counter Iran's reckless behavior toward neutralships engaged in lawful commerce. I am proud of our leadership inmeeting this challenge.   Together we have made it clear that we will keep the PersianGulf open, no matter what the threat. I am here to reaffirm tothose who depend on us and to those who would threaten us, that wewill not alter this course. Mr. President, the critical issueconfronting this body is not the how and why of Iran Air 655. It isthe continuing refusal of the government of the Islamic Republic ofIran to comply with Resolution 598, to negotiate an end to the warwith Iraq, and to cease its acts of aggression against neutralshipping in the Persian Gulf.   The victims of Iran Air 655 are only the most recent casualtiesof a brutal and senseless war that has brought immense pain andsuffering to the people of both sides.   Iran long ago could have accepted, and can still accept, anhonorable end to the war. As a first step, it should declare itsreadiness unequivocally to comply with Resolution 598 _ today, forthe first time, before this body. It can act now to end theunspeakable sacrifices the people of both Iran and Iraq are beingasked to make. What possible objectives could be worth the humansuffering and pain, the hundreds of thousands of casualties, andthe economic devastation the war has caused on both sides?   A particularly horrifying aspect of the Iran-Iraq war is theincreasingly routine use of chemical weapons. Who can forget thepictures of entire families lying dead in the streets of theirvillages, innocent of anything, yet killed in this savage way?   The United States was the first nation publicly to condemn theuse of chemical weapons in the war as a blatant violation of theGeneva protocols. We fully support Security Council Resolution 612,which demands an immediate end to chemical warfare by both parties.No country should think it can use chemical weapons with impunity.   We respect Iran's right to air its grievances. But Iran cannothave it both ways. Iran cannot simultaneously complain to this bodyand defy it.   The government of the Islamic Republic of Iran has refused tosay plainly and clearly that it will comply with the mandatorydecision of the Security Council. Iran must not be permitted tochoose those provisions of Resolution 598 it likes and ignore theothers. Nor can Iraq be permitted to rest on verbal adherence toResolution 598, while avoiding cooperation with thesecretary-general in finding practical ways to implement theresolution.   As for the immediate matter at hand _ the unfortunatedestruction of Iran Air 655 _ many of the circumstances remainunclear. Our own military investigation is under way. We will alsocooperate with any investigation that is conducted by theInternational Civil Aviation Organization, and we trust that thegovernment of Iran will do the same. We want all the relevant factsto be brought to light as quickly as possible.   But one thing is clear: The U.S.S. Vincennes acted inself-defense.   This tragic accident occurred against a backdrop of repeated,unjustified, unprovoked, and unlawful Iranian attacks against U.S.merchant shipping and armed forces, beginning with the mine attackon the USS Bridgeton in July 1987. It occurred in the midst of anaval attack initiated by Iranian vessels against a neutral vesseland, subsequently, against the Vincennes when it came to the aid ofthe innocent ship in distress.   Despite these hostilities, Iranian authorities failed to divertIran Air 655 from the area. They allowed a civilian aircraft loadedwith passengers to proeed on a path over a warship engaged inbattle. That was irresponsible and a tragic error.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>