<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880926-0120 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-09-26-88 1449EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Reagan-UN-Text 2ndAdd   09-26 1370</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Reagan-UN-Text, 2nd Add,1300</SECOND><HEAD>UNITED NATIONS: Soviet-American relations.</HEAD><TEXT>   In most of these areas, then, we see progress and, again, we areglad of it. Only a few years ago, Mr. Secretary-General, all ofthese and other conflicts were burning dangerously out of control.Indeed, the invasion of Afghanistan and the apparent failure ofwill among democratic and peace-loving nations to deter such eventsseemed to cause a climate where aggression by nations large andsmall was epidemic, a climate the world had not seen since the1930s. Only this time, larger war was avoided, avoided because thefree and peaceful nations of the world recovered their strength ofpurpose and will. And now the United Nations is providing valuableassistance in helping this epidemic to recede.   And because we are resolved to keep it so, I would be remiss inmy duty if I did not now take note here of the one exception toprogress in regional conflicts. I refer to the continuingdeterioration of human rights in Nicaragua and the refusal of thetiny elite now ruling that nation to honor promises of democracymade to their own people and to the international community. Thiselite _ in calling itself revolutionary _ seeks no real revolution;the use of the term is subterfuge, deception for hiding the oldest,most corrupt vice of all _ man's age-old will to power, his lust tocontrol the lives and steal the freedom of others.   That is why, as president, I will continue to urge the Congressand the American public to stand behind those who resist thisattempt to impose a totalitarian regime on the people of Nicaragua;that the United States will continue to stand with those who arethreatened by this regime's aggression against its neighbors inCentral America.   Today, I also call on the Soviet Union to show in CentralAmerica the same spirit of constructive realism it has shown inother regional conflicts. To assist in bringing conflict in CentralAmerica to a close by halting the flow of billions of dollars worthof arms and ammunition to the Sandinista regime, a regime whosegoals of regional domination _ while ultimately doomed _ cancontinue to cause great suffering to the people of that area andrisk to Soviet-American relations. Unless action is taken now.   Moving now to the arms reduction agenda, I have mentionedalready the importance of the INF treaty and the momentum developedin the START negotiations. The draft START treaty is a lengthydocument, filled with bracketed language designating sections ofdisagreement between the two sides. But through this summer inGeneva, those brackets have diminished; there is every reason tobelieve this process can continue. I can tell this Assembly that itis highly doubtful such a treaty can be accomplished in a fewmonths, but I can tell you a year from now is a possibility, morethan a possibility. But we have no deadline. No agreement is betterthan a bad agreement. The United States remains hopeful and weacknowledge the spirit of cooperation shown by the Soviet Union inthese negotiations. We also look for that spirit to be applied toour concerns about compliance with existing agreements.   So, too, our discussions on nuclear testing and defense andspace have been useful. But let me here stress to the GeneralAssembly that much of the momentum in nuclear arms controlnegotiations is due to technological progress itself, especially inthe potential for space-based defensive systems. I believe that theUnited States determination to research and develop and, whenready, deploy such defensive systems _ systems targeted to destroymissiles, not people _ accounts for a large share of the progressmade in recent years in Geneva. With such systems, for the firsttime, in case of accidental launch or the act of a madmansomewhere, major powers will not be faced with the single option ofmassive retaliation, but will instead have the chance of a sanerchoice _ to shield against an attack instad of avenging it. So,too, as defensive systems grow in effectiveness, they reduce thethreat and the value of greater and greater offensive arsenals.Only recently, briefings I have received in the Oval Officeindicate that progress toward such systems may be even more rapidand less costly than we had at first thought. Today, the UnitedStates reaffirms its commitment to its Strategic Defense Initiativeand our offer to share the benefits of strategic defenses withothers.   And yet, even as diplomatic and technological progess holds outthe hope of at last diminishing the awful cloud of nuclear terrorwe have lived under in the post-war era, even at this momentanother ominous terror is loose once again in the world. A terrorwe thought the world had put behind, a terror that looms at us nowfrom the long, buried past; from ghostly, scarring trenches and thehaunting, wan faces of millions dead in one of the most inhumaneconflicts of all time.   Poison gas. Chemical warfare. Mr. Secretary-General,distinguished delegates, the terror of it. The horror of it. Wecondemn it. The use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war _beyond its tragic human toll _ jeopardizes the moral and legalstrictures that have held these weapons in check since World War I.Let this tragedy spark reaffirmation of the Geneva signatories tothat protocol, as well as other concerned states, to convene aconference to consider actions that we can take together to reversethe serious erosion of this treaty. And we urge all nations tocooperate in negotiating a verifiable, truly global ban on chemicalweapons at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.   It is incumbent upon all civilized nations to ban, once and forall _ and on a verifiable and global basis _ the use of chemicaland gas warfare.   Finally, Mr. Secretary-General, we must redouble our efforts tostop further proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world.Likewise, proliferation in other high-technology weapons such asballistic missiles is reaching global proportions, exacerbatingregional rivalries in ways that can have global implications. Thenumber of potential suppliers is growing at an alarming rate andmore must be done to halt the spread of these weapons. This was amatter of discussion last week between Secretary Shultz and ForeignMinister Shevardnadze. Talks between American and Soviet expertsbegin on this today. And we hope to see a multilateral effort, toavoid having areas of tension like the Middle East become even moredeadly battlegrounds than they already are.   But in most of these areas, we see not only progress but alsothe potential for an incrasingly vital role for multilateralefforts and institutions like the United Nations. That is why nowmore than ever the United Nations must continue to increase itseffectiveness through budget and program reform. The U.N. alreadyis enacting sweeping measures affecting personnel reductions,budgeting by consensus, and the establishment of programpriorities. These actions are extremely important. The progress onreforms has allowed me to release funds withheld undercongressional restrictions. I expect the reform program willcontinue and that further funds will be released in our new fiscalyear.   And let me say here we congratulate the United Nations on thework it has done in three areas of special concern. First, ourstruggle against the scourge of terrorism and state-sponsoredterrorism must continue. And we must also end the scourge ofhostage taking. Second, the work of the World Health Organizationin coordinating and advancing research on AIDS is vital. Allinternational efforts in this area must be redoubled. The AIDScrisis is a grave one; we must move as one to meet it.   So, too, is the drug crisis. We are moving now toward a newanti-drug trafficking convention. This important treaty will becompleted in December. I am confident other strong U.N. drugcontrol programs will also follow. The American people areprofoundly concerned, deeply angered. We will not tolerate the drugtraffickers. We mean to make war on them _ and we believe this isone war the United Nations can endorse and participate in.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>