<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880621-0023 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-21-88 0127EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Summit-Text     06-21 1102</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Summit-Text,1,090</SECOND><DATELINE>TORONTO (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of the political statementissued Monday by the leaders of the seven largest industrializeddemocracies at their economic summit:   We the leaders of our seven countries, and the representativesof the European Community, uphold common principles of freedom,respect for individual rights, and the desire of all men to live inpeace under the rule of law. Our peoples stand in solidarity withinthe framework of our existing alliances for the cause of freedom,to safeguard democracy and the prosperity which it has produced. Inour discussions, we considered how these goals and values could bepursued in the field of foreign affairs, particularly with regardto East-West relations.   We discussed a wide range of regional questions and thesediscussions are continuing throughout the summit.   We confirmed our belief in constructive and realistic dialogueand cooperation, including ams control, human rights and regionalissues, as the way to build stability between East and West andenhance security at lower levels of arms. We also reaffirmed thatfor the foreseeable future nuclear deterrence and adequateconventional strength are the guarantees of peace in freedom.   In several important respects, changes have taken place inrelations between Western countries and the Soviet Union since welast met. For our part, this evolution has come about because theindustrialized democracies have been strong and united. In theSoviet Union greater freedom and openness will offer opportunitiesto reduce mistrust and build confidence. Each of us will respondpositively to any such developments.   We welcome the beginning of the Soviet withdrawal of itsoccupation troops from Afghanistan. It must be total and apply tothe entire country. The Afghan people must be able to choose theirgovernment freely. Each of us confirms our willingness to make ourfull contribution to the efforts of the international community toensure the return of the refugees to their homeland, theirresettlement, and the reconstruction of their country. We now lookto the Soviet Union to make a constructive contribution toresolving other regional conflicts as well.   Since our last meeting, progress has been made between theUnited States and the Soviet Union in agreeing to reduce nuclearweapons in a manner which accords fully with the security interestsof each of our countries. The INF treaty, the direct result ofWestern firmness and unity, is the first treaty ever actually toreduce nuclear arms. It sets vitally important precedents forfuture arms-control agreements: asymmetrical reductions andintrusive verification arrangements. We now look for deep cuts inU.S. and Soviet strategic offensive arms. We congratulate PresidentReagan on what he has already accomplished, along with GeneralSecretary Gorbachev, towards this goal.   Nonetheless, the massive presence of Soviet conventional forcesin Eastern Europe, the ensuing conventional superiority of theWarsaw Pact, and its capacity to launch surprise attacks andlarge-scale offensive operations, lie at the core of the securityproblem in Europe. The Soviet military buildup in the Far East isequally a major source of instability in Asia. These threats mustbe reduced. Our goal is enhanced security and stability at lowerlevels of forces, after having eliminated the present imbalances.We seek the early establishment of a comprehensive, effectivelyverifiable and truly global ban on chemical weapons.   Genuine peace cannot be established solely by arms control. Itmust be firmly based on respect for fundamental human rights. Weurge the Soviet Union to move forward in ensuring human dignity andfreedoms and to implement fully and strengthen substantially itscommitments under the Helsinki process. Recent progress must beenshrined in law and practice, the painful barriers that dividepeople must come down, and the obstacles to emigration must beremoved.   We pay special attention to the countries in Eastern Europe. Weencourage them to open up their economies and societies, and toimprove respect for human rights. In this context we support thecontinuation and strengthening of the Helsinki process.   We take positive note of Eastern countries' growing interest inending their economic isolation, for example in the establishmentand development of relations with the Economic Community. East-Westeconomic relations can be expanded and serve our common interestsso long as the commercial basis is sound, they are conducted withinthe framework of the basic principles and the rules of theinternational trade and payments system, and are consistent withthe security interests of each of our countries.   We strongly reaffirm our condemnation of terrorism in all itsforms, including the taking of hostages. We renew our commitment topolicies and measures agreed at previous summits, in particularthose against state-sponsored terrorism.   We strongly condemn recent threats to air security, inparticular the destruction of a Korean airliner and the hijackingof a Kuwaiti airliner. We recall the principle affirmed in previousdeclarations that terrorists must not go unpunished. We appeal toall countries who are not party to the international conventions oncivil aviation security, in particular the Hague Convention, toaccede to those conventions.   We express support for work currently under way in theInternational Civil Aviation Organization aimed at strengtheninginternational protection against hijackings. We welcome the mostrecent declaration adopted by the ICAO Council which endorses theprinciple that hijacked aircraft should not be allowed to take offonce they have landed, except in circumstances as specified by theICAO declaration.   We welcome the adoption this year in Montreal and Rome of twointernational agreements on aviation and maritime security toenhance the safety of travelers.   We reaffirm our determination to continue the fight againstterrorism through the application of rule of law, the policy of noconcessions to terrorists and their sponsors, and internationalcooperation.   The illegal use of drugs and illicit trafficking in them posesgrave risks to the peoples of summit countries as well as thepeoples of source and transit countries. There is an urgent needfor improved international cooperation in all appropriate fora onprograms to counter all facets of the illicit drug problem, inparticular production, trafficking, and financing of the drugtrade. The complexity of the problem requires additionalinternational cooperation, in particular to trace, freeze andconfiscate the proceeds of drug traffickers, and to curb moneylaundering.   We look forward to the successful negotiation in Vienna inNovember of a United Nations Convention on illicit trafficking.   We supported the initiative of the government of the UnitedStates for a special task force to be convened to propose methodsof improving cooperation in all areas including national, bilateraland multilateral efforts in the fight against narcotics.</TEXT><HEAD>End of Text</HEAD></DOC>