<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881005-0241 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-10-05-88 2221EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u p BC-VeepDebateText 9thadd   10-05 1248</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Veep Debate Text, 9th add,1,200</SECOND><HEAD>OMAHA, Neb.: will reject.</HEAD><TEXT>   Moderator: Tom Brokaw, a question for Senator Bentsen?   Q: Senator Bentsen, you were a business man before you enteredthe U.S. Senate. Let me offer you an inventory, if I may: lowerinterest rates, lower unemployment, lower inflation, and armscontrol deal with the Soviet Union. Now, two guys come through yourdoor at your business, and say, ``We'd like you to change,''without offering a lot of specifics.'' Why would you accept theirdeal?   Bentsen: You know, if you let me write $200 billion worth of hotchecks every year, I could give you an illusion of prosperity, too.This is an administration that has more than doubled the nationaldebt, and they've done that in less than eight years. They havetaken this country from the number one lender nation in the worldto the number one debtor nation in the world. And the interest onthat debt next year, on this Reagan-Bush debt of our nation, isgoing to be $640 dollars for every man, woman and child in America,because of this kind of a credit card mentality. So, we go out andwe try to sell our securities, every week, and hope that theforeigns will buy them. And they do buy them, but every time theydo, we lose some of our economic independence for the future.   Now they've turned around and they've bought 10 percent of themanufacturing base of this country. They bought 20 percent of thebanks. They own 46 percent of the commercial real estate in LosAngeles. They're buying America on the cheap. Now when we haveother countries that can't manage their economy down in Central andSouth America, we send down the American ambassador. We send downthe International Monetary Fund and we tell them what they can buyand what they can sell and how to run their economies. The ultimateirony would be to have that happen to us because foreigners finallyquit buying our securities.   So what we need in this country is someone like Mike Dukakis whogave 10 balanced budgets in a row there and was able to do that,meet that kind of a commitment, set those tough priorities. We needan administration that will turn this trade policy around and openup those markets, stand tough with our trading partners to helpkeep the jobs at home and send the products abroad.   Moderator: Senator Quayle?   Quayle: Senator Bentsen talks about running up the debt. Wellthe governor of Massachusetts has run up more debt than all thegovernors in the history of Massachusetts combined going back tothe days of the Pilgrims. I don't believe that that's the kind ofpolicy that we want. The question went to the heart of the matter,Tom. You asked the question that why would we change? Well we havechanged since 1980. We've got interest rates down. We got inflationdown. People are working again. America is held in respect onceagain around the world. But we're going to build on that change.   And as we made those positive change of lower interest rates,lower rate of inflation, the governor of Massachusetts fought usevery step of the way. We are proud of the record of accomplishmentand the opportunities and the hope for millions of Americans _ hopeand opportunity of these Americans is because of the policies thatwe have had for the last eight years and we want to build on thatand change it for even the better.   Moderator: Tom, a question for Senator Quayle.   Q: Senator Quayle as you mention here tonight, you activelysupported the invasion of Grenada which was the military operationto rescue some American medical students and to rescue an islandfrom a Marxist takeover. If military force was necessary in thatendeavor, why not use the military to go after the South Americandrug cartels and after General Noriega for that matter on asurgical strike, since drugs in the minds of most Americans pose afar greater danger to many more people?   Quayle: You're absolutely right. You're absolutely right thedrug problem is the number one issue.   Q: But would you please address the military aspect of it?   Quayle: I will address the military aspect if I may respond. Themilitary aspect of the drug problem is being addressed. As a matterof fact, we are using the Department of Defense in a coordinatedeffort on reconnaissance, but I don't believe that we're going toturn the Department of Defense into a police organization. We areusing our military assets in a prudent way to deal withinterdiction. And we've made some success in this area. Seventytons of cocaine have been stopped.   But, you know, when you look at the drug problem, and it is atremendous problem and there are no easy solutions to it, it's acomplicated problem. And it's heading up the effort to try tocreate a drug-free America, which is a challenge and a goal of allof us. Not only will we utilize national defense and the Departmentof Defense, but we've got to get on the demand side of the ledger.We've got to get to education, and education ought to begin athome, and it ought to be reinforced, reinforced in our schools.   And there's another thing that will be more important than thepremise of this question on a hypothetical of using troops. We'lluse military assets. We're not going to, we'll use military assets,but we need to focus on another part of this problem, and thatproblem is law enforcement. And here's where we have a majordisagreement with the governor of Massachusetts. He is opposed tothe death penalty for drug kingpins. We believe people convicted ofthat crime deserve the death penalty, as does the legislationthat's in the Congress that's supported by a bipartisan group,including many Democrats of his party. He also was opposed tomandatory drug sentencing for drug dealers in the state ofMassachusetts. You cannot have a war on drugs, you cannot be toughon drugs and weak on crime.   Moderator: Senator Bentsen.   Bentsen: It's interesting to see that the senator from Indiana,when we had a resolution on the floor of the United States Senatesponsored by Senator Dole, that this government would make no dealwith Noriega, that the senator from Indiana was one of the dozensenators that voted against it. It's also interesting to see thatone of his campaign managers that's trying to help him with hisimage, was also hired by Noriega to help him with his image inPanama.   What we have seen under this administration, we have seen themusing eight Cabinet officers, 28 different agencies, all fightingover turf. And that's one thing we'd correct under theDukakis-Bentsen administration. We'd put one person in charge inthe war against drugs, and we'd commit the resources to get thatjob done. Now, Mike Dukakis has been able to do that type of thingin the state of Massachusetts by cutting the drug use in highschools while it's going up around the rest of the country, byputting in a drug educational program that the Drug EnforcementAgency said was a model for the country. We'd be doing that aroundthe rest of the country. That's a positive attack against drugs.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>