<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880304-0023 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-03-04-88 0306EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-NATOSummit-Communique     03-04 1038</FIRST><SECOND>BC-NATO Summit-Communique,1,020</SECOND><HEAD>With PM-NATO Rdp Bjt</HEAD><DATELINE>BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here are excerpts from the officialtext of the final communique agreed to Thursday at the conclusionof the NATO summit.</TEXT><HEAD>A Time For Reaffirmation</HEAD><TEXT>   We, the representatives of the 16 members of the North AtlanticAlliance, have come together to re-emphasize our unity, to assessthe current state of East-West relations, to review theopportunities and challenges which lie ahead, and in so doing:   _To reaffirm the common ideals and purposes which are thefoundation of our partnership;   _To rededicate ourselves to the principles and provisions of theWashington Treaty of 1949;   _To reassert the vital importance of the alliance for oursecurity, and the validity of our strategy for peace. ...   The security in freedom and the prosperity of the European andNorth American allies are inextricably linked. The long-standingcommitment of the North American democracies to the preservation ofpeace and security in Europe is vital.   The presence in Europe of conventional and nuclear forces of theUnited States provides the essential linkage with the United Statesstrategic deterrent, and, together with the forces of Canada, is atangible expression of that commitment. This presence must and willbe maintained.   Likewise, a free, independent and increasingly united Europe isvital to North America's security. The credibility of allieddefense cannot be maintained without a major European contribution.We therefore welcome recent efforts to reinforce the Europeanpillar of the Alliance, intended to strengthen the transatlanticpartnership and Alliance security as a whole.   The Atlantic alliance cannot be strong if Europe is weak.   Our aim will continue to be to prevent any kind of war orintimidation. By maintaining credible deterrence the alliance hassecured peace in Europe for nearly 40 years.   Conventional defenses alone cannot ensure this; therefore, forthe foreseeable future there is no alternative to the alliancestrategy for the prevention of war. This is a strategy ofdeterrence based upon an appropriate mix of adequate and effectivenuclear and conventional forces which will continue to be kept upto date where necessary.   While seeking security and stability at lower levels ofarmaments, we are determined to sustain the requisite efforts toensure the continued viability, credibility and effectiveness ofour conventional and nuclear forces, including the nuclear forcesin Europe, which together provide the guarantee of our commonsecurity.   Taking into account the structure of the alliance, each of usundertakes to play his part in this joint endeavor in a spirit ofsolidarity, reaffirming our willingness to share fairly the risks,burdens and responsibilities as well as the benefits of our commonefforts. ...   We want gradually to overcome the unnatural division of theEuropean continent, which affects most directly the German people.We will continue to uphold the freedom and viability of Berlin andto support efforts to improve the situation there.   The search for improved and more stable relations with theSoviet Union and the other countries of Eastern Europe is among ourprincipal concerns. We call upon these countries to work with usfor a further relaxation of tensions, greater security at lowerlevels of arms, more extensive human contacts and increased accessto information. We will continue the effort to expand cooperationwith the East wherever and whenever this is of mutual benefit.   We have noted encouraging signs of change in the policies of theSoviet Union and some of its allies. This creates the prospect forgreater openness in their relations with their own people and withother nations. ... But we look beyond pronouncements for tangibleand lasting policy changes addressing directly the issues dividingEast and West.   However, we have to date witnessed no relaxation of the militaryeffort pursued for years by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Unionpersists in deploying far greater military forces than are requiredfor its defence. This massive force, which the Soviet Union has notrefrained from using outside its borders, as is still the case inAfghanistan, constitutes a fundamental source of tension betweenEast and West. ...   Arms control is an integral part of our security policy. We seeknegotiations not for their own sake but to reach agreements whichcan significantly reduce the ris of conflict and make a genuinecontribution to stability and peace. ...   The recently concluded INF agreement between the U.S. and theSoviet Union is a milestone in our efforts to achieve a more securepeace and lower levels of arms. ...   Consistent with their security requirements, the 15 alliesconcerned will make use of all possibilities for effectivelyverifiable arms control agreements which lead to a stable andsecure balance of forces at a lower level. For them, thecomprehensive concept of arms control and disarmament includes:   _A 50 percent reduction in the strategic offensive nuclearweapons of the U.S. and the Soviet Union to be achieved duringcurrent Geneva negotiations.   _The global elimination of chemical weapons.   _The establishment of a stable and secure level of conventionalforces, by the elimination of disparities, in the whole of Europe.   _In conjunction with the establishment of a conventional balanceand the global elimination of chemical weapons, tangible andverifiable reductions of American and Soviet land-based nuclearmissile systems of shorter range, leading to equal ceilings. ...   Genuine peace in Europe cannot be established solely by armscontrol. It must be firmly based on full respect for fundamentalhuman rights. As we continue our efforts to reduce armaments, weshall press for implementation on the part of the governments ofthe Soviet Union and of other Eastern countries of all of theprinciples and provisions of the Helsinki Final Act and of theMadrid Concluding document. ...   We agree that the speedy and complete withdrawal of Soviettroops from Afghanistan and effective restoration of that country'ssovereignty would be of major significance. It is against thesecriteria that we shall assess General Secretary Gorbachev's recentstatements.   We hope that at their forthcoming summit in Moscow PresidentReagan and General Secretary Gorbachev will be able to build uponthe progress achieved at their Washington meeting last December. Westrongly support the efforts of the United States.</TEXT><HEAD>End of NATO Communique-Excerpts</HEAD></DOC>