<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881005-0246 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-10-05-88 2240EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u p BC-VeepDebateText 12thadd   10-05 0989</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Veep Debate Text, 12th add,1,000</SECOND><HEAD>OMAHA, Neb.: understand that.</HEAD><TEXT>   Moderator: Tom Brokaw, a question for Senator Quayle.   Q: Senator Quayle, I don't mean to beat this drum until it hasno more sound left in it, but to follow up on Brit Hume's question,when you said that it was a hypothetical situation, it is sir,after all the reason that we're here tonight, because you arerunning not just for vice president. And if you cite the experiencethat you had in Congress, surely you must have some plan in mindabout what you would do if it fell to you to become president ofthe United States as it has to so many vice presidents just in thelast 25 years or so.   Quayle: Let me try to answer the question one more time. I thinkthis is the fourth time that I have had this question and _   Q: Third time.   Quayle: Three times, that I've had this question and I'll try toanswer it again for you as clearly as I can because the questionyou're asking is ``What kind of qualifications does Dan Quayle haveto be president?'' What kind of qualifications do I have and whatwould I do in this kind of a situation? And what would I do in thissituation?   I would make sure that the people in the Cabinet and the peopleand advisors to the president are called. I'll talk to them andI'll work with them. And I will know them on a first-hand basis,because as vice president, I'll sit on the National SecurityCouncil and I'll know them on a first-hand basis because I'm goingto be coordinating the drug effort. I'll know them on a first-handbasis because Vice President George Bush is going to recreate theSpace Council and I'll be in charge of that. I will have day-to-dayactivities with all the people in government.   And then if that unfortunate situation happens, if thatsituation which would be very tragic happens, I will be prepared tocarry out the responsibilities of the presidency of the UnitedStates of America. And I will be prepared to do that. I will beprepared not only because of my service in the Congress, butbecause of my ability to communicate and to lead. It is not justage, it's accomplishments, it's experience. I have far moreexperience than many others that sought the office of vicepresident of this country. I have as much experience in theCongress as Jack Kennedy did when he sought the presidency. I willbe prepared to deal with the people in the Bush administration ifthat unfortunate event would ever occur.   Moderator: Senator Bentsen?   Bentsen: Senator, I served with Jack Kennedy. I knew JackKennedy. Jack Kennedy was a friend of mine. Senator, you're no JackKennedy. What has to be done in a situation like that, (Applause)in a situation like that is to call in the joint _   Moderator: Please, please, once again you're only taking timeaway from your own candidates.   Quayle: That was really uncalled for Senator.   Bentsen: You're the one that was making the comparison, Senator,and I'm one who knew him well. And frankly, I think you're so farapart in the objectives you choose for your country that I did notthink the comparison was well taken.   Moderator: Tom, a question for Senator Bentsen.   Q: Since you seem to be taking no hostages on the stage, let meask you a question about the American _ nine still in brutalcaptivity in the Middle East. Senator Bentsen you have beencritical of the Iran-Contra affair. But tell me, does theDukakis-Bentsen ticket have any realistic plan for getting theAmerican hostages being held in the Middle East released in any duetime?   Bentsen: Tom, that's one of the toughest problems that any chiefexecutive will face because you can't help but have the sympathyfor that family and for those hostages in themselves. But the onething we ought to have, know by now is that you can't go out andmake secret deals with the Ayatollah. You can't trade arms forhostages. When you try to do that there's no question but what youjust encourage more taking of hostages. And that's been the resultby this dumb idea that was cooked out, cooked up in the White Housebasement.   And I want to tell you that George Bush, attending 17 of thosemeetings and having no record of what he said _ if Lloyd Bentsenwas in those meetings, you would certainly hear from him, and noone would be asking, ``Where is Lloyd?'' Because I would be making,I would be saying, ``That's a dumb idea and now let's put an end toit.'' And I would speak up on that type of thing. So all you can doon that is to continue to push, use every bit of diplomaticpressure you can, what you can do in the way of economic pressurein addition to that. And that's what you strive to do to have asuccessful release, finally, of those hostages. But not toencourage more taking of hostages.   Moderator: Senator Quayle?   Quayle: There's no doubt about it that arms for hostages iswrong, and it will never be repeated. We learn by our mistakes. Butthere have been a number of successes in foreign policy in thisadministration. But the question goes to a very difficult one: Howdo you do it? No one has the answer. If they did we'd, we'dcertainly do it. But we won't keep trying, we'll keep trying, we'llkeep the doors open. And hopefully some day Iran, and others whocontrol those hostages, will want to return to civilizedinternational community. And they can do that starting now byreleasing those hostages that are held illegally.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>