<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881228-0048 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-28-88 0615EST</FILEID><FIRST>r a PM-WeatherpageWeather     12-28 0751</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Weatherpage Weather,0772</SECOND><HEAD>Snow in the Midwest, Tornadoes in the South</HEAD><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Snow fell in the Midwest today, stranding hundreds of travelersin St. Louis, after tornadoes and thunderstorms demolished trailers,blew roofs off houses or uprooted utility poles in the South.   Twisters or strong winds struck Tuesday in Arkansas, Mississippi,Louisiana and Texas, and tornado watches remained in effect today inLouisiana and Mississppi. Snowstorms that began Tuesday continuedtoday in Arkansas, Indiana, Missouri and Illinois   In Mississippi, thunderstorm winds destroyed a mobile home inMinter City, and demolished a trailer in Anguilla, the NationalWeather Service said. A tornado reported in Belzoni damaged threemobile homes, a car and a service station, and a twister toucheddown near Lake Horn, Miss., just southwest of Memphis, Tenn.   Tornadoes also touched down near West Memphis and Marion, Ark.   Thunderstorm winds blew out windows in Natchez, Miss., anduprooted seven utility poles and blew roofs off houses elsewhere inthe state, the weather service said. Winds gusting to 81 mph wererecorded in Rolling Fork.   Strong winds overturned trailers and downed trees near LakeProvidence, La., and 66 mph gusts blew through Beaumont, Texas.   In Indiana, a winter storm warning was posted and up to 8 inchesof snow were expected.   In St. Louis, which had 5 inches of snow by late Tuesday, thestorm caused TWA to cancel 110 of 120 flights Tuesday night forLambert Airport, said TWA spokesman Bob Blattner. The airlinereserved 800 hotel rooms for passengers, he said.   Meanwhile, things were returning to normal at Chicago's O'HareInternational Airport, where a snowstorm stranded thousands oftravelers Tuesday.   Sections of the northern California coast that hadn't gotten anysnow in 12 years got a dusting Tuesday, causing a pileup of morethan 30 cars and a liquid propane tanker spill, closing highways,forcing the homeless into shelters and worrying citrus growers. Noserious injuries were reported.   In Utah, fog and ice Tuesday triggered a 67-car pileup onInterstate 215 south of Salt Lake City, leaving 15 people with minorinjuries.   Elsewhere today, rain spread from Ohio to Pennsylvania and NewYork state, and sleet fell on Lower Michigan. A mix of rain and snowfell over California's Sacramento Valley late Tuesday, and fallingtemperatures were expected to make area roads icy.   The nation's high Tuesday was 88 degrees in McAllen and Beeville,Texas, where President-elect Bush was hunting quail   Today's forecast called for snow from northern New England tonorthern New York state, northwest Ohio, northern Indiana andMichigan and in the Arizona mountains; snow becoming rain from therest of New England to the Virginias and the rest of the OhioValley; showers from the inland Carolinas to the Tennessee Valleyand the central Gulf Coast and in Southern California; rain alongthe northern Pacific Coast, changing to snow in the PacificNorthwest.   High temperatures were forecast in the single digits from easternMontana to North Dakota and Minnesota; the teens and 20s from therest of the upper Great Lakes to the remaining upper two-thirds ofthe Mississippi Valley, South Dakota and northern Nebraska, and fromMontana to northern New Mexico, northern Arizona and Nevada. The 30sand 40s were expected in northern New England, the lower GreatLakes, the lower Ohio Valley and Arkansas, and from southernNebraska to Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandel, and in the northerntwo-thirds of the Pacific Coast; the 70s in South Carolina,southeast Georgia and the Florida Panhandlel; the 80s in the FloridaPeninsula and the 50s and 60s in the rest of the nation.   Temperatures around the nation at 2 a.m. EST ranged from minus 15degrees at Havre, Mont., to 75 degrees at Key West, Fla.   Other reports:   _East: Atlanta 53 cloudy; Boston 44 cloudy; Buffalo 46 rain;Charleston, S.C. 66 cloudy; Cincinnati 43 rain; Cleveland 42 rain;Detroit 33 cloudy; Miami 72 fair; New York 45 cloudy; Philadelphia48 cloudy; Pittsburgh 48 cloudy; Portland, Maine 32 cloudy;Washington 51 cloudy.   _Central: Bismarck -4 snow; Chicago 18 partly cloudy; Dallas-FortWorth 31 fair; Denver 0 fair; Des Moines 11 fair; Indianapolis 25snow; Kansas City 20 windy; Minneapolis-St. Paul 3 fair; Nashville48 showers; New Orleans 72 cloudy; St. Louis 22 cloudy.   _West: Albuquerque 15 fair; Anchorage 26 snow; Las Vegas 34cloudy; Los Angeles 44 fair; Phoenix 36 fair; Salt Lake City 11cloudy; San Diego 48 rain; San Francisco 47 cloudy; Seattle 32 fair.   _Canada: Montreal 27 cloudy; Toronto 37 cloudy.</TEXT></DOC>