<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880709-0100 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-09-88 1319EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r w WithAM-Reagan-Meese-Drugs     07-09 0853</FIRST><SECOND>With AM-Reagan-Meese-Drugs</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Reagan's radioaddress Saturday:   My fellow Americans, today I want to tell you about some newanti-drug initiatives. But first, with the announcement by EdMeese, now that his name has been cleared, that he'll be returningto private life this summer, I'd like to take a minute to recognizea public servant of dedication and integrity who has been a closefriend for over 20 years.   As counselor at the White House, and as attorney general, EdMeese worked for stricter sentencing to put dangerous criminalsbehind bars, and also for greater resources for drug enforcementand to fight organized crime. And, in a system usually focused onthe criminal, he never forgot the victims of crime or their rights.   As attorney general, Ed Meese led our effort to appoint highlyqualified federal judges who would crack down on crime and alsofaithfully interpret the Constitution. He led our JusticeDepartment as it aggressively defended civil rights. In fact, thisadministration has achieved more convictions for civil rightsviolations than any previous administration.   In fighting terrorism, Attorney General Meese worked closelywith our allies to detect, apprehend and prosecute those who wagewar on innocent members of free societies. And in our campaignagainst the menace of illegal drugs, Ed Meese has been a centralfigure, serving as chairman of the National Drug Policy Board.   Now, let me turn to our anti-drug efforts. I believe that drugtesting is a key tool to help promote public safety and a drug-freework force. In fact, to set a good example, White House employeeswere informed yesterday that random drug testing would begin in 60days. I hope the White House program will encourage increasedtesting programs in the private sector.   In addition, as I mentioned earlier, I have just approved a newset of drug abuse policy recommendations. These proposals send astrong message to drug traffickers and illegal drug users that wehave zero tolerance for those who sell or use illegal drugs.   For example, we would require businesses and colleges thatreceive federal funds to adopt effective, anti-drug programs. Forpregnant women who use illegal drugs, there should be prioritytreatment to help them and their unborn children. We would give themilitary a greater role in coordination with our drug enforcementagencies.   Criminals on probation or parole would be drug-tested andtesting positive might send them right back to jail. And yes, forfor those who commit drug-related murders or kill law officers, wewe favor a federal death penalty.   Since 1981 when Vice President George Bush and I took office, wehave better than tripled total federal spending for drugenforcement, prevention and treatment. And we've requested afurther 13 percent increase that will put nearly $4 billion intothe federal effort next year. And we're beginning to see results.Arrests are up, seizures are up, and use in some categories iscoming down.   But by far the most important development is the change inattitude in America. You can feel it. People are angry aboutillegal drugs. We're a patient people, but we've lost our patienceand this is good news because more needs to be done. And as neverbefore, the American people are doing it _ in their neighborhoods,through their churches, at their schools and workplaces.   For example, today 28 percent of our largest corporations havedrug testing programs. Communities are working with police to getrid of drug dealers, and in thousands of schools throughoutAmerican, there are now ``Just Say No'' clubs.   I have to tell you that whole movement began when a young girlasked Nancy what to do if someone offered her drugs. And Nancy toldher, ``Just say no.'' Well I figure if young people across thecountry can come together against illegal drugs, then why shouldn'tthe grown-ups in Washington be able to do the same.   In May I proposed that both houses of Congress, both sides ofthe aisle, join together with our administration in a bipartisanexecutive-legislative task force to advance America's unifiedanti-drug policy. I proposed this task force for a simple reason _if we're going to get the drugs out of our schools, we need to getthe politics out of drugs. And fortunately on the drug issue, thereis near unanimous agreement. I can tell you that was not the caseseven years ago. But it is today.   This is my final year in office, and I believe that partisanbickering or seeking political advantage can only delay ourprogress in working to achieve a drug-free America.   Yesterday I gave a set of policy proposals to my representativesto the executive-legislative task force. I hope that the Democraticleaders in Congress will now join in this united effort. The timefor excuses and delays is long past. I hope that through this taskforce we can all come together and work in good faith for the goodof this country.   Until next week, thanks for listening and God bless you.</TEXT></DOC>