<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880709-0084 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-09-88 1137EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r p AM-DemocraticConvention Bjt   07-09 1057</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Democratic Convention, Bjt,950</SECOND><HEAD>Democrats To Convene For Southern-Style Coronation</HEAD><BYLINE>By DAVID ESPO</BYLINE><BYLINE>AP Political Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   Democrats will convene in Atlanta next week in a spirit of unityand optimism unseen in a dozen years, assuming that Michael Dukakiscan find a way to have Jesse Jackson on his side without placinghim on the ticket.   As the Democrats' 1988 nominee-in-waiting, the 54-year-oldDukakis unquestionably will command center stage in the conventioncity in the heart of Dixie.   And a southern-style political coronation it will be for the manfrom New England, from the convention site itself to the selectionof a Texas Treasurer Ann Richards as keynote speaker and thedecision to have Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton place Dukakis' name innomination a week from Wednesday night.   All this from a political party hoping to reclaim at least aportion of the South that has become a political desert in recentpresidential elections, with the exception of Georgian JimmyCarter's Southern success in 1976 en route to the White House.   Judging from the public opinion polls, the South remains adifficult hurdle to overcome for Dukakis. Overall, Democratshaven't enjoyed this much of a chance to win the White House sinceCarter's narrow victory of a dozen years ago, even though Dukakis'double-digit lead of late spring has all but evaporated in the wakeof persistent attacks by Vice President George Bush.   While Dukakis' hold on a nominating majority of the delegates isunquestioned and the convention's nightly two-hour prime timeprogram has been designed to convey his campaign themes, Jacksonhas reserved a starring role.   He'll arrive at the confab at the head of a ``Jackson Action''three-day bus tour but denies his pre-arranged fanfare will stealthe thunder from Dukakis.   ``It has nothing to do with thunder. Mr. Dukakis had nointention of bringing any thunder to Atlanta,'' Jackson saidThursday.   The runner-up in the primary season will have the support ofmore than 1,100 delegates at the convention and almost certainlywill have his name placed in nomination on Wednesday night,providing a symbolic challenge to Dukakis' nomination. A noisyfloor demonstration will ensue.   Jackson's campaign is organizing a series of events outside theconvention hall to maintain enthusiasm. In addition, Rep. GusSavage of Illinois, a Jackson delegate, holds a police permit for ademonstration outside the Omni, which is expected to urge Dukakisto name Jackson as his running mate.   And Jackson's response to the nomination of the vicepresidential candidate on the final night of the convention has theDukakis campaign on edge. The Massachusetts governor is widelyexpected to turn elsewhere for his running mate, and Dukakis aidesare concerned that rebellious Jackson forces may place their man innomination and force a prime-time showdown on the final night ofthe convention, or perhaps even stage a public walkout.   ``I think he has been and will be positive no matter whathappens,'' says Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri, a one-timeprimary rival and one of the contenders to be Dukakis' running mate.   But Dukakis' aides concede they need support from Jackson andthe millions who voted fo him during the primaries to defeat Bushin the fall campaign.   Jackson himself has provided conflicting clues of his intentionsin the five weeks since the primaries. He has criticized theplatform, campaigned publicly for the vice presidential nominationand dismissed the other contenders as ``unknown quantities.'' Yethe has spoken consistently of expanding the Democratic party, andwhen he left Boston earlier this week after spending the Fourth ofJuly with Dukakis, he said, ``our interests converge.''   Dukakis says he hopes to settle on a running mate and perhapssqueeze in a little campaigning time before flying to Atlanta nextweekend. The leading contenders are believed to be Sens. John Glennof Ohio; Bob Graham of Florida; Lloyd Bentsen of Texas and AlbertGore Jr. of Tennessee as well as Gephardt and Rep. Lee Hamilton ofIndiana.   Sens. Sam Nunn of Georgia and Bill Bradley of New Jersey haveruled themselves out, as has House Democratic leader Tom Foley ofWashington.   The vice presidenial issue aside, Democrats say there is littlecontroversy that could seriously mar the four-day spectacle thatparty officials hope will speed Dukakis on his way to the WhiteHouse.   Disputes over party rules and delegate credentials _ forums fornasty disputes in conventions of the recent past _ have been ironedout between the Jackson and Dukakis campaigns.   The two sides are expected to continue meeting over theirplatform disagreements. But Dukakis' aides seem to welcome a floorvote to reject an expected Jackson call to raise taxes on thewealthy and to freeze Pentagon spending.   Unlike the conventions of 1980 or 1984, there has been littlequestion that Dukakis holds a majority of the delegates, and notalk of a convention showdown that might loosen his grip.   Aside from Jackson, nearly all of Dukakis one-time rivals havenot only warmly endorsed him but campaigned by his side in recentdays.   Dukakis wrapped up the nomination early and also has benefittedfrom the lack of animosity that has accompanied recent Democraticraces. In 1980, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy waged a last-ditch floorfight in an unsuccessful attempt to wrest the nomination fromCarter. And in 1984, Walter F. Mondale struggled to win hisnominating majority on the final day of the primary season, whilefending off repeated challenges from Gary Hart and Jackson.   However harmonious the proceedings are inside the hall, theDemocrats will attract the normal complement of streetdemonstrators, ranging from white supremacists to gay rightsactivists to animal rights groups.   Not to mention a group of Georgians opposed to a four-lanehighway to Carter's presidential library.   Republicans will try to grab their share of media attention atthe Democratic meeting. They will send several well-known officialsto Atlanta to make themelves available for newspaper and televisioninterviews.   But one group's protest is another's opportunity.   Local leaders figure the convention will be worth roughly $60million to the economy.   The Georgia Tourist Division has sent each of the 4,000-plusdelegates a can of state-grown popcorn with the words ``Georgia'sPopping.'' The hope is to entice some convention goers _ and theirconvention dollars _ out of Atlanta and into other regions of thestate.</TEXT></DOC>