<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880713-0185 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-13-88 1824EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u p AM-Dukakis-Text 4thAdd   07-13 0968</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Dukakis-Text, 4th Add,940</SECOND><HEAD>WASHN: of America.</HEAD><TEXT>   Last week, we lost an attorney general, but we gained a measureof self-respect, didn't we? We gained a measure of self-respect.And next year with your help, we're going to clean out the wholecrew. Next year, we're going to clean out the whole crew. Nextyear, we're going to have a president that who will appoint SupremeCourt justices that we can be proud of, judges like Louise Brandeisand Thurgood Marshall. We're going to have a Civil RightsCommission that believes in civil rights.   We're going to have a foreign policy that reflects the values ofthe American people _ (applause). We're going to stop the shootingwar in Central America, and we're going to lead a war againstpoverty and in justice and exploitation throughout this hemisphere.And my friends on the Security Council of the United Nations, we'renot going to veto international sanctions against South Africa;we're going to sponsor them. That's what we're going to do _ that'swhat we're going to do.   We're not going to sell arms to terrorists _ we're going tocrack down on terrorists, whether they live in Beirut or Tehran orJohannesburg. And we're not going to cut deals with adope-peddling, gun-running Panamanian dictator and funnel aid tothe Contras through convicted drug dealers. We're going to say``no'' to Noriega and we're going to wage a real war and not aphony war against drugs and drug abuse in this country becausewe're going to have a president in the White House who understandsthat the greatest threat to our national security in thishemisphere is not the Sandinistas _ it's this avalance of drugsthat's pouring into our communities and poisoning our kids.   And you're going to have a president who's done more than justtalk about crime and drugs. You're going to have a president who'sbeen working for years with parents and students and educators andlaw enforcement officials to cut the demand for drugs. And ladiesand gentlemen, we can do all the enforcing in the world and we mustdo a tough enforcement job. And as any drug enforcement officerswill tell you, if we don't do something about the demand for drugsin this country, we're going to lose this war. We have five percentof the world's population in the United States of America; we'reconsuming 50 percent of the world's cocaine. Five percent of theworld's population and 50 percent of the world's cocaine.   So yes, we going to be enforcing the law both here and abroad.And we're going to be doing something about drug trafficking. Butwe have to set as our goal in this country drug-free schools in the1990s in every community in America, and I mean it. And I mean it.In my own state, we've been working for the past four years briningdrug education and prevention into the early elementary grades inevery community in my state. And we have already made an enormousimpact on drug use and abuse among young people. But that drugeducation has to begin in the first, second, and third grade, and Imean it, in every elementary school in America, and I personallywant to lead that fight with your help and with your support.   And when I say these things to you, I say these to you not assomebody who just talks about these things. I'm proud to say to youthat I'm the governor of a state that has had the second biggestdrop in crime of any state in this country in the past five years,and the lowest homicide rate of any industrial state in America.We're not going to have more rhetoric or photo opportunities in thewar against drugs. Beginning in January of 1989, we're going to getresults. That's a commitment and I promise it to you.   Many of you will recall that in June of 1966, just two years tothe day before his assassination, Robert Kennedy also stood infront of an audience of eager young students, some 15,000 strong.The site was a university, the city was Cape Town, South Africa,and his message was the same as Dr. King's in this city some 29years ago, and this is what he said: He said, ``Few of us will havethe opportunity to bend history itself, but each of us can work tochange a small portion of events. And the total of all those actswill be written in the history of this generation. Each time a manor woman stands up for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot ofothers, or strikes out against injustice, he sends forth a tinyripple of hope, and crossing each other from a million differentcenters of energy and of daring, those ripples build a currentwhich can sweep down the mightiest walls of oppression and ofresistance.'' My friends, the future of America doesn't depend onsome nameless, outside force, and it certainly doesn't depend onthe alignment of the stars, the future depends on us. The futuredepends on us.   The future depends on us. That's what democracy is all about.That's what this country is all about, that's what the NAACP is allabout, and that's what this presidential campaign is all about. Alot has happened since I addressed this same convention last year.I know that I've learned a great deal about myself, and about thepeople of this country. I know that I've never been prouder of myparty, the party that has opened up the door of opportunity to acouple of guys named Dukakis and Jackson, the top two candidatesfor our nomination.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>