<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880321-0270 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-03-21-88 1443EST</FILEID><FIRST>u f BC-ScotusAt-a-Glance     03-21 0650</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Scotus At-a-Glance,0707</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here, at a glance, are highlights of actionstaken Monday by the Supreme Court in some business-related cases:      DALKON SHIELD      The court refused to let the Dalkon Shield's maker set up a $15million emergency fund to help women who say the contraceptivedevice left them infertile.   The court, without comment, let stand a ruling that blockscreation of the fund pending the outcome of bankruptcy proceedingsfor A.H. Robins, which manufactures the device.   In a related case, the court refused to review a ruling that atleast temporarily barred some Dalkon Shield users from suing AetnaCasualty andamp; Surety Co., which insures A.H. Robins for liabilityclaims.   The cases are Mabey vs. Official Committee of Equity SecurityHolders, 87-1267, and Oberg vs. Aetna, 87-1208.      EQUAL TIME      The court rejected a constitutional attack on a federal lawrequiring broadcasters to give equal time to opposing candidatesfor public office.   The justices, without comment, turned down the appeal of aSacramento, Calif., television reporter kept off the air while heran for a non-salaried town council seat.   The case is Branch vs. FCC, 87-628.      AGE BIAS      The court, agreeing to decide an important issue for alllawsuits alleging age bias in employment, said it will study thecase of a laid-off Pennsylvania man.   The justices agreed to decide whether Eugene F. Brieck's lawsuitagainst his former employer, Harbison-Walker Refractories, shouldproceed to a jury trial.   The case is Harbison-Walker vs. Brieck, 87-271.      GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS      The court agreed to consider killing a key provision of a lawdesigned to promote competitive bidding on government contracts,setting the stage for a new ruling on the boundaries betweencongressional and presidential powers.   The court said it will hear Reagan administration argumentschallenging the comptroller general's role in administering the1984 Competition in Contracting Act.   The case is Army Corps of Engineers vs. Ameron, 87-163.      SALES TAX      The court agreed to decide whether states may impose sales taxeson most books, newspapers and magazines while exempting religiouspublications.   The justices said they will review a Texas court ruling thatsaid such a tax neither violates equal-protection rights norbreeches the constitutionally required separation of church andstate.   The case is Texas Monthly vs. Bullock, 87-1245.      CABLE RATES      The court refused to let states and local governments regulatethe prices most of the nation's cable television operators chargefor basic service.   The court, without comment, rejected arguments that thederegulation effected in 1986 by Congress and the FederalCommunications Commission left subscribers vulnerable to illegalmonopoly pricing.      The case is Connecticut vs. FCC, 87-671.      The court agreed to examine the power of labor unions to fireelected officials for disagreeing with union policies.   The court said it will consider killing a lawsuit by a LosAngeles area union business representative who said he was firedillegally by the Sheet Metal Workers' International Association.   The case is Sheet Metal Workers vs. Lynn, 86-1940.      SUPERFUND      The court agreed to consider shielding states from having tohelp pay for cleaning up hazardous waste sites when the federalgovernment sues businesses under the so-called Superfund law.   The court said it will hear arguments by Pennsylvania officialsthat exposing states to such liability could saddle them with $100billion in clean-up costs.   The case is Pennsylvania vs. Union Gas, 87-1241.      RICO      The court agreed to consider making it easier for people to usea federal anti-racketeering law to sue businesses.   The court said it will hear an appeal by phone customers inMinnesota who have accused Northwestern Bell Telephone Co. oftrying to bribe state public utility officials.   The phone subscribers sued the company under a law known as theRacketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO).   The case is H.J. Inc. vs. Northwestern Bell, 87-1252.</TEXT></DOC>