<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880601-0031 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-01-88 0026EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u i BC-Gorbachev-ToastText     06-01 1250</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Gorbachev-Toast Text,1240</SECOND><DATELINE>MOSCOW (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is a transcript of Soviet leader Mikhail S.Gorbachev's toast Tuesday at the dinner President Reagan hosted atthe home of the U.S. ambassador:   Esteemed Mr. President, esteemed Mrs. Reagan, ladies andgentlemen, comrades: I thank you, Mr. President for the words ofgreeting you've just addressed to us. Two great nations have giventhe two of us a mandate to determine what Soviet-American relationsshould be like. Since our first meeting in Geneva, relationsbetween our two countries have overcome a long, drawn-out period ofconfrontation to reach an acceptable level from it which it is noweasier to move forward. In Reykjavik, in Washington, and duringthis present visit of yours, our dialogue has been intense. It'smost important result has been the now-ratified first treaty toreduce nuclear weapons. A search is continuing to find a solutionfor problems relating to 50 percent cuts in strategic offensivearms. The Geneva Accord on Afghanistan has come into force. We nowhave as many as 47 bilateral agreements on cooperation.   The visit by a president of the United States to the SovietUnion is an occasion for a glance at the past, and a look into thefuture. The history of relations between our two countries hasknown all kinds of things, good and bad. Of the good things, weremember particularly well the Soviet-American comradeship in armsin World War II. Those grim years saw the emergence of the firstshoots of Soviet-American friendship. And there was not one singleSoviet citizen who did not feel bitter when that glorious page inthe history of our relations gave way to Cold War. That was a hardtest for our peoples. The world found itself in a dangeroussituation. We all felt the breath of impending catastrophe. Eventoday, we're sometimes chilled by cold winds. But worlddevelopments, in their main tendency, are turning toward a searchfor political solutions, toward cooperation and peace. We are, allof us, witnesses to momentous changes, though a lot still has to bedone to achieve irreversible change.   Although everything urges cooperation and trust, prejudices andstereotypes are still with us, as is rivalry, above all in themilitary sphere. A great deal has been said at this meeting tooabout how pointless and catastrophic it is. More importantly, wecan register some headway toward better mutual understanding inthis area as well.   Today, I would like to address another major world problem _ thesituation in the developing world, which cannot but affect ourcountries, too. The problems which the developing countries facehave turned out to be difficult to the point of tragedy. Glaringbackwardness, hunger, poverty and mass diseases continue to besetentire nations, and incredibly high debt has become an excruciatingand universal problem. It would seem that everybody can see itscomplexity, involving as it does extremely diverse and truly vitalinterests, and understand that a way out must be sought.   We believe that if the international community, and above allthe great powers, are to be of any help, the starting point and theessential thing is to recognize unconditionally the freedom ofchoice. We are insisting on fairness. We have seriously studied theeconomic situation in developing nations, and I am convinced that away out is possible along the lines of a radical restructuring ofthe entire system of world economic relations without anydiscrimination for political reasons. This would promote apolitical settlement of regional conflicts which not only impedeprogress in that part of the world, but also cause turmoil in theentire world situation. With such an approach, our differences asto what kind of a future awaits the Third World would not take onconfrontational forms. So in this matter too, our relationship isdoomed to have an international dimension.   Turning now to our bilateral relations, we envision theiropportunities and prospects primarily in the light of internalevolution in both countries, but also in the context of worlddevelopments. Many Americans who are studying us and who havevisited the USSR, and now, I hope, those present here as well, havebeen able to see for themselves the sweeping scope of change in ourcountry. It is based on comprehensive democratization and radicaleconomic reform. I am gratified to note that today the presidentand I have had an in-depth exchange of views on this subject. Wehave also discussed our perestroika a number of times with otherAmericans. This is all to the good. It, too, is a sign of change inour relationship.   We, for our part, are trying to closely follow the profoundtrends in the United States. We see how little similarity there isbetween what is happening in our country and in yours, in two verydifferent societies based on different values. But we do not regardthis as an obstacle to identifying promising areas for mutuallybeneficial ties or for cooperation in the interests of the twopeoples. We're in favor of competition and comparison.   And another thing, whatever the ups and downs of our dialoguewith America, Soviet representatives have been upholding theinterests of the Soviet state. In their contacts with us, Americanofficials have been acting in exactly the same way, vis-a-vis theirown interests. The truth is, that in building their relationship,the Soviet Union and the United States can effectively serve theirown interests only if they have a realistic view and take accountof each other's interests and intentions.   We must learn the difficult art of not just existing side byside, but of building bridges of mutually beneficial cooperation.Soviet and American people want to live in peace and communicate inall areas in which they have a mutual interest. The interest istheirs, and it is growing. We feel no fear. We are not prejudiced.We believe in the value of communication.   I ee a future in which the Soviet Union and the United Statesbase their relations on disarmament, a balance of interest andcomprehensive cooperation, rather than on deterring each other orupgrading their military capabilities. I see a future in whichsolutions to real problems are not impeded by problems historicallyoutdated or artificially kept alive, inherited from the times ofthe Cold War, and in which the policies of confrontation give wayto a joint quest based on reason, mutual benefit, and readiness tocompromise.   I see a future in which our two countries, without claiming anyspecial rights in the world, are always mindful of their specialresponsibility in a community of equal nations. It will be a worldthat is safer and more secure, which is so badly needed by allpeople on earth, by their children and grandchildren, so that theycan gain and preserve the basic human rights _ the right to life,work, freedom, and the pursuit of happiness.   The path towards this future can be neither easy nor short. Wemay be standing at the threshold of a uniquely interesting periodin the history of our two nations. This new meeting between the twoof us, Mr. President, confirms that three years ago in Geneva, wetook the right decision. May the years to come bring a healthierinternational environment. May life be triumphant.   To the very good health of the president, to the very goodhealth of Mrs. Nancy Reagan, to cooperation between our two peoples.</TEXT></DOC>