<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881112-0072 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-11-12-88 1319EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-ReaganText     11-12 0830</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Reagan Text,820</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Reagan's weeklyradio address, broadcast Saturday from Camp David, Md.:   My fellow Americans, this week we witnessed a glorious event: wethe people going to the polls to determine our political destiny.   I guess I don't need to tell you, I think the United States ofAmerica did itself proud with the selection of George Bush as the41st president of the United States and Dan Quayle as his vicepresident.   George Bush has gotten his mandate from the American people, themandate to continue the policies that have brought peace andprosperity to bring hope and opportunity to all Americans, and toexpand the frontiers of freedom around the world.   You know all year long people were saying it was time for achange. Well by your choice this week you proved we were right whenwe said we _ George Bush, Dan Quayle, and the Republican party _ arethe change. It began eight years ago and it's going to continue.   But some things don't change, like the glory of the Americanpolitical system. We saw it at work on Tuesday after the dustcleared and the people had spoken. That night the nation wasfortunate to witness the grace and dignity of the Democraticcandidate Governor Dukakis as he congratulated George Bush in hisvictory. He ran a tough race, full of energy and purpose and Isalute him for his dedication and courage.   On Tuesday night and in the days that have followed it, and inthe 10 weeks before January 20th 1989, we the people can take pridein just how strong our political system really is. We take it for   granted sometimes, but I couldn't help thinking on Tuesday nighthow inspiring it is that we know we Americans can choose our leaderwithout fear of violence. All Americans from Hawaii to Maine knowthat when the voice of the people is heard, even the mightiest amongus must bow before it and accept its wisdom.   President-elect Bush said it well the other day, ``We can nowspeak the most magestic words that democracy has to offer. Thepeople have spoken.''   Only twice in our history, during the dark days of our Civil Warhas anyone dared to question the wisdom of the American people asthey chose their president, dared to deny the validity of theselection.   In other nations a disgruntled group of defeated politiciansmight try to stage a coup d'etat or might even follow our disastrousmistake from the 1960s and go to war, brother against brother,rather than consent to the will of the people.   But here we Americans are just four days after one of the mostimportant nights in our history, working or playing or just enjoyingour weekend. We've made our choice, and life goes on. We don't evenneed to give it a thought. But when we do, I think it's cause for usto wonder at our freedom.   We continue to enjoy our freedom because of those brave Americansamong us who have legitimately taken up arms in the service of theircountry, protecting and defending the United States of America. Thisweekend, we commemorate America's veterans _ those who did theirduty so that we could be free and strong, so that tyranny could findno quarter, so that we could live in peace.   I think of the example of Staff Sergeant Carlos Stollard, one ofthe Gold Star men in World War II. In a 1944 letter to his parents,Carlos wrote, ``I believe in making that future a place where littlechildren can go swimming and playing around their homes withoutbeing mangled for life from bursting bombs and flaming debris thatwas once their homes, so that they can have a mother's care insteadof being left in some dark corner shivering with cold and dying withhunger and wondering if mother, in a concentration camp, is beingcruelly beaten or if she is dead. That's what we are fighting for,and I would gladly give ten lives if I had them.''   Well, like all of us, Carlos Stollard had but one life to give   for his country. He died in action in France on July 26, 1944.His heroic example reminds us why sometimes we must take up arms sothat we can live free and at peace. Every veteran in this countrydeserves our thanks and gratitude this weekend of all weekends.   And my friends, on this, the last Veteran's Day I willcommemorate as President, I would like to say that if there is onechange George Bush and I made that touches me most profoundly, itwould probably be this: once again, our young men and women areproud to wear the uniform of their country. Flight Lieutenant GeorgeBush sure was.   Until next week, thanks for listening, and may God bless you.</TEXT></DOC>