<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881209-0080 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-09-88 1040EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i BC-NATO-Text     12-09 0964</FIRST><SECOND>BC-NATO-Text,0994</SECOND><HEAD>Excerpts From The NATO Communique</HEAD><DATELINE>BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here are excerpts from the officialEnglish-language communique issued by the NATO foreign ministersFriday at the end of their two-day meeting at the NATO headquarters:   Our meeting has taken place amid clear signs of change in theinternal and external policies of the Soviet Union and of some ofits allies. Promising prospects are opening up for an improvedEast-West dialogue. We are encouraged by this trend which, ifsustained, would provide us with an unprecedented opportunity toshape a better international environment reflecting our basic valuesand the aspirations of our peoples.   Among the most promising recent developments is the address madeby President (Mikhail) Gorbachev at the 43rd U.N. General Assembly,which indicates the extend of change in Soviet policies.   We will continue to seize every opportunity to cooperate in thesearch for political solutions to East-West differences, with a viewto promoting our ultimate aim of a just and lasting peaceful orderin Europe.   In the pursuit of this endeavor, we look for further tangible andlasting changes addressing directly the issues dividing East andWest. We reiterate our willingness to work closely with the SovietUnion and its allies in the search for ways to ease and finallyovercome the painful division of Europe.   We will continue to evaluate closely the current developments ineastern Europe, where pressures for movement toward political andeconomic reform are mounting. While welcoming progress achieved incertain areas, we need to take a realistic view of developments.   The Soviet Union and other Eastern countries still have to meetfully their obligations on human rights. Nevertheless, we areencouraged by the recent introduction or announcement of importantmeasures in this field.   In the defense area we express the hope that PresidentGorbachev's address also represents the starting point of a newapproach by the Soviet Union to the size and structure of theirmilitary forces and programs, which both in the nuclear andconventional fields still exceed any reasonable defense need.   --- We attach particular importance to the CSCE (Conference onSecurity and Cooperation in Europe) process, which provides a roadmap for stable and constructive relations between East and West andfor a dynamic evolution in Europe.   We note with regret that a number of governments in the Eaststill continue to ignore important provisions of the Helsinki FinalAct and the Madrid Concluding Document; full implementation of theundertakings contained in these documents, including full respectfor human rights, is an essential requirement for genuine peace andenhancement of mutual confidence.   We will continue to strive for the conclusion of the CSCEFollow-Up meeting in Vienna in the immediate future, with asubstantial and balanced concluding document.   Arms control is an integral part of Alliance security policy. Inexpressing full support for the United States position in the START(Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) negotiations, i.e. its aim toreach a 50 percent reduction in the strategic nuclear forces of theU.S. and the Soviet Union, we welcome the substantial progressachieved, including preliminary agreement on key elements, and lookforward to a timely, successful conclusion of these negotiations.   We reaffirm the importance of the INF (Intermediate-range NuclearForces) Treaty and welcome its smooth implementation.   --- We look forward to beginning as soon as possible conventionalstability negotiations, within the framework of the CSCE process,with the objective of establishing a secure and stable balance offorces at lower levels, between the 23 members of the two militaryalliances in Europe. We want a situation in Europe in which forcepostures, as well as numbers and deployments of weapons systems, nolonger make a surprise attack and a large-scale offensive action afeasible option, an option which we have never possessed or desired.   Our vision remains a continent where military forces should onlyexist to prevent war and to ensure self-defense, not for the purposeof military aggression and not for the purposes of political ormilitary intimidation. We therefore welcome the latest pronouncementby the Soviet leadership regarding significant reductions of Sovietconventional forces in Europe and re-structuring of the remainingforces.   This implicitly acknowledges our long-held view that redressingthe conventional imbalance is a key to more security and stabilityin Europe. Implementation of these measures would be a veryimportant first step in this direction and reduce, but noteliminate, the conventional imbalances. In particular, it wouldprovide a very favorable impetus to the conventional stabilitynegotiations.   The conventional stability talks will be accompanied by distinctnegotiations on further confidence-building measures among the 35CSCE participants. Such negotiations will have to build upon andexpand on the results of the Stockholm Conference, which marked asignificant step toward increasing transparency and contributed togreater confidence and predictability of military activities inEurope. We look to the countries of the Warsaw Treaty Organizationand other participating states to reciprocate this effort.   --- The member states participating in the MBFR (Mutual andBalanced Force Reduction) talks emphasize their agreement to thecontinuation of these talks until a new mandate for negotiations onconventional stability has emerged. They also agreed these talksshould be concluded before the start of new negotiations.   We reiterate our full commitment to the goal of an earlyconclusion of a truly worldwide, comprehensive and effectivelyverifiable ban on chemical weapons.   --- We reaffirm our commitment to share fairly the risks, burdensand responsibilities, as well as the benefits, of our participationin the alliance. This commitment to equitable sharing is afundamental principle of the alliance and a prerequisite formaintaining its cohesion and solidarity. We all attach greatimportance, in an evolving political, trade and economic environmentto maintaining balance and equity in our partnership.</TEXT></DOC>