<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880507-0111 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-05-07-88 1338EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r w AM-Reagan-RadioText     05-07 0798</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Reagan-Radio Text,770</SECOND><HEAD>With AM-Reagan-Arms Control</HEAD><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Reagan's radioaddress, delivered Saturday from Camp David, Md:   My fellow Americans, next week the full United States Senate isexpected to begin floor debate on the treaty on intermediate-rangenuclear forces, known as the INF treaty. You'll recall that SovietGeneral Secretary (Mikhail S.) Gorbachev and I signed this treatyat our summit meeting in Washington last December. The treatyrepresents a landmark accomplishment, an historic accomplishment,because once implemented, it will bring about the elimination of anentire class of American and Soviet nuclear missiles.   Before our nation can commit itself to a treaty, ourConstitution provides that the Senate must give its advice andconsent, and therefore, last January, I formally submitted the INFtreaty to the Senate for its consideration. The duty of the Senatein giving its advice and consent to treaties is vital tomaintaining our separation of powers, and the role of the Senate inconsidering the INF treaty is essential.   Senior officials of the administration have been working closelywith the Senate. Officials from our State and Defense departments,our intelligence community, and our arms control agency, haveprovided many hours of testimony before three separate Senatecommittees, painstakingly responding to the detailed questionsposed to them by the senators on these committees.   In addition, senators have addressed to the administrationnumerous letters about the treaty and more than 1,200 writtenquestions; we have provided full written responses. So, you'll seethat we've worked very hard to meet any Senate concerns over thetreaty. And as I've assured the Senate, we'll continue to do so.   Now that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee has approved theINF treaty, the entire Senate will be called on to discharge itsconstitutional responsibility to provide its advice and consent tothe INF treaty. As this debate is about to begin in the historicSenate chamber, permit me to take a moment to review you throughthe treaty's background.   The INF treaty is the result of years of hard work by Americanofficials _ officials, who in representing you in our negotiationswith the Soviet Union, held fast to the key security objectivesthat had been set out for the United States and our NATO allies. Atone point, the Soviet Union actually walked away from the table andstayed away from the talks for almost a year and a half.   When in early 1985 the Soviets finally returned, we repeated ourcall for the elimination of this entire class of U.S. and Sovietmissiles _ my zero option proposal, first put forward all the wayback in 1981. And in 1987, it was the Soviet Union that finally,after two and a half more years of negotiating, came around to theAmerican position.   To sum up in the INF negotiations, we held fast to what wewanted and we got it, and this is what comes when negotiating fromstrength. It's the same successful formula, dealing from strength,that we're applying to our other negotiations with the Soviet Unionas well. And I assure you, if we don't get what we want in theseother areas _ in other words, if we do not get good treaties _there will be no treaties.   It's my hope that in recognition of the important role they playin this process, the 100 members of the United States Senate willnow proceed expeditiously in their debate on the INF treaty. It isafter all a solid treaty, carefully negotiated, a treaty thatstands on its own substantive merits, a treaty that will enhancethe security of our country and that of our European and Asianallies now threatened by the various Soviet missiles that will beremoved once the treaty is implemented.   Senate approval of the treaty will enable us to get on with thejob of eliminating these nuclear missiles. It will also allow us toput into action the elaborate verification regime that we achievedin the INF treaty. The most stringent in arms control history, itwill enable us to verify effectively that the Soviets are indeedcomplying with all of the treaty's provisions.   I know that you, the American people, strongly support this INFtreaty. And on Capitol Hill, the House of Representatives hasalready given the treaty its endorsement by an overwhelming vote of393 to 7. Now that the treaty is moving to floor debate in theSenate, let the debate be vigorous and full and let it proceedwithout delay. For I'm confident that the final vote will indeedgive advice and consent to this historic treaty, the historic steptoward a safer peace.   Until next week, thanks for listening, and God bless you.</TEXT></DOC>