<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881005-0250 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-10-05-88 2311EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u p BC-VeepDebateText 14thadd 1 10-05 1496</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Veep Debate Text, 14th add, 1,516</SECOND><HEAD>OMAHA, Neb.: on, Judy.</HEAD><TEXT>   Moderator: Jon Margolis, a question for Sen Quayle.   Q: Sen. Quayle, I want to go back to the matter   of qualifications, which I think for most people is more thanjust   -- more than just your -- how long you've been in the Senate --   Quayle: Jon, we can't hear you.   Q: You can hear now?   I want to go back to the question of qualifications, which Ithink for most people is more than just how long you've been in theSenate and how long you've been in public life. There's also aquestion of candor and of consistency. And several of the thingsyou've said, both here and earlier, I think have raised somereasonable questions.   Each of them alone might seem rather trivial, but I thinktogether they create a pattern that needs to be asked. You'vetalked a few times today about the Job Training Partnership Act,which you authored. In fact, I believe you co-authored it withanother senator whom you almost never name. Earlier in thecampaign, when you were asked why you got a very -- a desk job inthe National Guard, after being trained as a welder -- you said, atthe time, you had a very strong background in journalism, which atthat time was summer jobs at your family-owned newspaper (about)which you have not been very forthcoming about what they were, asyou have not been very forthcoming about your college record. Now,you'll have to say -- you have, at least the males on this panelhave earlier agreed that your record was probably comparable toours.   But, nonetheless, these examples of sort of overstatement andexaggeration, and not being forthcoming, this is what has led a lotof people to question this part of your qualifications. Not your --not your experience, but your character. Would you like to set someof these things straight now, as to what you did in your summerjobs in college, what your grades were like, and would you like toidentify your co-sponsor of the Job Training Partnership Act.   Quayle: All in two minutes?   Q: Sure.   Quayle: Let me -- let me start with the underlying premise thatsomehow I haven't been straight forward, and I have, and let's go-- right to the very first question: The Job Training PartnershipAct. I was the author of that. The co-author in the United StatesSenate was Sen. Kennedy. I was the chairman of the employment andproductivity subcommittee _ chairman of the committee _ write (sic)that legislation. Chairman of the committee write (sic) thelegislation, and then they go out and get co-sponsorship. And whenyou are the chairman of the committee, and you sit down and youwrite the legislation, you are the author of that.   And I'm proud to have been the author of that, because you knowwhat we had, we had a CETA program, that spent $50 billion dollars-- from about 1973 through 1982. And when we concluded that program-- when we concluded that program, unemployment was higher thanwhen it began. It was a program that didn't work, and the JobTraining Partnership Act does work.   Now, the issue of releasing all of my grades. I am, and I standbefore you tonight, as the most investigated person ever to seekpublic office. Thousands of journalists have asked every professorI've had, all my teachers, and they know -- and I've neverprofessed to be anything but an average student. I have never saidthat I was anything more than that, but it's not whether you're anaverage student, it's what are you going to do with your life? Andwhat am I going to do with my life? I have committed it to publicservice since I was 29 years of age: Elected to the House ofRepresentatives, elected to the United States Senate when I was 33,and now ....   Moderator: Senator? Sen. Bentsen?   Bentsen: I have absolutely no quarrel with Sen. Quayle'smilitary record, but I do strongly disagree with him on some of theissues. You make great patriotic speeches, and I enjoy them. But Idon't understand your vote on veterans' issues. Sen. Quayle has oneof the worst voting records in the United States Senate onveterans' issues. And one of them that particularly bothers me,sponsoring legislation to put a tax on combat pay and disabilitypay for veterans, for fighting men and women of America _ tax ondisability pay when lying there in the hospital, people who havesacrificed for our country. I think you ought to explain that tothe people of America, and you ought to explain it tonight.   Moderator: Jon, a question for Sen. Bentsen.   Q: Senator, you're chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, andyou're generally considered rather an orthodox conservative onfiscal matters, meaning someone who would be very concerned aboutthe budget deficit. With everybody in politics afraid even tomention taxes or Social Security cuts or even very much restraintin defense spending, would you now list a few specific programswhich would reduce or eliminate -- which you would reduce oreliminate to cut the deficit by about $50 billion, the deficitwhich is expected to be about $135 billion this fiscal year?   Bentsen: One of them that I'd work on, and I do this as afarmer, I'd try to turn the situation around where we have seen thesubsidy payments go from two and a half billion to ten times thatunder this administration. And the way I would accomplish that waswith a tough trade policy -- opening up those markets, gettingthose prices back up to market prices. We can do that if we have anaggressive trade policy for our country, if we make trade a numberone priority and not trade it off for some foreign policy objectiveof the moment. That means we have to stand up for the Americanfarmers, and that cuts back on the regulation on American farmers.   That's a positive way to accomplish that. In addition to that,we'd do some of the things that I think have to be done insofar asdoing a better job of procurement, particularly when we're talkingabout some of our military things that we should buy. I know thatI've fought very hard to put in an independent inspector generalfor the Defense Department, but the senator from Indiana opposed meon that.   But we were finally able to put that into effect, and we savedover a quarter of a billion dollars this year -- almost enough tobuy a squadron of F16s. Those are the kinds of things that I'd workon, and one of the things I learned in business is that you canexpect what you inspect. So we'd be doing a much tougher job ofauditing to try to get rid of some of these kickbacks toconsultants on military contracts, to be much more aggressive onthat. In addition, those types of things would bring the interestrate down. I'd try to turn this trade deficit around and that toowould help us and help us very substantially.   And I'd get rid of some things like these planes that you'regoing to have that the Administration wants that will fly from NewYork to Tokyo and take those investment bankers over there in fourhours. I don't think we can afford a piece of technologicalelegance like that. I'd strike that sort of thing from the ticket.I don't know how many people have ridden the Concorde. Not many.But I voted against it (and) said it would be a financial disaster,and it's been just that. So those are the types of things that Iwould work on.   Moderator: Sen. Quayle.   Quayle: The way we're going to reduce this budget deficit -- andit is a challenge to make sure that it is reduced -- is first tostick to the Gramm-Rudman targets. The Gramm-Rudman targets haveworked. We've reduced the federal budget deficit $70 billion.Senator Bentsen voted against Gramm-Rudman -- the very tool thathas been used to bring the federal budget deficit down.   We're going to need all the tools possible to bring this federalbudget deficit down. We need the tools of a line-item veto. Aline-item veto that 43 Governors in this country have, but not thePresident of the United States. The president of the United Statesneeds to have a line-item veto when Congress goes ahead and putsinto appropriations bills unrequested and unecessary spending. Letthe president put a line through that, send it back to theCongress, and the let the Congress vote on it again. Congress hasgot to help out in reducing this budget deficit as much as theexecutive branch.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>