<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881109-0141 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-11-09-88 1106EST</FILEID><FIRST>u p PM-ELN--PropositionsRdp 6thLd-Writethru a0981 11-09 1153</FIRST><SECOND>PM-ELN--Propositions Rdp, 6th Ld - Writethru, a0981,1181</SECOND><HEAD>Gun Control In Maryland; Abortion Foes Win In Three States</HEAD><NOTE>Eds: Subs lead with insurance measure winning, subs 6th graf, `Latereturns ...' with new figures.</NOTE><BYLINE>By MARTIN STEINBERG</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   California voters approved deep cuts in car insurance ratesdespite a record $60 million campaign against the measure, whileMaryland upheld a landmark ban on cheap guns and abortion foes wonmajor victories in Michigan, Colorado and Arkansas.   In other election results, California voters overwhelminglyrejected an emotionally charged AIDS initiative that would haveforced doctors to report AIDS patients in order to trace everyonethey might possibly have infected. However, they also approved areferendum allowing AIDS testing for people accused of certaincrimes.   Massachusetts and Nebraska residents Tuesday gave votes ofconfidence to nuclear power; the tax revolt suffered setbacks inColorado and Utah. Oregonians rejected what would have been thenation's toughest anti-smoking law, while Californians approved a25-cent increase in cigarette taxes with the proceeds used topromote health. Florida, Colorado and Arizona made English theirofficial state language. New Yorkers approved a record $3 billionborrowing to repair roads.   In all, voters in 41 states faced 238 statewide ballot questions_ 29 in California alone.   In California, where auto insurers, lawyers and consumeradvocates waged a record $75 million media battle over fiveconflicting insurance-related ballot measures, voters rejected fourof those propositions.   A Ralph Nader-backed measure that would slash rates by more than20 percent was narrowly approved by 51.2 percent to 48.8 percent.The vote on that measure was 4,528,783 to 4,320,205 with nearly 98.9percent of the precincts reporting.   The AIDS measure that would have forced California doctors toreport the identities of AIDS sufferers was defeated by 66-34percent with 93 percent of the precincts reporting. The plan wasbacked by tax rebel Paul Gann, who contracted acquired immunedefiency syndrome in 1982 from a blood transfusion.   The other AIDS measure, which won by 62-38 percent, is designedto help protect rape victims and law officers who fear they may havebeen exposed to AIDS or other communicable diseases.   In Maryland, the state's 6-month-old law that bans cheap handgunsknown as ``Saturday night specials'' won by 58-42 percent despite amore than $4 million media campaign by the National RifleAssociation, which feared it will encourage gun control elsewhere.   In Michigan, voters approved a ban on state-financed abortionsfor poor women except to save the life of the mother. With 84percent of the precincts reporting, the ban won by 58-42 percent.   Coloradans likewise voted against state-funded abortions, by60-40 percent. An Arkansas amendment that protects life beginning atconception and forbids state-financed abortions was approved by a52-48 percent margin, with 96 percent of the precincts reporting.   In Massachusetts, voters rejected an initiative that would haveshut the state's two nuclear power plants. With 79 percent of theprecincts reporting, 68 percent voted against the plan that wasopposed by Gov. Michael Dukakis.   Nebraskans decided against becoming the first state to withdrawfrom an interstate nuclear waste compact.   Among the more stringent tax-cutting measures, South Dakotansrejected Proposition II, which would have rolled back property taxesand limit future increases, by 61-39 percent.   Coloradans defeated a ``Taxpayers Bill of Rights Amendment,''which would have cut income taxes about 10 percent, limit propertytaxes and require voter approval on future hikes except inemergencies. The measure lost, 58 percent to 42 percent.   In Utah, voters overwhelmingly rejected three tax initiativesthat together would have lowered state and local revenues by $329million. The measures would have limited property taxes, rolled backincome, sales, gasoline and cigarette taxes, and granted tax creditsfor private education.   Nevadans overwhelmingly approved a constitutional prohibition onincome taxes. The measure, backed by the casino industry, wasapproved 83 percent to 17 percent.   A ``Fair Tax Amendment'' that would have made it easier for theArkansas legislature to raise certain taxes failed 62-38 percentwith 96 percent of the precincts reporting.   Oregon voters rejected an ordinance that would have bannedsmoking in most public places. The measure was defeated by 61-39percent.   But 58 percent of California voters endorsed a 25-cent hike inthe cigarette tax, with 93 percent of the vote counted. Proceeds ofthe tax would go toward promoting health.   In Florida, 84 percent of voters decided to declare English theofficial state language. Coloradans endorsed a similar amendment bya 61-39 percent margin with 99 percent of the precincts reporting.The vote was closer in Arizona, where it was approved 51-49 percentwith 97 percent of the precincts counted.   Oregonians overturned Gov. Neil Goldschmidt's order protectinghomosexual state workers from discrimination by a 53-47 percentmargin. Fort Collins, Colo., voters rejected a proposed gay rightsinitiative by 56-43 percent, with 67 of 164 precincts counted.   State lotteries were approved in Kentucky, Indiana, Idaho andMinnesota.   South Dakota voters approved a measure legalizing gambling inDeadwood, a Black Hills town where Wild Bill Hickok died playingpoker and where townspeople are now eager for money to preservewild-west architecture. The measure won 64-36 percent.   A Massachusetts initiative aimed at protecting farm animals fromcruelty was trounced by a 71-29 percent margin, with 79 percent ofthe precincts reporting.   South Dakotans were endorsing a ban on corporate hog farming by a62-38 percent margin.   In other major contests:   _ Florida residents rejected an amendment limiting liabilityclaims for bodily injury to $100,000 for non-economic losses such aspain and suffering.   _ A South Dakota measure requiring strip miners to restore landto original contours where possible was defeated by a 59-41 percentmargin. Kentucky residents strongly endorsed a measure restrictingstrip-mining rights. With 99 percent of precincts reporting, thevote was 868,634 yes, 192,240 against.   _ Montanans rejected a repeal of the state's year-old seat beltlaw, while Oregon voters rejected a new seat belt ordinance.   Montana rejected a measure that would have made the state the10th to enact a ``bottle bill'' requiring return deposits onbeverage containers.   _ Washington voters chose between two rival measures dealing withhazardous waste disposal. Voters approved a toxic waste initiativedrafted by environmentalists over one drafted by big business andfavored by state leaders. The margin was 55 percent to 45 percent,with 88 percent of the precincts reporting.   _ Californians approved a proposal requiring restoration of fundsfor the state's Occupational Safety and Health Agency, which wasdismantled last year by Republican Gov. George Deukmejian.   In local contests, residents of Cape Cod, Mass., approved limitson development, and two dozen California communities consideredsimilar curbs.   Cambridge, Mass., approved a referendum supporting Palestinianrights and demanding Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and GazaStrip, but another college town, Berkeley Calif., rejected a measurethat would have established a sister-city relationship with aPalestinian refugee district in the Gaza Strip.</TEXT></DOC>