<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881201-0185 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-01-88 2023EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i AM-Mexico-Israeli 2ndLd-Writethru a0792 12-01 0956</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Mexico-Israeli, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0792,0985</SECOND><HEAD>Iran-Contra Figure Reported Killed in Plane Crash</HEAD><NOTE>Eds: New material and editing throughout. No pickup</NOTE><DATELINE>MORELIA, Mexico (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   An Israeli who was linked to the U.S.Iran-Contra affair and who briefed Vice President George Bush onarms deals with Iran apparently died in a plane crash whiletraveling under an assumed name, officials said Thursday.   The man was tentatively identified by a passport found on hisbody as Amiram Nir Nisker, a former adviser on counter-terrorism totwo Israeli prime ministers, said a statement from the Michoacanstate attorney general's office.   Nir's former newspaper colleagues in Israel said Thursday hisname was Nisker before he changed it to Nir. They gave his age as 38.   The pilot of the Cessna T210 also was killed in the crashWednesday in western Michoacan state and two people were badly hurt,the Mexican statement said. It said engine failure may have been thecause.   Officials and sources in Israel, speaking on condition ofanonymity, said Nir was in Mexico on a business trip, but would notdisclose its nature.   Nir was an important liaison in secret arms deals involving saleof U.S. weapons to Iran, according to testimony heard by U.S.congressional investigators. Nir's activities included trips toTehran, the capital of Iran, and Western Europe.   Former White House aide Oliver North, who was deeply involved inthe transactions, suggested during congressional testimony that theContra link _ diverting funds from U.S. arms sales to Iran toNicaraguan rebels _ was Nir's idea. Israel denied it.   Nir was sought for questioning by Special U.S. ProsecutorLawrence E. Walsh. Israel insisted Nir be granted immunity fromprosecution.   The state attorney general's statement said Nir's passport wasissued in Tel Aviv and contained a Mexican visa issued by theMexican Embassy in London on Nov. 25.   It said the passenger carrying the passport had registered as PatWeber for the flight, prompting authorities to pursue theirinvestigations for a positive identification.   The plane, belonging to the Aerotaxis of Uruapan line, took offfrom Uruapan Wednesday afternoon and crashed on a ranch near Rio delSalto, near Ciudad Hidalgo, 30 minutes later, the statement said.   Ciudad Hidalgo lies 110 miles west of Mexico City.   ``According to preliminary reports, the plane crashed ... becauseof an engine failure, obliging the pilot to try an emergencylanding,'' the statement said.   It identified the dead pilot as Pedro Espinoza Hurtado, 34, andthe injured as Guillermo Joaonde Amezqua, 35, and Ester Areaga, 23.   Cmdr. Arturo Martinez, an airport official in Uruapan, said theflight plan showed the Cessna was bound for Mexico City.   Sources in Israel said Israeli Embassy officials were travelingfrom Mexico City to the crash site for positive identification ofNir.   Nir was a close associate of Shimon Peres, now foreign ministerof Israel. He rose to prominence after Peres became prime ministerand named him adviser on counter-terrorism in 1985.   Nir remained on after Shamir succeeded Peres as prime minister inOctober 1986, and the Iran-Contra affair exploded that November.Israeli reports, however, said Shamir deprived him of any tasks.   According to news reports, Shamir resisted pressure to fire Nirlast year, fearing such a move would be interpreted as an admissionof wrongdoing in the Iran weapons affair.   Nir resigned this year.   Israeli leaders admitted selling weapons to Iran but insistedthey acted only in cooperation with the United States. Israel alsodenied any knowledge of the Contra connection.   The Iran-Contra case rocked the Reagan administration.   One major issue was that officials in the Reagan administrationwere secretly selling arms to the revolutionary government ofAyatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in Iran while Washington was criticizingother countries for selling arms to Iran.   Another issue was the disclosure that funds from the arms saleswere diverted to the Contras despite congressional measures thatbarred military aid to the Contras.   Peres, who was prime minister from 1984-86, assigned Nir inDecember 1985 to serve as liaison with North.   In that capacity, Nir met with North in Israel, Europe and theUnited States, discussing U.S. arms sales to Iran through Israel andthe diversion of profits to the Contras.   Nir also traveled to Tehran in May 1986 with North and formerNational Security Adviser Robert McFarlane to discuss the release ofAmerican hostages held by pro-Iranian extremists in Lebanon inreturn for the supply of anti-aircraft Hawk missiles.   Nir briefed Bush on the program involving selling U.S. weapons toIran at a meeting the two men had in Jerusalem on July 27, 1986.Bush has said he does not remember much about the briefing, but hisaide Craig Fuller also attended the meeting and took notes. Fuller,now co-director of the Bush transition office, was then the chief ofstaff for the vice president.   Nir, who lost an eye in a car crash in his youth, was ajournalist and military commentator before turning to politics andjoining Peres' 1984 campaign. He was married and had two children.   Nir intervened in the Iran-Contra affair in late 1985, squeezingout Israeli arms dealers Yakov Nimrodi and Al Schwimmer. In January1986, he met in Washington with North and Adm. John Poindexter, anational Security adviser, and proposed to renew arms shipments toIran.   According to testimony taken by congressional investigators, Nirbecame an important liaison in the arms deals to Iran and passedhimself off on his trips abroad as an American named Miller.   Until October 1986, Nir controlled most of the U.S. access to theIranians through Iranian-born middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar. Norththen tried to push Nir to a ``supporting role.'' According toNorth's testimony, Nir constantly insisted on overcharging theIranians for U.S.-made TOW anti-tank missiles.</TEXT></DOC>