<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880601-0017 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-01-88 0225EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Reagan-StudentsText 5Takes   06-01 1056</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Reagan-Students Text, 5 Takes,1,000-up</SECOND><HEAD>Text of Reagan Speech Before University Students</HEAD><DATELINE>MOSCOW (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Following is the text of President Reagan's speechTuesday before a student assembly at Moscow State University:   Well, thank you, Rector Lagunov. And I want to thank all of youvery much for a very warm welcome. It's a great pleasure to be hereat Moscow State University, and I want to thank you all for turningout. I know you must be very busy this week, studying and takingyour final examinations. So let me just say, (speaks in Russian).(Applause.)   Nancy couldn't make it today because she's visiting Leningrad,which she tells me is a very beautiful city. But she, too, sayshello, and wishes you all good luck.   Let me say it's also a great pleasure to once again have thisopportunity to speak directly to the people of the Soviet Union.Before I left Washington, I received many heartfelt letters andtelegrams, asking me to carry here a simple message, perhaps, butalso one of the most important business of this summit. It is amessage of peace and good will and hope for a growing friendshipand closeness between our two peoples.   As you know, I've come to Moscow to meet with one of your mostdistinguished graduates. In this, our fourth summit, GeneralSecretary Gorbachev and I have spent many hours together, and Ifeel that we're getting to know each other well. Our discussions,of course, have been focused primarily on many of the importantissues of the day, issues I want to touch on with you in a fewmoments.   But first, I want to take a little time to talk to you, much asI would to any group of university students in the United States. Iwant to talk not just of the realities of today, but of thepossibilities of tomorrow.   Standing here before a mural of your revolution, I want to talkabout a very different revolution that is taking place right now,quietly sweeping the globe without bloodshed or conflict. Itseffects are peaceful, but they will fundamentally alter our world,shatter old assumptions and reshape our lives. It's easy tounderestimate, because it's not accompanied by banners or fanfare.   It's been called the ``technological'' or ``information''revolution. And, as its emblem, one might take the tiny siliconchip, no bigger than a fingerprint. One of these chips has morecomputing power than a roomful of old-style computers. As part ofan exchange program, we now have an exhibition touring your countrythat shows how information technology is transforming our lives,replacing manual labor with robots, forecasting weather forfarmers, or mapping the genetic code of DNA for medicalresearchers. These microcomputers today aid the design ofeverything from houses to cars to spacecraft. They even designbetter and faster computers.   They can translate English into Russian, or enable the blind toread, or help Michael Jackson produce on one synthesizer the soundsof a whole orchestra. Linked by a network of satellites and fiberoptic cables, one individual with a desktop computer and atelephone commands resources unavailable to the largest governmentsjust a few years ago.   Like a chrysalis, we are emerging from the economy of theindustrial revolution, an economy confined to and limited by theearth's physical resources, into, as one economist titled his book,``The Economy in Mind,'' in which there are no bounds on humanimagination and the freedom to create is the most precious naturalresource.   Think of that little computer chip. Its value isn't in the sandfrom which it is made, but in the microscopic architecture designedinto it by ingenious human minds. Or take the example of thesatellite relaying this broadcast around the world, which replacesthousands of tons of copper mined from the earth and molded intowire.   In the new economy, human invention increasingly makes physicalresources obsolete. We are breaking through the material conditionsof existence to a world where man creates his own destiny. Even aswe explore the most advanced reaches of science, we are returningto the age-old wisdom of our culture, a wisdom contained in thebook of the Genesis in the Bible. In the beginning was the spirit,and it was from this spirit that the material abundance of creationissued forth.   But progress is not foreordained. The key is freedom _ freedomof thought, freedom of information, freedom of communication. Therenowned scientist, scholar and founding father of this university,Mikhail Lomonosov, knew that. ``It is common knowledge,'' he said,``that the achievements of science are considerable and rapid,particularly once the yoke of slavery is cast off and replaced bythe freedom of philosophy.''   You know, one of the first contacts between your country andmine took place between Russian and American explorers. TheAmericans were members of Cook's last voyage on an expeditionsearching for an Arctic passage. On the island of Unalaska, theycame upon the Russians, who took them in, and together with thenative inhabitants, held a prayer service on the ice.   The explorers of the modern era are the entrepreneurs, men withvision, with a courage to take risks and faith enough to brave theunknown. These entrepreneurs and their small enterprises areresponsible for almost all the economic growth in the United States.   They are the prime movers of the technological revolution. Infact, one of the largest personal computer firms in the UnitedStates was started by two college students, no older than you, inthe garage behind their home. Some people, even in my own country,look at the riot of experiment that is the free market and see onlywaste. What of all the entrepreneurs that fail?   Well, many do, particularly the successful ones, often severaltimes. And if you ask them the secret of their success, they'lltell you it's all that they learned in their struggles along theway. Yes, it's what they learned from failing, like an athlete incompetition or a scholar in pursuit of the truth.   Experience is the greatest teacher. And that's why it's so hardfor government planners, no matter how sophisticated, to eversubstitute for millions of individuals working night and day tomake their dreams come true.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>