<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881210-0109 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-10-88 1511EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-DemocratsText     12-10 0831</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Democrats Text,840</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of the Democratic response toPresident Reagan's weekly radio address, given by Rep. Tom Foley:   Good afternoon. This is Representative Tom Foley of the state ofWashington, majority leader of the United States House ofRepresentatives.   We Americans have traditionally appreciated the bold stroke. Atthe United Nations this past Wednesday, Soviet General SecretaryMikhail Gorbachev gave us a splendid example of a bold stroke. Heoffered a far-reaching proposal to unilaterally cut Soviet forces byhalf a million troops over the next two years.   This reduction would include the withdrawal of some 50,000 troopsand 5,000 tanks from three East European countries, and therestructuring of the remaining Soviet forces in a more defensiveposture.   On a broader scale, the secretary general appeared to promise anend to persecution for political or religious beliefs, and offeredthe incoming administration of President-elect Bush a readynegotiating partner to continue work on cuts in overall strategicarms and conventional forces in Europe.   In speaking on the politics of change, he clearly appeared to beoffering cooperation rather than confrontation.   As President Reagan said today, it is certainly true that theSoviet Union has far to go in its full economic restructuring, andin its recognition of human rights. It is also fair and accurate tonote, as the president did, that Soviet forces would still retainsuperiority over NATO in important categories, even if the announcedreductions are fully implemented.   While we must thus be cautious about the extent of our optimism,Americans will agree with President Reagan's comment, that if theGorbachev program is carried out in full, we would be witnessing adramatic restructuring of Soviet society, which history would regardas tremendously important.   The secretary general's early departure from the United Stateswas required by a disastrous earthquake in Armenia, which has lefttens of thousands dead and injured.   We join the president in expressing our heartfelt sympathy andsorrow to the victims of the devastating earthquake, and we standwith him in his continuing offer of US humanitarian assistance inthis tragedy.   The full import of General Secretary Gorbachev's plan remains forthe weeks and months ahead, but his remarks alone tell us how farSoviet policy and our own relationship with the Soviet Union havecome over the past few years.   President Reagan has played an extraordinary role in bringingabout these important changes in our relationship. But as strongDemocratic Party congressional approval of the INF Treatydemonstrated, the president's efforts have had strong bipartisansupport.   In fact, with the exceptions of disputes about our policy towardNicaragua and South Africa, President Reagan's administration hasenjoyed the traditional bipartisan support in foreign policy.   In addition to the president on the administration side, greatcredit must go to Secretary of State George Shultz, whose forthrightdealings with the Congress and skillful diplomatic leadership willmark him as one of the great secretaries of state of our time.   We trust and believe that the incoming administration ofPresident-elect Bush will recognize what bipartisanship hasaccomplished, and that together we can usher in a new era ofcooperation, as we face our national challenges at home and abroad.   The American people have recently concluded an election, whichhave left the executive and legislative branches of government inthe control of different parties. Although the campaign wasoccasionally acrimonious, elections are not an end to themselves,but a means to an end.   If there is a political mandate in the 1988 elections, it is thepublic's expectation that a Republican president and a DemocraticCongress will now, together, address our pressing national issues.That is the public's rightful expectation, and our sharedresponsibility.   Since World War II, this shared responsibility has been the rulerather than the exception, and experience has shown us it can work,from the Marshall Plan's economic reconstruction of Western Europein the 80th Congress to the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement in the100th Congress.   As President-elect Bush prepares to take office, theadministration and the Congress face daunting challenges in suchareas as medical care, education, the environment, economiccompetitiveness, agriculture, national security, and foreign affairs.   It is important to recognize that if we are to continue makingprogress in the vital area of U.S.-Soviet relations, which has sohighlighted these last years of President Reagan's presidency, wemust have a strong economy and a strong society at home.   The first task of the new administration and the 100th Congressmust be to face the unprecedented budget and trade deficits.   These issues are too important, now and for the futuregenerations, for one branch of government, or one political party,to act alone. Solutions will require the active consent andcooperation of the president and the Congress. Democrats in theCongress stand ready to work with President-elect Bush in thisspirit of conciliation and cooperation.   This is Representative Tom Foley. Thank you for listening.</TEXT></DOC>