<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880319-0100 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-03-19-88 1333EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w AM-Reagan-RadioText     03-19 0796</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Reagan-Radio Text,790</SECOND><HEAD>With AM-US-Nicaragua</HEAD><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Reagan's radioaddress Saturday from the White House:   My fellow Americans, there was a nice celebration of St.Patrick's Day up on Capitol Hill this week, but believe me thatwasn't the only reason Congress knew I had my Irish up.   On two issues vital to our national security, I had some sternwords for some of our lawmakers. The first has to do with thesafety of our hemisphere. Back in the early 1980s, there were thosewho argued that the prospects for democracy in Central America werebleak and we would do little to prevent Marxist dictatorships there.   But after the administration built a consensus, Congress finallypassed our economic and military aid program, and today thecountries of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala aredemocratic. Indeed, tomorrow, El Salvador, the nation some inCongress were gloomiest about, will host congressional andmunicipal elections, just one more sign of a successful democraticreform in that nation and region.   However, in one Central American nation, Nicaragua, the cause offreedom is in grave peril. Up until the end of last month, theUnited States had been aiding the freedom fighters who have beentrying to restore democracy by resisting the regime of theSoviet-backed Sandinista communists.   However, just as the heroic efforts of the democratic resistancehave forced the communists to cut back on their aggression abroadand to make peace concessions, the Congress in a close vote decidedto cut off aid to the freedom fighters. Since the Congress rejectedour package of assistance for those fighting for freedom inNicaragua, the communist dictators have done exactly as wepredicted.   Instead of giving peace a chance, the aid cutoff is giving thecommunist dictators a chance, a chance they long hoped for, achance to smash their opponents. They have hardened theirnegotiating position. They have fired the mediator, Cardinal Obandoy Bravo. They have sent mobs of thugs against peaceful oppostiongroups. And now, instead of negotiating for a ceasefire, they havelaunched a major, military assault on the weakened Contras,invading democratic Honduras in the process.   Now, from the beginning, our Central American policy has beendesigned to prevent another Cuba, and to let the people ofNicaragua win back their freedom and their independence from theSoviet Union on their own; to do this without having to commitAmerican military personnel.   But now, because of Congress' aid cut-off last month, theSandinistas have mounted their major cross-border incursion intoHonduras. In response and at the request of President Azcona, wehave sent American military units to Honduras to conduct anemergency readiness exercise. Our purpose is to send the signal tothe governments and peoples of Central America about theseriousness with which we view the situation.   The freedom fighters are in desperate need of support. If theyare to remain a viable and effective force, they must haveassistance now. There's not a moment to spare. If urgently neededhelp does not reach them soon, we face the prospect of a collapseof the democratic resistance, the attendant consolidation of aMarxist-Leninist regime in Nicaragua and an increased threat toNicaragua's democratic neigbors. Ultimately, we will face anational security crises of the first order, and an enormous humantragedy.   Now, another vital security matter where the Congress has notbeen doing its job has involved our work on a strategic defenseagainst ballistic missiles. This coming week marks the fifthanniversary of my call for just such a strategic defenseinitiative, or SDI. I'm taking this occasion to note that theSoviets have been making extensive progress on their own SDI-likeprogram in the last few years.   Indeed, the Soviets may be preparing a nationwide defense whichwould mean a breakout from the restrictions of the ABM treaty whichprohibits a massive deployment of such a system. However, at thevery moment where the Soviets are so far along in their efforts,Congress has been cutting back ours. Every year Congress has cutthe SDI budget.   We are now one to two years behind schedule. And this, despitethe fact that the actual SDI program is progressing faster than weexpected. Our scientists and engineers must have Congress' supportand they must have it soon.   So I can't think of two more vital national security issues thanthese; preventing the establishment of a Soviet beachhead inCentral America, and erecting a defense shield that will reduce thenuclear threat that has so overshadowed the post-war era. That'swhy we cannot permit some in Congress to take dangerous risks withAmerica's national security.   Until next week, thanks for listening, and God bless you.</TEXT></DOC>