<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP881208-0019 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-08-88 0235EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Summit-Gorbachev-UNText-5thAdd     12-08 1227</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Summit-Gorbachev-UN Text - 5th Add,1263</SECOND><HEAD>UNITED NATIONS: all things.</HEAD><TEXT>   In this context I would like to join the voice of my country inthe expressions of high appreciation of the significance of theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights adopted 40 years ago on Dec.10, 1948.   Today, this document retains its significance. It, too, reflectsthe universal nature of the goals and objectives of the UnitedNations.   The most fitting way for a state to observe this anniversary ofthe declaration is to improve its domestic conditions for respectlngand protecting the rights of its own citizens.   Before I inform you on what specifically we have undertakenrecently in this respect I would like to say the following.   Our country is going through a period of truly revolutionaryuplifting.   The process of perestroika is gaining momentum. We began with theformulation of the theoretical concept of perestroika. We had toevaluate the nature and the magnitude of problems, to understand thelessons of the past and express that in the form of politicalconclusions and programmes. This was done.   Theoretical work, a reassessment of what is happening, thefinalization, enrichment and readjustment of political positionshave not been completed. They are continuing.   But it was essential to begin with an overall concept, which, asnow confirmed by the experience of these past years, has generallyproved to be correct and which has no alternative.   For our society to participate in efforts to implement the plansof perestroika, it had to be democratized in practice. Under thesign of democratization, perestroika has now spread to politics, theeconomy, intellectual life and ideology.   We have initiated a radical economic reform. We have gainedexperience. At the start of next year the entire national economywill be redirected to new forms and methods of operation. This alsomeans profoundly reorganizing relations of production and releasingthe tremendous potential inherent in socialist property.   Undertaking such bold revolutionary transformations, we realizedthat there would be mistakes, and also opposition, that newapproaches would generate new problems. We also foresaw thepossibility of slowdowns in some areas.   But the guarantee that the overall process of perestroika willsteadily move forward and gain strength lies in a profounddemocratic reform of the entire system of power and administration.   With the recent decisions by the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet onamendments to the Constitution and the adoption of the Law onElections, we have completed the first stage of the process ofpolitical reform.   Without pausing, we have begun the second stage of this processwith the main task of improving the relationship between the centerand the republics, harmonizing interethnic relations on theprinciples of Leninist internationalism that we inherited from theGreat Revolution, and at the same time reorganizing the local systemof Soviet power.   A great deal of work lies ahead. Major tasks will have to bedealt with concurrently.   We are full of confidence. We have a theory and a policy, andalso the vanguard force of perestroika _ the party, which also isrestructuring itself in accordance with new tasks and fundamentalchanges in society as a whole.   What is most important is that all our peoples and allgenerations of citizens of our great country support perestroika.   We have become deeply involved in building a socialist statebased on the rule of law. Work on a series of new laws has beencompleted or is nearing completion.   Many of them will enter into force as early as in 1989, and weexpect them to meet the highest standards from the standpoint ofensuring the rights of the individual.   Soviet democracy will be placed on a solid normative base. I amreferring, in particular, to laws on the freedom of conscience,glasnost, public associations and organizations, and many others.   In places of confinement there are no persons convicted for theirpolitical or religious beliefs.   Additional guarantees are to be included in the new draft lawsthat rule out any form of persecution on those grounds.   Naturally this does not apply to those who committed actualcriminal offenses or state crimes such as espionage, sabotage,terrorism, etc., whatever their political or ideological beliefs.   Draft amendments to the penal code have been prepared and areawaiting their turn. Among the articles being revised are thoserelated to capital punishment.   The problem of exit from and entry to our country, including thequestion of leaving it for family reunification, is being dealt within a humane spirit.   As you know, one of the reasons for refusal to leave is aperson's knowledge of secrets. Strictly warranted time limitationson the secrecy rule will now be applied. Every person seekingemployment at certain agencies or enterprises will be informed ofthis rule. In case of disputes, there is a right of appeal under thelaw.   This removes from the agenda the problem of the so-called``refuseniks''.   We intend to expand the Soviet Union's participation in theUnited Nations and CSCE (Conference of Security and Cooperation inEurope) human rights monitoring arrangements. We believe that thejurisdiction of the International Court of Justice at the Hague asregards the interpretation and implementation of agreements on humanrights should be binding on all states.   We regard as part of the Helsinki process the cessation ofjamming of all foreign radio broadcasts beamed at the Soviet Union.   Overall, this is our credo. Political problems must be solvedonly by political means; human problems, only in a humane way.   Now let me turn to the main issue _ disarmament, without whichnone of the problems of the coming century can be solved.   International development and communication have been distortedby the arms race and the militarization of thinking.   As you know, on Jan. 15, 1986 the Soviet Union put forward aprogram of building a nuclear weapon-free world. Translated intoactual negotiating positions, it has already produced materialresults.   Tomorrow marks the first anniversary of the signing of the INFTreaty. I am therefore particularly pleased to note that theimplementation of the treaty _ the elimination of missiles _ isproceeding normally, in an atmosphere of trust and business-likework.   A large breach has thus been made in a seemingiy unbreakable wallof suspicion and animosity. We are witnessing the emergence of a newhistoric reality _ a turning away from the principle of superarmament to the principle of reasonable defense sufficiency.   We are present at the birth of a new model of ensuring security _not through the build-up of arms, as was almost always the case inthe past, but on the contrary, through their reduction on the basisof compromise.   The Soviet leadership has decided to demonstrate once again itsreadiness to reinforce this healthy process not only by words butalso by deeds.   Today, I can report to you that the Soviet Union has taken adecision to reduce its armed forces.   Within the next two years their numerical strength will bereduced by 500,000 men. The numbers of conventional armaments willalso be substantially reduced. This will be done unilaterally,without relation to the talks on the mandate of the Vienna meeting.   By agreement with our Warsaw Treaty allies, we have decided towithdraw by 1991 six tank divisions from the GDR, Czechoslovakia andHungary, and to disband them.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>