<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880903-0101 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-09-03-88 1438EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-DemocraticText     09-03 0878</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Democratic Text,860</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of the Democratic responsedelivered Saturday to President Reagan's weekly radio address. Thespeech was delivered by Rep. Tom Downey, D-N.Y.   This is Congressman Tom Downey from Long Island, New York. Thisweekend we celebrate the working men and women of America and theirfamilies who have done so much to make this country great.   Just as we began the summer by commemorating those who gavetheir lives to defend our nation, it is fitting that we close byhonoring the accomplishments of those who work so hard to make thisnation worth defending.   American workers have toiled long and hard to produce what weenjoy today. They have bent their backs and their minds to whatevertasks were at hand. They built the roads, tamed the plains, raisedthe great cities; and, along the way, they stopped to raise theirfamilies, educate their children, and create a strong sense ofnational pride.   No one has done more for the working men and women of thiscountry than the Democratic Party. We have fought for the right toorganize and bargain collectively. The struggle for a fair day'swage for a fair day's work was the Democratic struggle. TheDemocratic Party led the fight to improve working conditions and tomake health and safety a primary concern in the workplace. TheDemocratic Party has worked with working men and women for improvededucation, for affordable housing, for better healthcare, and for astrong national defense.   Together we have achieved a great deal, but there is much thatremains to be done. Today there over 115 million of us working.Never before have so many of us been working, and we are justlyproud of that fact, but we ask whether all of us are better offtoday.   Not too long ago, President Reagan reminded us that ``facts arestubborn things,'' and just this week, the Census Bureau releasedthe figures on wealth and poverty for 1987. The results aredisappointing for working Americans.   The fact is that the typical worker in America is no better offtoday than he or she was ten years ago. In fact, things have gottenworse. The gap between the rich and the working poor threatens tobecome a chasm. Since the Census Bureau began collecting incomedata in 1947, the gap between rich and poor families has never beenso great. The fact is that adjusted for inflation, the poorest 40percent of American families are worse off today than they were tenyears ago. At the same time, the richest five percent are betteroff today than they were ten years ago by an average of over$16,000.   We must wonder why an administration which prides itself onproducing so much wealth has such a dismal record when it comes toworking people. The facts tell us that five years of thepresident's economic boom has done nothing to reduce poverty in theUnited States. Despite a low unemployment rate, 32.5 millionAmericans remain mired in poverty. Imagine everyone living in thestates of Pennsylvania, Missouri, Florida and Arizona being poor.That's what 32 million people represent.   In fact, the poverty rate is higher than at any time in the 70s.In 1987, there were 8 million more poor Americans than there werein 1978. Clearly, economic growth alone will not help these people.   These Census figures reveal that there are a million and a halfmore children living in poverty now than there were when PresidentReagan was elected in 1980. Today one child out of every five livesin poverty. That is unacceptable.   Tragically, poverty rates have been higher, on average, duringPresident Reagan's administration, than they were in the Nixon,Ford, or Carter administrations. This President has done less thanany other recent president to help those who are struggling so hardto make their way. Is it any wonder that so many people believethis adminstration has turned its back on the working poor of thiscountry.   Democrats are concerned about those Americans who are workinghard to provide a good life for their families. Democrats in boththe House and Senate have passed a Family Welfare Reform Bill thathelps poor families move off welfare. This bill would give familiesthe training and education they need to find work. The bill wouldalso provide health and childcare benefits so that they can keepthe jobs they find.   Democrats believe in the simple proposition that work shouldmake a person better off. This bill provides incentives so thatwelfare parents who work are better off than those who do not.   Unfortunately, this administration seems more eager to punishthe poor. Yes, requiring a welfare recipient to work may benecessary, but those requirements should be controlled by state andlocal officials who administer our welfare programs, not federalbureaucrats.   This bill is paid for. We have compromised and walked theadditional mile to gain the President's support. On behalf of thosemothers who are struggling to care for their children and get offwelfare, I strongly urge the President to help us pass thecompromise version of this bill and put more American families towork.</TEXT></DOC>