<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880620-0168 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-20-88 1910EST</FILEID><FIRST>u w AM-Iran-Contra 2ndLd-Writethru a0771 06-20 1060</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Iran-Contra, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0771,1,040</SECOND><HEAD>Former CIA Station Chief in Costa Rica Indicted</HEAD><NOTE>EDS: SUBS last graf with 2 grafs background</NOTE><BYLINE>By JAMES ROWLEY</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   The CIA's former station chief in Costa Ricawas indicted Monday on charges he participated in an illegalconspiracy to arm the Nicaraguan rebels and lied to his superiorsto keep the operation secret.   Joseph F. Fernandez, 51, also known as Tomas Castillo, wascharged with helping former National Security Council aide OliverL. North and arms dealer Richard V. Secord ship arms to the Contrasin 1986 when Congress had banned U.S. military assistance to therebels.   The five-count indictment also charges that Fernandez obstructedthe Iran-Contra investigation conducted last year by thepresidential commission headed by former Sen. John Tower, R-Texas,by stating falsely that he did not know that North was involved incovert aid to the Contras or that supplies Fernandez helped deliverincluded weapons and ammunition.   The indictment alleges that Fernandez oversaw construction of anairstrip in northern Costa Rica to help delivery of arms to theContras and encouraged rebel leaders to reopen the so-calledSouthern Front of Nicaragua's civil war with promises of militaryassistance.   He also is charged with lying to an official of the CIA'sCentral America Task Force and later the CIA's Office of InspectorGeneral about the true nature of the airstrip.   The indictment by the special federal grand jury investigatingthe Iran-Contra affair signalled that independent counsel LawrenceE. Walsh is continuing his probe while preparing to try North,Secord, former national security adviser John M. Poindexter andarms dealer Albert Hakim on a separate conspiracy charge.   The judge in those cases, Gerhard A. Gesell, strongly indicatedlast week that he was ready to set a date for North to go to trialin U.S. District Court.   Gesell has ruled that North and his co-defendants should betried separately on charges they conspired illegally to divertU.S.-Iran arms sale profits to the Contras.   The case against Fernandez was assigned to Aubrey E. RobinsonJr., chief judge of U.S. District Court here.   Thomas Wilson, an attorney representing Fernandez, declined tocomment on the charges, saying he had not had an opportunity toreview the indictment.   Laurence Shtasel, an associate independent counsel, said thegrand jury was continuing to meet and suggested that its 18-monthterm would be extended when it expires next month.   ``The grand jury's investigation is ongoing, I have no furthercomment as to what you should or shouldn't expect,'' Shtasel toldreporters outside the U.S. Courthouse after the indictment wasreturned by the grand jury.   Fernandez, who was named as an unindicted co-conspirator in thecharges returned March 16 against North, Poindexter, Hakim andSecord, is accused of conspiring to defraud the U.S. government byparticipating in a clandestine arms-supply network for the Contras.   The indictment charges that in 1985, Fernandez ``worked incoordination with his co-conspirators in establishing a clandestinesupply network to support military and paramilitary operations inNicaragua by the Contras'' at a time when direct U.S. military aidwas banned by Congress.   Fernandez and his co-conspirators acted ``deceitfully andwithout legal authorization'' in running the secret supply network,the indictment said.   The indictment does not specifically name Fernandez's allegedco-conspirators, but it notes that he met with Robert Owen andRafael Quintero, associates of North, to discuss the operation.   It notes that North gave him a secure communications deviceobtained from an unidentified government agency. Fernandez used thedevice to exchange messages with North and Quintero, a Cuban exilewho had fought in the aborted Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba and wasa veteran of other covert CIA operations, the indictment said.   The indictment charges that Fernandez helped North and Secordcoordinate air drops of arms to the Southern Front in April 1986and directed eight other shipments between June and September ofthat year.   He also is accused of opening the so-called Southern Front ofthe civil war by encouraging Contra forces in Costa Rica tore-enter the conflict against Sandinista troops with promises ofmilitary aid.   Fernandez also is accused of using a Panamanian company, UdallResearch Corp., to buy land for the airstrip in northwest CostaRica and supervising its construction in the fall of 1985.   The indictment alleges that Fernandez met in the Costa Ricancapital city of San Jose with William Haskell, also known as RobertOlmsted, at the direction of North and Secord. Haskell wasidentified by the congressional Iran-Contra investigatingcommittees as being involved in the negotiations for the airstripland.   As part of the conspiracy count, Fernandez is charged withmaking a false statement to an official of the CIA's CentralAmerican Task Force in late September 1986 during a meeting at theagency's headquarters about the true nature of the airstrip.   Fernandez, who retired from the CIA earlier this year, also isaccused of trying to cover up the supply network by sendingincomplete or unresponsive cable messages in response to theCentral American Task Force's inquiry.   The task force probe was launched after a C-123K cargo planecarrying arms to the rebels was shot down over southern Nicaragua.   Fernandez is separately charged with making a false statement toan official of the CIA's Office of Inspector General on Jan. 11,1987, when he said the airstrip was a project of the Costa Ricangovernment to train its forces for a possible invasion by Nicaragua.   Fernandez told a private session of the congressionalIran-Contra committees that his CIA superiors were aware of hisefforts to help deliver arms to the Contras.   According to transcripts later released by the committees,Fernandez said that he misled the Tower Commission and the CIA'sinspector general about his involvement in the supply operation.   But Fernandez said that in so doing, he thought he was ``actingwithin the guidelines'' that had been arranged by Clair George, theCIA's deputy director for operations who retired last year.   Fernandez was one of several CIA employees disciplined lastDecember by CIA Director William Webster for their roles in theIran-Contra affair. Asked if he disputed press reports that Websterhad fired his client Wilson said: ``Maybe yes, maybe no, it dependson the perspective you take. He resigned from the agency.''   Wilson said Fernandez left the CIA last December.</TEXT></DOC>