<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP880806-0023 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-08-06-88 1504EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-ReaganText     08-06 0831</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Reagan Text,840</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Reagan's weeklyradio address, given from the White House Oval Office:   My fellow Americans, on Wednesday of this past week I took adramatic step, one that I must admit gave me no pleasure.   I vetoed the defense authorization bill. As it stood, thedefense bill that Congress sent me would have made unilateralconcessions to the Soviets at the very moment when we're trying toachieve a strategic arms reduction treaty. I could not, in goodconscience, have done anything other than mark that bill ``veto''and send it right back.   Permit me to discuss with you for a moment just what's at stakein this whole matter of the defense bill, and in doing so, it'simportant to begin with some historical background. You see, it wasjust eight years ago that America's defenses were in a pitiablestate _ weaker, relative to the threats we faced than at any timein decades.   We had airplanes that couldn't fly for lack of spare parts. OurNavy had declined from more than a thousand battle-ready ships tofewer than 500. Among our men and women in uniform, morale wasunderstandably low.   And yet, at the same time, the Soviet Union was embarked upon amassive arms build-up enlarging its armed forces on land, sea, andair. The Soviet Union had invaded Afghanistan. It was backingcommunist expansion in Africa, in Asia, and yes, with theSandinistas in Nicaragua in our hemisphere.   The trend was clear _ American power and influence weredeclining while the power of the totalitarian world was growinggreater and greater. The implications for the cause of freedom, forthe cause of peace, were grim. The trend had to be reversed.   During these last eight years, we've done just that _ restoringAmerica's strength. The results _ well today, the Soviets arewithdrawing from Afghanistan; we're seeing progress in settlingregional conflicts, and not long ago, an American Presidentreturned from a successful summit in Moscow having earlier signedthe first treaty in history that actually reduces nuclear arsenals.   By the way, if we had listened to those who wanted to stop thedeployment of our INF missiles in Europe, the so-called ``FreezeMovement,'' we would have thrown away the bargaining leverage thatforced the Soviets to return to the negotiating table. We would nothave signed the INF Treaty in Washington, and Soviet SS-20 missileswould still be pointed at our allies.   This brings me back to the defense bill that I just vetoed.   You see, if I had accepted that bill, it would have underminedthe strength we worked so hard to restore, in time, jeopardizingall our remarkable diplomatic advances.   Congress' defense bill represented an all-but-open attempt toblock our strategic defense initiative, or as we call it, SDI. Yetno development has been of greater importance in our strategic armsnegotiations with the Soviets than our decision to proceed with SDI.   The idea of SDI is simple: to give us the advance technologiesnecessary to defend us and our allies from attack by nuclear armedballistic missiles. Some said it would take years to develop such atechnologically sophisticated defense system. We said all the morereason to get started right now. And in fact, as SDI has goneforward, overall progress has taken place even faster than we hadhoped.   Perhaps the best endorsement for SDI comes from the Sovietsthemselves, since they've long engaged in many kinds of strategicdefense programs of their own.   But Congress wants to cut our budget request for SDI deeply.Congress also wants to cut all requests for funding one of the mostpromising SDI technologies, the space-based interceptor program, byover 70 percent.   It is not just the damage done to SDI's funding and spacecomponent that concerns me. From requirements for unilateraldisarmament, missile testing, the bill represents an attempt byCongress to handcuff the President in our arms reductionnegotiations with the Soviets. And this kind of unilateralconcession with the Soviets could set back all the progress we'vemade on the arms reduction front.   Now that I have vetoed the defense bill, there's talk on CapitalHill about producing an even worse defense bill as an act ofpolitical retribution. Well, let me ask you, what could be moredeplorable than to use the defense of this nation as a politicalpawn? It won't happen. Not if I have anything to say about it.   As long as I'm President, our nation's defenses, including ourstrategic defenses, will remain above partisan politics.   Congress needs to go back to work to pass a new defense bill,one that I can sign because it strengthens our negotiating hand,instead of weakening it. We may be Republicans or Democrats, butwhen it comes to a strongly-defended nation, we must all be simplyAmericans.   Until next week, thanks for listening, and God bless you.</TEXT></DOC>