<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890529-0063 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-05-29-89 1023EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-BushTranscript 3Takes 1130-2520 05-29 1136</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Bush Transcript, 3 Takes, 1130-2520</SECOND><DATELINE>BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is a transcript of PresidentBush's meeting with reporters Monday at which he announced afour-point U.S. arms-control initiative:   I'll have a brief statement before taking some questions. Thismorning I met with the other NATO leaders and shared with them myviews on the role of the North Atlantic alliance in a changingEurope. NATO, we all agree, is one of the great success stories,and it's guaranteed the peace in Europe, provided a shield for 40years of freedom and prosperity.   And, now, our alliance faces new challenges at a time ofhistoric transition as we seek to overcome the division of Europe.I call it beyond containment.   And today I am proposing a major initiative to help move ustoward that momentous objective. If it were accepted, it would be arevolutionary conventional arms control agreement.   I believe the alliance should act decisively now to takeadvantage of this extraordinary opportunity and I urge that NATOadopt a four-point proposal to bring the Vienna negotiations to aspeedy conclusion.   First, lock in Eastern acceptance of the proposed Westernceilings on each side's holdings of tanks and armored troopcarriers. Additionally, we would seek agreement on a similarceiling for artillery, provided there are some definitionalquestions that have to be resolved there. But all of the equipmentreduced would be destroyed.   We would then, No. 2, expand our current NATO proposal so thateach side would reduce to 15 percent below current NATO levels intwo additional categories: Attack and assault, or transport,helicopters; and all land-based combat aircraft. All of theequipment reduced would be destroyed.   And third, propose a 20 percent cut in combat manpower in UnitedStates-stationed forces and a resulting ceiling in U.S. and Sovietground and air forces stationed outside of national territory inthe Atlantic to the Ural zone at approximately 275,000 each. Thismanpower ceiling will require the Soviets to reduce their forces inEastern Europe by about 325,000 people. Withdrawn soldiers andairmen on both sides would be demobilized.   And then, fourthly, accelerate the timetable for reaching a CFE(conventional forces in Europe) agreement along these lines andimplementing the required reductions. I believe it should bepossible to reach such agreement in six months or maybe a year andto accomplish the reductions by 1992 or 1993.   Now, if the Soviet Union accepts this fair offer, the resultswould dramatically increase stability on the continent andtransform the military map of Europe.   We can and must begin now to set out a new vision for Europe atthe end of this century.   This is a noble mission that I believe the alliance should beready to undertake. And I have no doubt that we are up to the task.And, incidentally, in addition to these arms control proposals Imentioned in there that we are prepared to change our no-exceptionspolicy on trade. And I called again for a ban on chemical weapons.And I would reiterate my support for our open-skies proposal and inthe meeting it was discussed by the president _ the prime ministerof Canada.   Helen?   Q: Mr. President, does this plan signal _ this revolutionaryplan signal _ the end of the Cold War?   A: Well, I don't know what it signals. Except it signals awillingness on our part to really put Mr. Gorbachev to the testnow. And so I don't like to dwell in antiquated history but I dolike to get the idea that we are out front as an alliance, becausethis has broad alliance support, in challenging Mr. Gorbachev tomove forward now more quickly on the most destabilizing part of themilitary balance, and that is on conventional forces.   Q: Well, were you pressure by him and the allies?   A: No. I think I said when I first came in we are going to takeour time and we are going to study and we are going to think itout. And we did exactly that. And you know and I know that somevoices were raised in Congress that we are going too slow. But weknew exactly what we were doing all along and we have now said thisis what we suggest and this is the way we plan to lead _ lead thealliance and lead the free world.   Q: Mr. President, why is it possible make such drastic cuts inconventional weapons and not move on nuclear ... ground-based,short-range missiles, which seems to disturb the Germans and reallya majority of the alliance?   A: Because the conventional forces, the existing imbalance is sogreat that that is the most urgent problem and the mostdestabilizing.   Q: Following up on that question, if the Soviets accept thisproposal, would that enable us to talk about reducing oreliminating short-range forces?   A: After agreement was reached and after there was someimplementation, yes. We are not unwilling to negotiate on SNF(strategic nuclear forces).   Q: What was the reaction of the NATO leaders this morning whenyou told them? Did you consult with all the allies before you putit on the table?   A: We had widespread _ and I would think every one wasconsulted. I know we had widespread consultation and _   Secretary of State James A. Baker III: The answer is yes.   Bush: The answer is yes to all NATO members. It has been doneover the last few days.   Q: What did you tell them about it? Why did they find itappealing?   Bush? I'll leave it to them to wax euphoric but I'll tell you Iwas very, very pleased with the response in the meeting justconcluded.   Q: Mr. President, can you ever see a time when you might nothave nuclear forces in Europe?   A: No.   Q: Never? ...   A: Because the _ we need the concept of flexible response and Ican't in the foreseeable future see us getting away from that.   Q: Is there any indication that this disagreement with the WestGermans over the SNF issue will be resolved here at the NATO summit?   A: Well, I'm not really at liberty to go into too much on that,because right now they've put together, we put together, a workinggroup to try to work out some resolution. But you see, thisproposal, bold proposal in terms of conventional forces, shouldgive those who have had difficulty with our position on SNF achance to regroup and rethink and give them a little leeway thatthey haven't had heretofore.   Q: Do you expect early negotiation by the secretary of statewith Mr. Shevardnadze or Mr. Gorbachev on this proposal, Mr.President?   A: The sooner the better.</TEXT><HEAD>MORE</HEAD></DOC>