<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890626-0163 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-26-89 1825EST</FILEID><FIRST>u w AM-Scotus-Excerpts     06-26 0769</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Scotus-Excerpts,770</SECOND><HEAD>With AM-Scotus Rdp, Bjt</HEAD><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here are excerpts from Monday's Supreme Courtdecisions upholding the death penalty for convicted murderers asyoung as 16 and for mentally retarded killers.   From Justice Antonin Scalia's majority opinion in thejuvenile-killers cases:   Petitioners are correct in asserting that this court has notconfined the prohibition embodied in the Eight Amendment (banningcruel and unusual punishment) to ``barbarous'' methods that weregenerally outlawed in the 18th century, but instead has interpretedthe amendment in a flexible and dynamic manner.   In determining what standards have evolved, however, we havelooked not to our own conceptions of decency, but to those of modernAmerican society as a whole. ... We emphasize that it is Americanconceptions of decency that are dispositive, rejecting thecontention of petitioners and their various amici (organizationsfiling friend-of-the-court briefs) that the sentencing practices ofother countries are relevant.   First among the objective indicia that reflect the publicattitude toward a given sanction are statutes passed by society'selected representatives. Of the 37 states whose laws permit capitalpunishment, 15 decline to impose it upon 16-year-old offenders and12 decline to impose it on 17-year-old offenders.   This does not establish the degree of national consensus thiscourt has previously thought sufficient to label a particularpunishment cruel and unusual.   From Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's concurring opinion:   It is sufficiently clear that no national consensus forbids theimposition of capital punishment on 16- or 17-year-old capitalmurderers.   I am unable, however, to join the remainder of (Scalia's) opinion(which in part) emphatically rejects the suggestion that, beyond anassessment of the specific enactments of American legislatures,there remains a constitutional obligation imposed upon this court tojudge whether the nexus between the punishment imposed and thedefendant's blameworthiness is proportional. In my view, this courtdoes have a constitutional obligation to conduct proportionalanalysis.   From Justice William J. Brennan's dissenting opinion:   I believe that to take the life of a person as punishment for acrime committed when below the age of 18 is cruel and unusual, andhence is prohibited by the Eighth Amendment.   Together, the rejection of the death penalty for juveniles by amajority of the states, the rarity of the sentence for juveniles ...the decisions of respected organizations in relevant fields thatthis punishment is unacceptable, and its rejection generallythroughout the world provide to my mind a strong grounding for theview that it is not constitutionally tolerable that certain statespersist in authorizing the execution of adolescent offenders.   From O'Connor's controlling opinion in the death penalty forretarded killers ruling:   Mental retardation is a factor that may well lessen a defendant'sculpability for a capital offense. But we cannot conclude today thatthe Eighth Amendment precludes the execution of any mentallyretarded person of (Johnny Paul) Penry's ability convicted of acapital offense simply by virtue of their mental retardation alone.   So long as sentencers can consider and give effect to mitigatingevidence of mental retardation in imposing sentence, anindividualized determination of whether death is the appropriatepunishment can be made in each particular case.   While a national consensus against execution of the mentallyretarded may someday emerge reflecting the evolving standards ofdecency that mark the progress of a maturing society, there isinsufficient evidence of such a consensus today.   From Brennan's opinion, concurring in part and dissenting in part:   I agree that the jury instructions given at sentencing in thiscase deprived petitioner of his constitutional right to have a juryconsider all mitigating evidence that he presented before sentencinghim to die. I would also hold, however, that the Eighth Amendmentprohibits the execution of offenders who are mentally retarded andwho thus lack the full degree of responsibility for their crimesthat is a predicate for the constitutional imposition of the deathpenalty.   From Justice John Paul Stevens' opinion concurring in part anddissenting in part:   (Justice Scalia's opinion) adequately and fairly states thecompeting arguments respecting capital punishment of mentallyretarded persons. In my judgment, however, that explication _particularly the summary of the American Association on MentalRetardation and other amici curiae (friends of the court) _ compelsthe conclusion that such executions are unconstitutional.   From Scalia's opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part:   In holding that the jury had to be free to deem Penry's mentalretardation and sad childhood relevant for whatever purpose itwished, the court has come full circle, not only permitting butrequiring what (the court) once condemned. ``freakishly'' and``wantonly'' have been rebaptized ``reasoned moral response.''</TEXT></DOC>