<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890607-0009 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-07-89 0115EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i AM-China 10thLd-Writethru   06-07 1134</FIRST><SECOND>AM-China, 10th Ld-Writethru,a0417,1177</SECOND><HEAD>Soldiers Who Suppressed Protests Fire As They Leave City Center</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 18 grafs with troops appearing to be taking up positionsfor an attack. Picks up 12th pvs, `The troops chanted ...' EDITS therefterto trim, conform.</HEAD><BYLINE>By JOHN POMFRET</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>BEIJING (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Thousands of the troops responsible for the bloodycrackdown on the pro-democracy movement fanned out from the citycenter Wednesday, spraying gunfire as they passed Chinese anddiplomatic residential areas.   They appeared to be taking up positions for an attack, possiblyfrom rival military factions which had moved into the city'soutskirts.   Most of the troops from the 27th Army, in a convoy of hundreds oftrucks and support vehicles, appeared to be shooting into the air,although some aimed at an apartment complex where hundreds ofdiplomats and other foreigners live.   Several dozen bullets hit the windows of apartments facing themain street. There were no reports of injuries.   At a nearby intersection, troops took up defensive positionsbehind barricades and trees as if expecting an attack.   Troops were also seen reinforcing positions at the BeijingRailway Station to the east of Tiananmen Square and at the BeijingUnion Medical College Hospital northeast of the square.   The 27th drove unarmed pro-democracy demonstrators from thecenter of Beijing on early Sunday, killing hundreds in the mostviolent suppression of a popular movement in Communist China's40-year history.   Troops from the 28th and 38th armies and soldiers fromnortheastern China have moved into the city, raising fears of abattle.   The 27th Army is closely linked to President Yang Shangkun andother Communist Party hardliners.   The 28th Army is believed to back Zhao Ziyang, a moderate whochallenged the conservatives and was stripped of his post asCommunist Party leader. The 38th Army, which is based aroundBeijing, reportedly refused orders to open fire on civilians andopposed the martial law crackdown.   There have been several skirmishes between rival military groups,but no major clashes. An unidentified general appeared on nationaltelevision Tuesday night and denied factional divisions in thePeople's Liberation Army.   China's Foreign Ministry issued a statement condemning the UnitedStates for what it called its ``short-sighted'' policies towardChina.   The United States, joining other Western countries imposingsanctions on China, has suspended arms sales and other militarycontacts to protest the violent suppression of the pro-democracymovement.   The ministry, in a statement read on television, insisted thesituation in China is stable and there has been no change in thenation's foreign policy.   About 3,000 foot soldiers carrying rifles left Tiananmen Squarein two waves Wednesday. The first group of about 1,000 had packs ontheir backs and marched 20 abreast. They were accompanied by a tankand two armored personnel carriers.   Some 400 split soon from the main group and turned toward thesouth.   Some in the second group were in plain clothes.   The troops chanted, ``Down with corruption, we love the people,we love the capital, we love youth, long live the Communist Party''as they left their positions in Tiananmen Square.   People along the sidewalks initially cheered when they heard thechanting. But one office worker said, ``They can sing any sloganthey want but then they start shooting.''   An undetermined number of troops and tanks remained in the square.   Another group of 600 foot soldiers wearing red armbands was seenadvancing toward the square from the west. They appeared to bepreparing to take over traffic control.   Thousands of foreigners are trying frantically to leave Beijing.The U.S. Embassy has told all Americans to leave as soon as possibleand the Japanese Embassy has told the 3,000 Japanese in the city toprepare for immediate evacuation.   Many nations were arranging for special planes to transport theirnationals out of the country.   The state-run Xinhua News Agency said Qiao Shi, one of fivemembers of the party's policy-making Politburo Standing Committee,received a telegram from the Supreme People's Court supporting thecrackdown.   The report, read on Beijing radio, was significant because thetelegram was sent to Qiao and not Zhao. Although Zhao has not beenseen publicly since May 19, officials have not confirmed he has losthis post.   Diplomats have often considered Qiao, 64, a top candidate toreplace Zhao. But a Chinese source said Wednesday that a familymember said Qiao had not been appointed party chief.   Qiao generally is viewed as the party's law-and-order chief.   Beijing radio also reported that conservative Premier Li Pengattended a meeting Tuesday to hear reports on industrial production.A Hong Kong newspaper reported that Li was shot in the thigh by ayoung guard officer but his wounds were not serious.   The reports were the first official indications of leadershippositions since Saturday's assault. The leadership, including seniorleader Deng Xiaoping, has not made any public appearances since thecrackdown.   A report that Deng had died added to the chaos. The report, fromTaiwan, was denied by the government.   The U.S. administration said it appeared likely that China'ssenior leaders had left Beijing.   Soldiers continued firing into crowds around Beijing on Tuesdayand early Wednesday. Witnesses said a small boy was killed and agirl wounded in the head Tuesday.   Anti-government demonstrations spread to Shanghai, Nanjing,Chengdu, Shenyang and other cities.   China's most famous dissident, astrophysicist Fang Lizhi, tookrefuge in the U.S. Embassy. He had told The Associated Press lastweek he was concerned conservatives might arrest him.   Government spokesman Yuan Mu said on television 300 people werekilled in Saturday's crackdown, including 23 students; and 7,000were injured and 400 soldiers were missing. The evening TV news said32 people were arrested, most of them for trying to set fire topublic buses.   U.S. intelligence reports reaching Washington indicate 3,000people probably were killed, a U.S. official said Tuesday.   On Tuesday afternoon, witnesses said the 27th Army fought withsoldiers from Shanxi province's 28th Army, believed loyal to Zhao.There were no reports of casualties.   The brief exchange, including several rounds from a tank cannon,occurred just south of the Military Museum in western Beijing. Itfollowed unconfirmed reports of soldiers fighting soldiers in thewestern and southeastern parts of the city.   The People's Liberation Army is organized into about 22 GroupArmies. Each has about three divisions and totals about 40,000soldiers.   Hundreds of citizens flocked to the bridge at Muxudi, also in thewest, to welcome soldiers Tuesday evening who said they were fromthe 38th Army.   ``Exterminate the 27th Army! Avenge blood with blood!'' people inthe crowd chanted as they handed buns, eggs and cigarettes to thetroopers.   ``People, do not be afraid!'' said a voice from a loudspeakercarried by the soldiers. ``The 38th Army will not kill the people.''</TEXT></DOC>