<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890204-0001 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-02-04-89 0006EST</FILEID><FIRST>u a AM-Cold 3rdLd-Writethru a0789 02-04 1031</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Cold, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0789,1051</SECOND><HEAD>Cold Moves Toward East Coast Behind Freezing Rain</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 2 grafs to UPDATE with a fourth fatality due to exposure;SUBS 17th graf, `Of the ...,' to conform. SUBS last graf to UPDATE withhighway partially reopened.</HEAD><HEAD>LaserPhoto ASTX1, TA1, CX3, MP2, SE1, DX3</HEAD><BYLINE>By ROGER PETTERSON</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   Bitingly cold arctic air and freezing drizzle iced highwaysFriday from the Northwest to New England and south to Texas, closingscores of schools and one state government and prompting increasedaid for the homeless.   The urge to play in new-fallen snow resulted in four sleddingdeaths in Washington. Twelve other deaths also were blamed on theweather, including four of hypothermia.   A Greyhound Trailways bus with 15 people aboard spun around andoverturned Friday on icy Interstate 70 in Colorado near the Utahline. Police said six people suffered broken limbs and ribs.Helicopters took the injured to hospitals.   Temperatures early Friday were below zero all the way south tothe middle Mississippi Valley, with readings of 20 below zero to 38below zero over the Dakotas, Wyoming, much of Montana, Minnesota andnorthwestern Nebraska, the National Weather Service said. Austin,Texas, fell from a high Thursday of 69 to a low Friday of 28, and afreeze warning was posted for the lower Rio Grande Valley.   Record lows were scattered from Oregon to Iowa, including 35below zero at Great Falls, Mont. Mason City, Iowa, had a low of 20below zero, but wind gusting to 31 mph produced a wind chill factorof 78 below zero. Minong, Wis., hit 32 below zero.   At noon, the temperature was only 27 degrees below zero atBozeman and Butte, Mont. The weather service's official low for theLower 48 states was 52 degrees below zero at Wisdom, Mont.   But ahead of the cold air, 14 cities in the Southeast and Eastreported record highs, ranging from 61 at Beckley, W.Va., to 84 atJacksonville, Fla.   The cold reached all the way to New Orleans on Friday, less thanfive days before Mardi Gras. ``Snow, sleet, ice, or 80 mile an hourwinds. Those are the only things that would stop a parade,'' saidAssistant Police Chief Ray Holman.   In Montana, the first state struck by the frigid air that hadpreviously stunned Alaska and slid over Canada, moderation oftemperatures isn't expected until Monday or Tuesday, and then itcould warm only to about zero, said weather service spokesman RobertDoherty.   The mass of cold air remained over the eastern two-thirds ofAlaska, but temperatures continued to moderate. Northway was thecoldest at 50 below, Fairbanks warmed up to minus 8 and Anchoragereached 10 above. A low pressure system moving in from the westwarmed the western third of Alaska; above the Arctic Circle, Barrowreached 16 above and it was 20 above at Prudhoe Bay.   Montana's state government reopened Friday after shutting downthe day before because of the cold and wind, but Wyoming Gov. MikeSullivan closed his government because of the cold and more than afoot of snow. Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton gave state workers moretime to get to work because of icy roads.   An estimated 200 travelers had been stranded since Wednesday atDubois, Idaho, and roads out of the area remained closed by snowFriday, among a number of highways closed in the state.   In southern Maine, Interstate 95 was closed from Brunswick toFreeport for 1{ hours after a 15-car pileup. No injuries werereported.   Slippery roads and the cold forced school closings in Arkansas,Colorado, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada,New York, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Texas, Washington stateand Wyoming. Some colleges and universities also closed.   Officials at Oregon State University in Corvallis canceledclasses for the fourth time in the school's 120-year history.   The four sledding deaths in Washington were unrelated. Three ofthe four, including a 6-year-old boy and a 12-year-old, occured inthe Seattle area; the fourth was in Tacoma.   Of the 12 other deaths since the start of the cold wave, sevenwere traffic fatalities: four in Oklahoma, one in Oregon, one inIdaho and one in Indiana. A utility worker was killed in Washingtonwhile repairing a downed power line. And four people died ofexposure, one in Martin, S.D., one in Great Falls, Mont., one inLame Deer, Mont., and one in Sioux City, Iowa.   Two school buses collided on an icy parking lot in Indianapolis,and 17 elementary school students suffered minor injuries, officialssaid.   Many cities stepped up aid to the homeless.   Shelters in Denver agreed to remain open during the day, ratherthan putting their clients out on the street until nightfall, saidChristine Hager, Denver's coordinator for the homeless. The cityalso contracted with hotels to house homeless people, Hager said.   Some homeless shelters in Oregon reported operating beyond normalcapacity. In Minneapolis, as many as 400 people slept outsideThursday night, including 150 in campsites, said Mary Jo Copeland,director of Sharing and Caring, a day shelter for the poor. Fourhomeless people have been treated for frostbite.   Seattle Mayor Charles Royer asked residents to donate blankets,warm clothing, toiletries and non-perishable food for the city'shomeless.   At Paducah, Texas, hundreds of people were left without heat whena 4-inch natural gas pipeline ruptured. Temperatures were in thesingle digits at Paducah and residents were told to move toelectrically heated buildings.   Helena, Mont., also had to cope with Thursday's train explosionthat forced the daylong evacuation of thousands of people and leftsome without power. On Friday, officials asked residents to cut backon use of such things as space heaters and stoves to conserveelectricity.   Mail delivery was curtailed at Mitchell, S.D., after two postalworkers suffered mild frostbite in wind chill factors as low as 65below zero, said Postmaster Ron Kight.   In the Sierra Nevada of northern California, a 70-mile stretch ofInterstate 80 from Applegate to Truckee was closed by zerovisibility and high wind, but reopened late Friday afternoon tosmall cars only, with travelers convoyed in groups of 100 vehicles.</TEXT></DOC>