<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890620-0177 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-20-89 1929EST</FILEID><FIRST>u a AM-WeatherpageWeather     06-20 0682</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Weatherpage Weather,0697</SECOND><HEAD>Heavy Rain Causes Flooding In Southeast</HEAD><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Showers and thunderstorms were scattered from the Southeast tothe lower Great Lakes on Tuesday, producing locally heavy rain thatcaused some flooding in Alabama and Tennessee.   Elsewhere, early afternoon temperatures climbed into the 90s fromsouthwestern Minnesota across the central and southern Plains to thedesert Southwest, while light snow was falling at Butte, Mont.   Thunderstorms deluged Wadley, Ala., with more than 5 inches ofrain during the morning, with much of that falling in a three-hourperiod. Some streets and roads were closed by water in Wadley andother locations in Randolph County. Roads and low-lying areas alsowere flooded in Tallapoosa County in southern Alabama, the NationalWeather Service said.   Hiram Taylor, coordinator of the Tallapoosa County EmergencyManagement Agency, said 15 to 20 families were evacuated Tuesdayfrom homes in low-lying areas. He said flooding had destroyed atleast half of the county's cotton crop.   Heavy rain also fell across northern Georgia, including 2.5inches at Jonesboro and more than 2 inches at Atlanta. Clayton got3.5 inches and Gainesville picked up 3 inches. Streams in HabershamCounty, Ga., overflowed and some roads were flooded, the weatherservice said.   Nearly 2 inches of rain fell overnight at Newfound Gap, Tenn.,and at higher elevations of the Great Smoky Mountains, and theweather service said some roads and bridges were flooded nearOakdale, Tenn.   Eastern Tennessee also had a rock slide that closed Interstate 40near Rockwood and flooding that required the evacuation of about 40people from their homes in Rhea County, authorities said.   After four years of drought, Tennessee has had more rain thannormal this year, including 6.8 inches above normal at Memphis, 7.12inches above at Nashville and 6.06 inches above at Knoxville.   The Tennessee Valley Authority was caught between storing as muchwater as possible in its reservoirs and letting enough water out tosave room for future flood control. Every lake in the system wasfull by Tuesday afternoon, said Larry Richardson, manager of waterresources operations.   He said water was spilling out of reservoirs and an estimated5,000 to 6,000 acres of cropland below Pickwick Dam near Savannah inwestern Tennessee was under water.   To the north, there was a threat of flooding along the GenesseeRiver in western New York state after 1.75 inches of rain soakedGetzville, N.Y., northeast of Buffalo.   Some streams also were reported out of their banks in westernPennsylvania, the weather service said.   Heavy thunderstorms also hit parts of central Maryland, withBaltimore getting 1.5 inches of rain in only 15 minutes, and Bowiegot over 3.5 inches of rain.   Thunderstorms generated high wind across parts of North Carolina,with a small tornado reported in southern Wake County, but no damagewas reported.   Temperatures around the nation at 3 p.m. EDT ranged from 37degrees at Butte, Mont., to 110 at Needles, Calif. Tuesday's low forthe Lower 48 states was 30 degrees at Truckee, Calif.   For Wednesday, numerous showers and thunderstorms were forecastfrom the mid and southern Atlantic Coast states to the upper OhioValley. Scattered showers and thunderstorms were forecast from muchof New England across southern Lower Michigan, the lower Ohio andTennessee valleys to the central Gulf Coast. Scattered showers andthunderstorms also were forecast from the upper Mississippi Valleyacross the northern and central Plains to the central Rockies.Widely scattered afternoon thunderstorms were forecast from thesouthwestern Plains across the southern Rockies to southeasternArizona, with showers over the northern Rockies.   Highs only in the 50s and 60s were predicted over the northernRockies; in the 60s over Washington state; in the 70s and 80s fromthe Atlantic Coast states across the Ohio, upper Mississippi andmiddle Missouri valleys and the central Rockies to Oregon; in the90s from the middle and lower Mississippi Valley across the centraland southern Plains, the southern Rockies to the southern PacificCoast; and above 100 from the inland valleys of California acrossthe desert Southwest to southwestern Texas.</TEXT></DOC>