<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890525-0102 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-05-25-89 1308EST</FILEID><FIRST>u w PM-GNP 4thLd-Writethru a0544 05-25 1268</FIRST><SECOND>PM-GNP, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0544,1220</SECOND><HEAD>Economy Grew at 4.3 Percent Annual Rate in First Quarter</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: Inserts 2 grafs of Boskin comment after 12th graf, ``Fed policy''</HEAD><BYLINE>By MARTIN CRUTSINGER</BYLINE><BYLINE>AP Economics Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. economy grew at a 4.3 percent annualrate in the first three months of 1989, much slower than previouslythought, the government reported today.   The Commerce Department's estimate of growth in the grossnational product, the broadest measure of economic health, was wellbelow an initial estimate a month ago that put the GNP increase at5.5 percent.   The slowdown was even more pronounced when the effects of arebound from last year's drought in the farm sector were removed.   That rebound added 2.5 percentage points to growth in the firstquarter after the drought had subtracted 1.1 percentage points inthe last quarter of 1988.   Thus, growth in the non-farm economy slumped to a lackluster 1.8percent in the first three months of the year, down from a non-farmgrowth rate of 3.5 percent in the fourth quarter and the slowestquarterly GNP advance in more than two years.   At the same time, inflation grew at an annual rate of 5 percentduring the January-March quarter, unchanged from the earlierestimate.   The 4.3 percent overall GNP increase was substantially lowerthan expected. In advance of today's report, many forecasters werelooking for only a slight downward revision to 5.4 percent GNPgrowth.   However, Michael Evans, head of a Washington forecasting firm,said the GNP report was actually good news for the economy becausemuch of the weakness came from a big downward revision in theamount of inventories being accumulated by businesses.   While inventory growth adds to the GNP growth rate, it is oftenworrisome to economists who fear that it will lead to big cutbacksin production in later months as companies try to get theirstockpiles more in line with sales. If the production cutbacks andjob layoffs are too severe, then an unwanted inventory buildup cantrigger a recession.   ``The fact that inventories were well under control means therewon't be a cutback this quarter,'' Evans said. ``The economy is inamazingly good shape. There seem to be no signs of a seriousslowdown.''   Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher said the Federal Reserve'sefforts to fight inflation by slowing growth appeared to be havingthe desired effects.   ``Fed policy over the past year appears to be succeeding insteering the economy to a more moderate, but sustainable, growthpath,'' he said in a statement. ``A more moderate pace of economicgrowth at this stage of the record expansion will assist inreducing inflationary pressures in the quarter ahead.''   At the White House, Michael Boskin, chairman of President Bush'sCouncil of Economic Advisers said, ``It's not usual, but it's notat all uncommon'' to see a revision in the GNP figures as large asthat reported today.   ``I'm confident the economy will continue growth, inflation willbe contained and the economy will remain solid,'' he told reporters.   In a separate report, the National Association of Realtors saidexisting home sales fell by 1.2 percent in April to an annual rateof 3.36 million units. It was the fourth consecutive monthlydecline, reflecting the fact that rising mortgage rates arecontinuing to take their toll on the housing industry.   In another report, the National Association of BusinessEconomists said its latest survey projected that economic growthwill slow dramatically this year but the nation should be able toforestall a recession until at least 1990.   The consensus of 54 forecasting experts surveyed by theassociation was that unemployment would rise modestly this yearwith inflation picking up as well because of higher food and energyprices.   The slowdown being forecast by the business economists wasevident in today's GNP report.   Even with the effects of the drought, the GNP expanded last yearat a four-year high of 3.9 percent. That rapid pace helped to driveunemployment down sharply and the overall prosperity was creditedin part with helping the Republicans hold onto the White House.   However, the expansion, which has lasted a peacetime record ofmore than six years, is expected to slow this year under the impactof the credit-tightening engineered by the Federal Reserve in aneffort to keep inflation under control.   Economists say it is still an open question whether the Fed'sintervention will succeed in achieving slower growth and lowerinflation or a more severe weakening that could topple the countryinto a recession.   A price index tied to the GNP rose at an annual rate of 5percent from January through March, reflecting higher wage costsfor federal employees and higher food and energy prices.   The inflation advance, while unchanged from the initial estimatea month ago, was up from a 4.2 percent rate of inflation in thefinal three months of 1988.   The sharp downward revision in overall growth reflected in largepart a slower buildup in business inventories than previouslybelieved. The Commerce Department said part of this reduction inestimated inventories came from $1 billion lower growth in thevalue of unsold autos.   This development was viewed positively by economists because itmeans automakers may not have to cut back production as sharply aspreviously believed.   The lower inventory growth was offset somethat by abetter-than-expected decline in the U.S. trade deficit. As measuredby the GNP, it narrowed at an annual rate of $17.6 billion in thefirst quarter, the first quarterly improvement since the spring of1988. Exports shot up at a 15.3 percent rate, while imports rose aslight 0.9 percent.   In other developments, consumer spending rose at a modest 1.1percent rate in the first three months of the year, down sharplyfrom a 3.5 percent fourth quarter increase.   Consumer spending, which accounts for two-thirds of overalleconomic activity, is expected to slow sharply this year.Economists thus are pinning their hopes for avoiding a recession oncontinued improvement in the trade deficit and further growth inbusiness investment.   Reflecting that scenario, the GNP report showed that capitalspending by businesses jumped 7.6 percent in the first quarter,rebounding from a 2.9 percent decline in the October-Decemberfourth quarter.   Housing construction, which has been hurt by rising mortgagerates, fell at a rate of 5.4 percent in the first quarter whilegovernment spending grew at a modest rate of 1.4 percent,reflecting in part efforts to reduce the federal budget deficit.   In another report today, the Commerce Department said theafter-tax profits of corporations fell by 1.7 percent in the firstquarter of 1989 following a 3.2 percent rise in the fourth quarter.It was the biggest decline in business profits since a 2.5 percentdrop in the fourth quarter of 1987.   The GNP, before adjusting for inflation, grew 8.7 percent to$5.105 trillion from January through March, reflecting the firstquarter the economy has passed the $5 trillion mark.   In inflation-adjusted dollars, the GNP measured $4.077 trillion.   The Bush administration is counting on growth to remain at afairly robust level in order to reduce the federal budget deficitbelow $100 billion next year without resorting to tax increases.   The Bush budget is built on economic assumptions that the GNPwill grow at a 3.2 percent rate this year, down only slightly fromlast year's 3.9 percent increase.   However, private analysts generally believe that forecast is toooptimistic with many private analysts looking for growth to averagearound 2.8 percent for the entire year, more than a full percentagepoint lower than the 1988 growth.</TEXT></DOC>