<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890515-0134 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-05-15-89 1545EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i AM-Soviet-Election Bjt   05-15 0886</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Soviet-Election, Bjt,0908</SECOND><HEAD>Reformers Win More Parliamentary Seats</HEAD><BYLINE>By ANN IMSE</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>MOSCOW (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Reformers won more seats in the new Sovietparliament in a second round of voting, according to resultsreleased Monday, with the most resounding victory going to acriminal investigator who alleged corruption at the highest levels.   Prosecutor Nikolai Ivanov won the Leningrad seat in Sunday'selection with 61 percent of the vote against 33 opponents, two daysafter saying in a televised debate that his investigation touchedon Politburo member Yegor Ligachev. He made no specific charge.   But pro-democracy activists in the Soviet Union's second-largestcity opposed Ivanov, saying he used Stalinist methods in hisinvestigations.   Other victors were reformers barred from the ballot on theirfirst try, including editor Vitaly Korotich, whose magazine Ogonyokhas infuriated conservatives with sensational reports on the pastand present.   The reformers' success continued a trend started in the firstround of elections March 26, which were the first nationwidemulticandidate elections in the Soviet Union in 70 years. Repeatelections were held in 195 districts where voters were given achoice of only one or two candidates on March 26, and more than 50percent refused to elect anyone.   Candidates backed by the pro-democracy People's Fronts inEstonia, Latvia and the Ukraine claimed victories. People's Frontofficials in Latvia said their candidates won five of the six racesthere.   Korotich was tossed off the ballot in Moscow in the first roundby an election commission stacked with party hard-liners. He waselected this time in the supposedly conservative city of Kharkov inthe Ukraine with about 80 percent of the vote against nine othercandidates, said Lyudmilla Merko, assistant director of Kharkov'selectoral commission.   Ivanov became the focus of debate in the closing days of thecampaign in Leningrad, as the democracy-oriented coalition thatdefeated top party officials in the first round mounted a campaignagainst the front-runner. Ivanov was calling for a nationalcommission to investigate corruption, but his opponents said hewould use illegal methods to coerce confessions.   Ivanov and his partner, Telman Gdlyan, are famous throughout theSoviet Union for a lengthy investigation of corruption in therepublic of Uzbekistan. Gdlyan won a parliamentary seat in March inMoscow.   Gdlyan reportedly gave a 45-minute speech on high-levelcorruption at a closed meeting of the newly elected Moscow deputieson May 3, and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev reacted by suggestingthat he had better be right.   ``I hope you sleep tonight,'' Gorbachev said, according toseveral people at the meeting. ``If you are right, that's onething, but if you are lying, this will not turn out to be the bestday of your life.''   On Saturday, the Presidium, the country's highest executivebody, attacked Ivanov and Gdlyan in the party newspaper Pravda,accusing them of interfering with an investigation into theiralleged abuses of power.   The Soviet Supreme Court also has demanded that the SovietProcurator General's Office investigate whether Gdlyan shouldremain on the job because of a botched investigation of an eminentEstonian scientist. The scientist died in jail, and the courtearlier this month overturned his conviction.   Several key conservatives lost Sunday, including Anatoly Ivanov,editor of the monthly Molodaya Gvardia. The journal is noted forsuch articles as this month's interview with Josef Stalin'sagriculture minister, who defended the purges of the 1930s asnecessary even though millions were killed.   The Molodaya Gvardia editor lost in the monastery town ofZagorsk. Journalists Alexander Bovin and Alexander Krutov movedinto a run-off election scheduled for Sunday. The quick turn-aroundwill allow winners to take their seats when the new Congress ofPeople's Deputies opens May 25.   Latvian prosecutor Janis Djdnitis, a hardliner voted mostunpopular Latvian in a poll by a youth newspaper last year,received 6 percent of the vote in a Riga district. ReformerMaveriks Vulfsons won, said Janis Trikulis, a television editor.   Klara Hallik, a college lecturer on ethnic relations backed bythe Estonian People's Front, defeated both the editor of aCommunist Party youth magazine and a student who called forwithdrawal of Soviet troops from the Baltic.   A leader of the Ukrainian People's Front, economist VladimirChernyak, advanced to the run-off against Vitaly Karpenko, editorof the official newspaper Vecherny Kiev, said Lydia Voronova, aKiev election official.   In Moscow, one reformer won and another lost.   Olympic weight-lifting champion Yuri Vlasov, considered to havea radical platform, advanced to the second round along withjournalist V. Shinkaretsky in the Lublinsky region. But glasnostchampion and playwright Mikhail Shatrov lost in the Kuntsovskydistrict to Afghanistan war hero Alexander Rudskoy and aMoskovskaya Pravda editor, V. Logunov. Those two advance to therun-off.   In Tashkent in Central Asia, Moslem leader mufti Muhammad-SakykIbn Muhammad-Yusuf was elected.   In the March election, voters embarrassed dozens of CommunistParty and government officials by denying them seats in the newparliament. Candidate Politburo member Yuri F. Solovyov ranunopposed in one Leningrad district and still lost.   Most of those who lost in March did not run again.   In three districts of Armenia elections were held Sunday becausefewer than half the voters went to the polls in March. In onedistrict a repeat election was held because the winner died shortlyafter being elected.</TEXT></DOC>