<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891222-0048 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-22-89 0349EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i PM-Panama-Reconstruct Bjt   12-22 1204</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Panama-Reconstruct, Bjt,1253</SECOND><HEAD>After Days Of Rising Tension, The Sound of Planes</HEAD><HEAD>With PM-Panama, Bjt</HEAD><NOTE>EDITOR'S NOTE </NOTE><TEXT>   This story was reconstructed from accounts byU.S. and Panamanian officials, interviews with Panamanian citizensand reporting by Associated Press correspondents in Panama.</TEXT><BYLINE>By SUSANA HAYWARD</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   The first sign of trouble came with the planes _ giant C-141 andC-5 jet transports landing every ten minutes at Howard Air ForceBase, only four miles west of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega's PanamaCity headquarters.   Hours later, just after midnight, mortar blasts and machine-gunfire lit the sky. The dark shapes of helicopters roared through themoonlit night, their running lights out.   Operation Just Cause was under way. President Bush was strikingfor Noriega, the accused drug trafficker who had controlled Panamaand thumbed his nose at American power for years.   Thousands of soldiers, Marines, sailors and pilots were on themove by 12:30 a.m. Wednesday. Paratroopers landed at Omar TorrijosInternational Airport to secure it for landing.   In a blaze of gunfire, American soldiers battled Panamanianforces and surrounded Noriega's Defense Forces headquarters. By 2a.m., flames a hundred feet high rose from the building.   ``We're kicking ass tonight,'' boasted one U.S. soldier.   But the target, Noriega, disappeared into the night. Noriegabodyguard Lt. Asuncion Gaitan said by radio that the dictator hadbeen warned.   Shortly after the fighting broke out, opposition leaderGuillermo Endara was sworn in as president and asked Panamanianforces to surrender.   Noriega loyalists, however, did not. And the massive U.S.military operation turned bloody in the metropolis of 1 million.   With garrisons destroyed or under siege, many Panamanianofficers in Noriega's 15,000-strong Defense Forces joinedparamilitary groups and the so-called Dignity Battalions of armedcitizens.   A media war began.   U.S.-controlled television urged surrender and said ``The UnitedStates has no territorial ambitions in Panama,'' an unintentionalreminder that until a decade ago Washington controlled a10-mile-wide zone through Panama's center.   On a pro-Noriega radio network, radio announcers called forneighborhood resistance and guerrilla war.   The Panama Canal, the root of U.S.-Panama conflict by its veryexistence, closed at 1 a.m. even though there were ships in thewaterway. Under 1977 treaties, the United States cedes control ofthe canal by century's end.   Frightened residents fled combat zones around the neighborhoodsof Chorillo and Old Panama, the colonial quarter of the city wherea Panamanian cavalry unit was based. In the neighborhood of SanMiguelito to the northeast, U.S. jets strafed a Defense Forcesbarracks.   Fighting was also reported at the Panamanian bases of FortCimarron, 20 miles east of the capital; Rio Hato, 80 milessouthwest, and David, 240 miles to the west, where U.S. troops hitthe airport.   Panamanian forces also attacked the U.S. Embassy and causedlight damage before it was secured by U.S. forces at around 4:30a.m.   During the morning armed Panamanians raided the luxury MarriottHotel and temporarily held 12 people, including eight Americans.Elsewhere in Panama, Noriega supporters targeted U.S. citizens forcapture.   Although scattered combat continued through the day, by 4 a.m.Wednesday the heaviest fighting was over.   At dawn, a pall of smoke lay over the city as dazed civilianssought shelter. Santo Tomas Hospital, near the Defense Forcesheadquarters, counted 80 bodies in its morgue and about 1,000injured, hundreds of them civilians.   Red Cross ambulances raced to pick up bodies rotting in99-degree heat.   The Pentagon said U.S. troops took 1,500 prisoners, most fromthe Defense Force.   In a somber speech on national television at 7 a.m. Wednesday,President Bush announced that American servicemen had been killed.The U.S. death toll began a climb into double figures.   Bush said he ordered the invasion to protect the lives of 35,000Americans in Panama in light of Noriega's announcement five daysearlier that Panama was in a ``state of war'' with the UnitedStates.   Bush said the assault was aimed at capturing Noriega, who hadjust been named Panama's chief executive, to bring him to trial inthe United States on charges of cocaine trafficking.   It was the first U.S. attack against a government since the 1986air raid on Libya and the first U.S. invasion of a country sincethe Grenada intervention in 1983.   Latin American allies condemned the action and called forwithdrawal. The Soviet Union called it ``gunboat diplomacy.''   Sources in Washington later said Bush decided on Sunday to mountthe assault, one day after a U.S. Marine lieutenant was killed at aPanamanian Defense Forces checkpoint and a U.S. Navy couple washeld, beaten and the woman threatened sexually.   Panama was tense after the killing of the Marine, with Americantroops on maximum alert and Panamanian news media trying to whip upa frenzy of anti-American sentiment, screaming that Bush waspreparing an invasion.   On Monday, a U.S. Army officer wounded a Panamanian policemanbecause he thought the man was going to draw a weapon.   Secretary of State James A. Baker III claimed the invasion cameafter the administration received unconfirmed reports Noriegaplanned to attack a U.S. residential neighborhood.   On Wednesday, the Bush administration offered a $1 millionreward for information on Noriega's whereabouts.   From an undisclosed location that night, the elusive Noriegaspoke briefly over national radio and vowed to fight. ``We're intrench warfare now and we will maintain the resistance,'' he said.   Pro-Noriega radio stations were able to keep broadcasting allday, but finally were shut off the air shortly after Noriega made abrief statement.   On Thursday, the U.S. troops were in control of Panama'sstrategic points but scattered fighting took place in the capital.Despite a massive manhunt, Noriega remained at large.   A massive wave of looting that began Wednesday spread throughoutthe city Thursday. Every kind of business from bakeries to cardealers was picked clean by swarming hordes of Panamanians.Entrepreneurs stripped warehouses and set up bargain street stallsto sell the merchandise.   Endara, the candidate elected in a May 7 election nullified byNoriega, left his shelter on a U.S. base and spoke at the NationalAssembly, announcing a curfew to try to control looting.   In the absence of police, who as members of the Defense Forceswere either in combat or vanished, his order had little effect.   U.S. troops rescued 29 Americans and 35 foreign nationalsWednesday night at the Marriott Hotel, but other U.S. citizens werestill missing Thursday and three photographers were shot, one ofthem dead, by American troops in the hotel parking lot.   The 51-mile Panama Canal opened Thursday, but only duringdaylight hours. Not enough workers could get in to keep the canalopen at night, a spokesman said.   The White House said the occupation could last for aconsiderable time but Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said sometroops might return by Christmas. Other officials worried theUnited States had impulsively entered an open-ended commitment thatmight end in guerrilla war.   Bush said Thursday the military mission ``is not over, butpretty well wrapped up.''   He vowed to continue the search for Noriega, who had commandedthe Defense Forces since 1983 and earned a reputation as a miracleman by defying U.S. economic sanctions and frustrating two coupattempts.</TEXT></DOC>