<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891218-0075 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-18-89 1217EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i PM-Romania 6thLd-Writethru a0527 12-18 1200</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Romania, 6th Ld - Writethru, a0527,1237</SECOND><HEAD>Source Reports Deaths in Romania; Unconfirmed Report of HundredsDead</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 29 grafs to move up background on Ceausescu, UPDATEwith action in Yugoslavia today, reaction from exiled king, British touristsdetained; Picks up 26th graf, `The unrest ...'</HEAD><BYLINE>By ROLAND PRINZ</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>VIENNA, Austria (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Romanian police opened fire on protestersduring weekend anti-government riots, and at least two people werekilled, including a child, a person traveling in the region saidtoday.   In West Germany, Radio Bremen quoted William Totok, an ethnicGerman author who emigrated from Romania to West Germany, as sayingthat eyewitnesses told him as many as 300 to 400 people werekilled. The report could not be independently confirmed.   Several sources reported Sunday and today that they heardgunfire in the streets of Timisoara, Romania's fourth-largest city,following the largest protests against the hard-line Communistgovernment in two years.   Romania sealed its border with Yugoslavia today to all butofficial traffic and tanks were reported patrolling Timisoara and anearby city.   President Nicolae Ceausescu, the East bloc's longest-rulingleader, traveled to Iran on a state visit. He has crushedopposition, rejected the reforms being adopted elsewhere in EasternEurope and imposed harsh economic measures on Romania.   Romanian emigres said thousands of demonstrators enraged withthe hardship and repression under Ceausescu clashed with securityforces in Timisoara. Police reportedly fired shot and also usedwater cannon against the demonstrators.   Romania's strictly controlled state-run media made no mention ofthe unrest, but Bucharest radio on Sunday warned citizens to staycalm, indicating security forces were worried about protestsspreading, as occurred in East Germany and Czechoslovakia.   Popular revolts in those countries led to the downfall ofhard-line leaders and ended the Communists' monopoly on power.   Elsewhere in the East bloc today:   _East Germany's Communist leaders resumed talks with oppositionfactions on how to run the country until the first free electionsare held in May.   _Czechoslovakia's Communist Party chief, Karel Urbanek, said hisparty likely will try to form a coalition with other parties beforefree elections planned next year. The party's official Rude Pravonewspaper apologized for past articles that criticized opponents ofthe government.   _Yugoslavia's Premier Ante Markovic proposed a new convertiblecurrency unit as part of a sweeping reform plan to save theCommunist nation from its worst economic crisis.   The traveler in Romania, a Yugoslav who refused to give hisname, told The Associated Press that other Yugoslav touristsreported seeing more dead in Timisoara after security forcesintervened to break up the protests.   Those reports also could not be independently confirmed, andRomania has refused to allow Western journalists into the country.   ``Police and troops moved in quickly,'' the traveler said afterleaving Romania today. He said only police, but not troops, wereseen firing at the demonstrators.   ``I saw two dead, including a child, on the streets,'' thesource said.   Western diplomats contacted by telephone in Romania saidsecurity forces guarded Otopeni international airport and refusedto allow a plane carrying about 200 Western tourists to land.   It also refused to allow a group of 28 British schoolgirls,three teachers and two parents who were on a ski vacation. Theywere detained at Bucharest Airport on Sunday, the British ForeignOffice said in London.   Hungarian border officials also reported that entry to Romaniaby Hungarian visitors was severely curtailed following the weekenddemonstrations.   Zoltan Kiraly, a Hungarian parliamentarian, told legislatorstanks were on the streets of Timisoara, where a protest over anethnic dispute evolved into a violent demonstration againstCeausescu.   Kiraly said tanks also patrolled Arad, 40 miles north ofTimisoara, where unrest was reported over the weekend.   Timisoara, with a population of 350,000, is in the region ofTransylvania, about 30 miles from the Yugoslav and Hungarianborders.   Protest in Romania has generally originated in Transylvania andthe northern areas near Soviet Moldavia, where people canunderstand broadcasts from neighboring Hungary and the Soviet Unionand learn of reforms sweeping the East bloc but rejected byCeausescu.   Hungarian Premier Miklos Nemeth told reporters in Budapest thathe had been told Romanian armed forces were put on a state ofalert, but this could not be confirmed.   Budapest radio, quoting unidentified witnesses, reported thatRomanian security forces sealed off Timisoara.   Romanian emigres who contacted friends and relatives abroad saidanti-government demonstrations also were staged in Brasov, anotherTransylvanian city that was the site of a major anti-Communistrally in 1987.   The Western diplomats said the Romanian capital, Bucharest,appeared calm.   Ceausescu, 71, rarely travels abroad, and his departure for Iranindicated he wanted to appear unruffled by the demonstrations. Hiswife Elena, the second most powerful person in the country, stayedbehind.   In Geneva, exiled King Michael of Romania today condemned thecrackdown on anti-government protests and said he was deeply movedby the demonstrators' ``courageous action.''   The unrest in Timisoara began Saturday after demonstratorsformed a human chain to prevent officials from evicting an ethnicHungarian clergyman from his church. Transylvania's ethnicHungarian minority has long complained of harassment by Romanianauthorities.   Some news reports said the government planned to deport theProtestant minister, the Rev. Laszlo Toekes, a Reformed Churchclergyman who has championed the rights of ethnic Hungarians.   Toekes had been confined to the church since masked assailantsattacked him in his adjoining apartment Nov. 2, said Steve Toekes,the minister's brother, in a telephone interview today from hishome in Montreal.   The Hungarian state-run MTI news agency, said a crowd ofHungarians and Romanians ``tried to prevent the eviction of theirclergyman when hell broke loose and the human chain changed into ademonstration of thousands against Ceausescu and his regime.   ``Riot police tried to suppress the demonstration, and a bloodybrawl started,'' the agency said. MTI said it took police nearlytwo hours to regain control. It said Toekes' fate was not known.   ``Eyewitnesses saw bloodied young people in the streets ofTimisoara and Ceausescu pictures floating on the Bega Canal. Theysaid many of the demonstrators were arrested,'' MTI said.   Yugoslav travelers returning from Timisoara told The AssociatedPress in Belgrade that tens of thousands of people were milling inthe streets Sunday morning. The Yugoslavs said that ``the entirecity seemed on the streets.''   They said that when they left the city at 2 p.m. Sunday, cordonsof soldiers, three-deep, were blocking traffic at mainintersections.   The Yugoslav witnesses said on Saturday night, protesterssmashed the window of a bookstore, threw Ceausescu books into thestreet and burned them.   A Yugoslav customs official at the Vatin crossing to Romaniatold the AP in Belgrade that Romania stopped letting through allprivate cars early today.   MTI said that on Sunday morning Romania closed its border forHungarians, but other travelers were apparently allowed to enterRomania.   Ceausescu was elected Romanian Communist Party chief on March22, 1965.   This is the biggest challenge to his leadership since ananti-government march in the town of Brasov in 1987.   That protest was quashed by the massive secret police force thathas helped Ceausescu, the longest-serving Soviet bloc leader, tosilence virtually all dissent.</TEXT></DOC>