<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890419-0222 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-04-19-89 1331EST</FILEID><FIRST>s a BC-ReturntothePlanets Adv23-1stAdd   04-19 0911</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Return to the Planets, Adv 23 - 1st Add,0920</SECOND><HEAD>$Adv23</HEAD><HEAD>For Release Sunday, April 23, and Thereafter</HEAD><HEAD>CAPE CANAVERAL: rise significantly.</HEAD><TEXT>   The latest discoveries come from a far-off realm, Uranus,relayed by Voyager 2, a marvelous machine launched along withVoyager 1 in 1977 to probe Jupiter and Saturn. Voyager 2 wasworking so well after exploring Saturn that NASA reprogrammed it tosail past Uranus in 1986 and Neptune next August.   Uranus is considered the oddball of the solar system because,unlike the other planets, it lies tipped on its side with its northand south poles alternately facing the sun. Voyager 2 found thatUranus' magnetic field does not follow the usual north-south axisand instead is tilted 60 degrees and offset at the center.Astronomers believe it might have been knocked off course by anancient collision with another celestial object.   Voyager 2 found that winds on Uranus whip up to 450 mph and blowfrom the west instead of the east as previously suspected. About5,000 miles below the planet's cloudtops, the spacecraft detectedevidence of a boiling ocean of water and dissolved ammonia some6,000 miles deep. Beneath this ocean, it is believed there is anEarth-size molten core of heavier materials.   The spacecraft discovered 10 new moons orbiting Uranus, rangingfrom 24 to 102 miles in diameter, much smaller than the planet'spreviously recorded five satellites. Uranus was thought to havenine rings; Voyager found 11. In contrast to Saturn's rings, whichare composed of bright grain-sized particles, Uranus' rings aremade up of dark boulder-sized chunks.   The Voyagers also discovered a ring around Jupiter, the largestplanet in the solar system and a valuable astronomical laboratorybecause of the diversity of its system of at least 16 moons.   During the flyby encounters, the Voyagers and the earlierPioneers 10 and 11, found Jupiter to be a whirling ball of liquidhydrogen, topped by a uniquely colorful atmosphere which is mostlyhydrogen and helium. They learned the Great Red Spot, observed forcenturies through Earth-based telescopes, is a tremendousatmospheric storm similar to Earth's hurricanes.   The space probes detected lightning in Jupiter's upperatmosphere and observed auroral emissions like Earth's northernlights in the Jovian polar regions. Jupiter spins at a dizzyingpace _ once every 9 hours, 55 minutes, 30 seconds _ but it takesthe massive planet almost 12 Earth years to complete a journeyaround the sun.   Before Pioneer 11 and the Voyagers passed by Saturn, astronomersknew the planet only as a fuzzy yellow sphere surrounded by sixrings. The startling images relayed back quickly identified severalthousand rings made up of small ice particles orbiting the planetat various speeds.   The spacecraft discovered five new Saturnian moons, raising thetotal to 17. Titan, the largest, received the most attentionbecause it is the only moon in the solar system believed to have anatmosphere. Although it is inconceivable that life could exist inthe oceans of liquid nitrogen and freezing hydrocarbons believed toform Titan's surface, scientists are intrigued by the possibilitythat the giant moon may hold clues about the formation of organicmolecules in the atmosphere of the primeval Earth between three andfour billion years ago.   The Voyagers also found Saturn's atmosphere of hydrogen andhelium alive with monster storms, with winds of 1,100 mph.   Venus, our sister planet and closest neighbor, more nearlyresembles Earth in size, physical composition and density than anyof the other planets. However, Mariner and Pioneer probes foundthat Venus is a blistering hot world where the 900-degree heat istrapped in a thick atmosphere of carbon dioxide.   Radar peering through Venus' thick cloud cover found evidence oftwo major active volcano areas. The concentration of lightning overthese areas suggests frequent eruptions. A valley may have beencreated by tension in the planet's crust pulling the surface apartlike similar processes on Earth.   Photographs taken of Mercury by Mariner 10 in 1974 and 1975revealed an ancient, heavily cratered surface, closely resemblingour own moon. The pictures also showed huge cliffs crisscrossingthe planet.   Instruments aboard Mariner 10 found that Mercury has a weakmagnetic field and a trace of an atmosphere - a trillionth thedensity of the Earth's and composed chiefly of argon, neon andhelium. The spacecraft reported temperatures ranging from 950degrees Fahrenheit on the sunlight side to 346 degrees below zeroon the shadowed side.   Of all the planets, Mars has long been considered the solarsystem's prime candidate for harboring extraterrestrial life. Butthe results obtained by the Viking 1 and 2 landers in 1976 and 1977were teasingly inconclusive. Small samples of Martian soil werescooped up and specially treated in three different experimentsdesigned to detect biological processes. While some of the testsindicated biological processes were occuring, the same resultscould be explained by the planet's chemistry. There was no evidenceof organic molecules in the small areas surveyed by the Vikings.   The Vikings and earlier Mariners found that dust covers theMartian surface under a sparse atmosphere that allows the wind tostir up fierce summer storms. Massive active volcanoes dot thelandscape, and dry sinuous channels, perhaps carved long ago byflowing water, stretch for hundreds of miles. Many scientistsbelieve water still lies below the surface, giving rise tospeculation that some form of life might yet be found there.</TEXT><NOTE>End Adv for Sun, April 23</NOTE></DOC>