<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890303-0036 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-03-03-89 0143EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i PM-EEC-Environment Bjt   03-03 0752</FIRST><SECOND>PM-EEC-Environment, Bjt,0774</SECOND><HEAD>Common Market Agrees To Chlorfluorocarbon Ban</HEAD><DATELINE>BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Common Market has agreed to cut itsuse of chlorofluorocarbons, the synthetic compounds that destroy theEarth's ozone layer, by 85 percent and seek a total ban on itsproduction by the end of the century.   Chlorofluorocarbons, invented in 1930, are used in aerosolsprays, refrigeration coolants, cleaning agents and several otherproducts. The compounds are blamed for depletion of the ozone layerthat protects the Earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays andfor an increase in skin cancer.   Environmental officials meeting in Brussels agreed Thursday togive the 12 EEC member nations a mandate to completely phase out themanufacture and use of the compounds by the year 2000.   In Washington, Environmental Protection Agency AdministratorWilliam Reilly urged President Bush to support thechlorofluorocarbon phase-out by the end of the century. But hisproposal was not immediately endorsed by the administration, theWashington Post reported today.   The EEC member states are responsible for about half the world'sannual chlorofluorocarbon production of 1 million tons, with Britainleading in both production and exports, according to theLondon-based environmental group Greenpeace.   The commission will represent the 12 nations at internationalconferences being held this year to discuss the ozone issue and tomonitor application of an international accord called the MontrealProtocol.   This protocol, signed by 40 countries and ratified by 32, tookeffect Jan. 1 and is intended to reduce the production and use ofchlorofluorocarbons by 50 percent from current levels by 1998.   On Sunday, scientists, industrialists and government officialsfrom around the world will gather in London to discuss how toeliminate chlorofluorocarbons, which also are blamed for damagingcrops and forests by depleting the protective ozone shield.   British Environment Secretary Nicholas Ridley said more than 110countries have accepted Britain's invitation to attend the three-dayconference, entitled ``Saving the Ozone Layer.''   Several countries, including the United States, have banned useof the compounds in aerosol propellants, and Prime Minister MargaretThatcher said Thursday that Britain will soon require all newrefrigerators to contain substances that will not harm the ozonelayer.   Britain will lobby other nations to do the same, Ridley said. Hesaid emphasis will be placed on developing countries such as Indiaand China, which are beginning mass production of refrigerators andother consumer goods containing the compounds.   Greenpeace says Britain exported chlorofluorocarbons to 117countries in 1988, 81 of which had not signed the Montreal Protocol.   Thirty-one countries have agreed to reduce their emissions by 50percent by the end of the century. Britain already has vowed to cutits emissions in half by the end of this year and to reduce totalemissions by 85 percent by 1999.   In Tokyo, a government official said today that the governmenthas urged domestic companies to reduce their dependency onchlorfluorocarbons, or CFCs, before regulations restricting theiruse become mandatory.   Beginning in July, Japan will regulate the production and importof CFCs in compliance with the Montreal Protocol.   Chlorofluorocarbons and related chemicals known as halons, whichare used in firefighting equipment, can last 100 years. They arestable and non-toxic at lower levels but when they reach thestratosphere, 15-25 miles up, they are broken up by ultravioletradiation and their chlorine atoms destroy the ozone.   Over the Antarctic, an ozone hole _ an area where ozone has beenseriously depleted _ is worsening, according to the Britishgovernment's Stratospheric Ozone Review Group. The group reportedthat ozone concentration in the winter was reduced by 95 percent insome parts.   An international expedition warned in February that theatmosphere over the Arctic region is also primed for a largedestruction of ozone.   The U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration reportedlast year that annual ozone depletion over the Northern Hemisphere'smid-latitudes is much higher than thought. The protective shieldappears to have shrunk by 2.3 percent since 1969 over the area,which includes most of the United States and Canada, NASA said.   Scientists say a thinning of the ozone layer increases theincidence of skin cancer. According to Greenpeace, each 1 percentdepletion is estimated to increase incidence of skin cancer by about4 percent.   The London conference, to be opened by Kenyan President Danielarap Moi, will be addressed first by scientists studying ozonedepletion, then from industrialists developing safe alternatives forsome compounds.   Another conference is scheduled in Helskinki, Finland, on May 2-5to monitor application of the Montreal protocol.</TEXT></DOC>