<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890306-0094 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-03-06-89 1320EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-ScotusAt-a-Glance     03-06 0797</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Scotus At-a-Glance,800</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here, at a glance, are highlights of actionstaken Monday by the Supreme Court.      DRUNKEN DRIVING      People accused of driving under the influence of alcoholgenerally are not entitled to jury trials, a unanimous Supreme Courtruled today.   The court, in a case from Nevada, said states are not required tohold jury trials for drunken driving when the maximum jail terms aresix months and other penalties are not particularly severe.   The court left open the possibility the Constitution mightrequire a jury trial in the case of a repeat offender who could besentenced to more than six months in jail if convicted of drivingunder the influence more than once.   The case is Blanton vs. North Las Vegas, 87-1437.      ACID RAIN      The court turned down an appeal by northeastern states seeking toforce the federal government to crack down on acid rain and otherpollution they say is caused by smokestacks in other states.   The court, without comment, refused to order the federalEnvironmental Protection Agency to take steps to limit interstateair pollution.   The case is Maine vs. EPA, 88-684.      YONKERS DESEGREGATION      The court agreed to review the stiff fines imposed against fourYonkers, N.Y., councilmen for defying a federal judge's order toadopt a housing desegregation plan.   The justices said they will study arguments that the judgeexceeded his power in imposing the contempt-of-court fines.   The cases are Spallone vs. U.S., 88-854; Yonkers vs. U.S.,88-855; Chema vs. U.S., 88-856; and Longo vs. U.S., 88-870.      FEDERAL WORKERS      The court said federal workers do not have a right to sue infederal court when they accuse the union representing them of unfairtreatment.   The justices, voting 9-0, ruled that the only recourse for theemployees in such cases is to file an unfair labor practice chargewith the Federal Labor Relations Authority.   The case is Karahalios vs. National Federation of FederalEmployees, 87-636.      PRISON INMATES      The court agreed to decide whether prison inmates are entitled toa court hearing and other safeguards before being forced to takeanti-psychotic drugs.   The justices said they will hear an appeal by Washington stateofficials who say judges should not be allowed to interfere with theprofessional judgment of prison administrators and doctors.   The case is Washington vs. Harper, 88-599.      POLICE PROTECTION      The court barred a lawsuit against a former federal prosecutorwho refused police protection to a witness gunned down before shecould testify.   The justices, without comment, let stand a ruling that theprosecutor was not legally responsible to protect the woman, killedin New York City along with three CBS employees who tried to come toher aid.   The case is Barbera vs. Schlessinger, 87-2034.      FREE SPEECH      The court turned down the free-speech arguments of a financialmagazine accused of violating an anti-touting provision of federalsecurities law.   The court, without comment, let stand a ruling that could forceThe Stock Market Magazine to tell readers whether companies featuredin its articles bought advertising space or paid the magazine forother services.   The case is Wall Street Publishing Institute vs. SEC, 88-982.      ARBITRATION      The court said a contract dispute between Stanford University anda computer firm should be settled in state court, not in arbitration.   The court's 6-2 decision is a victory for Stanford and a setbackfor Volt Information Sciences Inc., which had asked the justices tocompel arbitration.   The case is Volt Informational Sciences vs. Stanford, 87-1318.      MINORITIES      The court today reinstated a challenge to a Miami affirmativeaction plan requiring 5 percent participation of businesses owned bywomen or minorities in building a rail transit system.   The justices, by a 5-4 vote, ordered a lower court to reconsiderits dismissal of the challenge in light of their Jan. 23 decisionstriking down a similar affirmative action ``set aside'' program inRichmond, Va.   The case is Porter vs. Metropolitan Dade County, 87-1001.      AGE BIAS      The court, in a case stemming from Delta Air Lines' takeover ofWestern Air Lines, today refused to let Delta force the retirementof a group of flight engineers over 60.   The justices, without comment, let stand a ruling that Delta isbound by an age bias lawsuit the flight engineers won againstWestern.   The case is Delta vs. Criswell, 88-1138.      CORPORAL PUNISHMENT      The court left unresolved whether public school students enjoyany constitutional protection against paddling or other corporalpunishment by teachers and administrators.   The justices, without comment, let stand a Texas law that allowsthe use of all necessary corporal punishment, short of deadly force,in the state's public schools.   The case is O'Connor vs. Beavers, 88-1181.</TEXT></DOC>