<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890531-0113 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-05-31-89 1238EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Bush-Text 4thAdd a0539 05-31 0859</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Bush-Text, 4th Add, a0539,0879</SECOND><HEAD>Eds: Retransmitting a0555 to restore dropped matter.</HEAD><HEAD>MAINZ: opportunity pass.</HEAD><TEXT>   Our proposal has several key initiatives. I propose that we lockthe Eastern agreement to Western-proposed ceilings on tanks andarmored troop carriers. We should also seek an agreement on commonnumerical ceilings for artillery, the range between NATO's and thatof the Warsaw Pact, provided these definitional problems can besolved. And the weapons we remove must be destroyed.   We should expand our current offer to include all land-basedcombat aircraft and helicopters by proposing that both sides reducein these categories to a level 15 percent below the current NATOtotals.   Given the Warsaw Pact's advantage in numbers, the pact wouldhave to make far deeper reductions than NATO to establish parity atthose lower levels. Again, the weapons we remove must be destroyed.   I propose a 20-percent cut in combat manpower in U.S.-stationedforces, and a resulting ceiling on U.S. and Soviet ground and airforces stationed outside of national territory in theAtlantic-to-the-Urals zone at approximately 275,000 each. Thisreduction to parity, a fair and balanced level of strength, wouldcompel the Soviets to reduce their 600,000-strong Red Army inEastern Europe by 325,000. And these withdrawn forces must bedemobilized.   Finally, I call on (Soviet) President (Mikhail S.) Gorbachev toaccelerate the timetable for reaching these agreements. There is noreason why the five-to six-year timetable, as suggested by Moscow,is necessary.   I propose a much more ambitious schedule. And we should aim toreach an agreement within six months to a year and accomplishreductions by 1992, or 1993 at the latest.   In addition to my conventional arms proposals, I believe that weought to strive to improve the openness with which we and theSoviets conduct our military activities, and therefore I want toreiterate my support for greater transparency. I renew my proposalthat the Soviet Union and its allies open their skies to reciprocalunarmed aerial surveillance flights, conducted on short notice towatch military activity.   Satellites are a very important way to verify arms controlagreements, but they do not provide constant coverage of the SovietUnion. An open skies policy would move both sides closer to a totalcontinuity of coverage, while symbolizing greater openness betweenEast and West.   These are my proposals to achieve a less militarized Europe.   A short time ago, they would have been considered toorevolutionary to consider, and yet today, we may well be on theverge of a more ambitious agreement than Europe, than anyoneconsidered possible. But we're also by challenged developmentsoutside of NATO's traditional areas of concern.   Every Western nation still faces the global proliferation oflethal technologies, including ballistic missiles and chemicalweapons. We must collectively control the spread of these growingthreats. So we should begin as soon as possible with a worldwideban on chemical weapons.   Growing political freedom in the East, a Berlin withoutbarriers, a cleaner environment, a less militarized Europe, each isa noble goal. And, taken together, they are the foundation of ourlarger vision, a Europe that is free and at peace with itself.   So let the Soviets know that our goal is not to undermine theirlegitimate security interests. Our goal is to convince them, stepby step, that their definition of security is obsolete, that theirdeepest fears are unfounded.   When Western Europe takes its giant step in 1992, it willinstitutionalize what's been true for years _ borders open topeople, commerce and ideas; no shadow of suspicion, no sinisterfear is passed between you. The very prospect of war within theWest is unthinkable to our citizens.   But such a peaceful integration of nations into a worldcommunity does not mean that any nation must relinquish itsculture, much less its sovereignty.   This process of integration, a subtle weaving of sharedinterests, which is so nearly complete in Western Europe, has nowfinally begun in the East. We want to help the nations of EasternEurope realize what we, the nations of Western Europe, learned longago: the foundation of lasting security comes not from tanks,troops, or barbed wire, it is built on shared values and agreementsthat link free peoples.   The nations of Eastern Europe are rediscovering the glories oftheir national heritage, so let the colors and hues of nationalculture return to these gray societies of the East. Let Europeforego a peace of tension for a peace of trust, one in which thepeoples of the East and West can rejoice, a continent that isdiverse, yet whole.   Forty years of cold war have tested Western resolve and thestrength of our values. NATO's first mission is now nearlycomplete. But if we are to fulfill our vision, our European vision,the challenges of the next 40 years will ask no less of us.   Together, we shall answer the call. The world has waited longenough.   Thank you for inviting me to Mainz. May God bless you all.   Long live the friendship between Germany and the United States.   Thank you, and God bless you.</TEXT><NOTE>END TEXT</NOTE></DOC>