<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890622-0033 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-22-89 0226EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w PM-Scotus-Excerpts     06-22 0821</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Scotus-Excerpts,820</SECOND><HEAD>With PM-Old Glory, Bjt</HEAD><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here are excerpts from the Supreme Courtdecision Wednesday that gave constitutional protection to theburning of the American flag as a form of political protest.   From Justice William J. Brennan's majority opinion:   After publicly burning an American flag as a means of politicalprotest, Gregory Lee Johnson was convicted of desecrating a flag inviolation of Texas law. This case presents the question whether hisconviction is consistent with the First Amendment. We hold that itis not.   Texas claims that its interest in preventing breaches of thepeace justifies Johnson's conviction. However, no disturbance of thepeace actually occurred or threatened to occur because of Johnson'sburning of the flag. We have not permitted the government to assumethat every expression of a provocative idea will incite a riot, buthave instead required careful consideration of the actualcircumstances surrounding such expression.   Johnson was prosecuted because he knew that his politicallycharged expression would cause serious offense. If he had burned theflag as a means of disposing of it because it was dirty or torn, hewould not have been convicted. The Texas law is thus not aimed atprotecting the physical integrity of the flag in all circumstances,but is designed instead to protect it only against impairments thatwould cause serious offense to others.   Nothing in our opinion should be taken to suggest that one isfree to steal a flag so long as one later uses it to communicate anidea. We also emphasize that Johnson was prosecuted only for flagdesecration _ not for trespass, disorderly conduct or arson.   If there is a bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment,it is that the government may not prohibit the expression of an ideasimply because society finds the idea itself offensive ordisagreeable.   We can imagine no more appropriate response to burning a flagthat waving one's own, no better way to counter a flag-burner'smessage than by saluting the flag that burns, no surer means ofpreserving the dignity even of the flag that burned than by _ as onewitness here did _ according its remains a respectful burial.   We do not consecrate the flag by punishing its desecration, forin doing so we dilute the freedom that this cherished emblemrepresents.   From Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's concurring opinion:   The hard fact is that sometimes we must make decisions we do notlike. We make them because they are right, right in the sense thatthe law and the Constitution, as we see them, compel the result.   It is poignant but fundamental that the flag protects those whohold it in contempt.   From Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist's dissenting opinion:   For more than 200 years, the American flag has occupied a uniqueposition as the symbol of our nation, a uniqueness that justifies agovernmental prohibition against flag burning in a way Johnson didhere.   No other American symbol has been as universally honored as theflag. Both Congress and the state have enacted numerous lawsregulating misuse of the American flag. With the exception of Alaskaand Wyoming, all the states now have statutes prohibiting theburning of the flag.   Millions and millions of Americans regard it with an almostmystical reverence regardless of what sort of social, political, orphilosophical beliefs they may have. I cannot agree that the FirstAmendment invalidates (an) act of Congress and the laws of 48 of the50 states, which make criminal the public burning of the flag.   From Justice John Paul Stevens' dissenting opinion:   A country's flag is a symbol of more than nationhood and nationalunity. It also signifies the ideas that characterize the societythat has chosen that emblem as well as the special history that hasanimated the growth and power of those ideas.   It is a symbol of freedom, of equal opportunity, of religioustolerance, and of goodwill for other peoples who share ouraspirations. The symbol carries its message to dissidents both athome and abroad who may have no interest at all in our nationalunity or survival.   The value of the flag as a symbol cannot be measured. Conceivablythat value will be enhanced by the court's conclusion that ournational commitment to free expression is so strong that even theUnited States as ultimate guarantor of that freedom is without powerto prohibit the desecration of its unique symbol. But I amunpersuaded.   The creation of a federal right to post bulletin boards andgraffiti on the Washington Monument might enlarge the market forfree expression, but at a cost I would not pay. Similarly, in myconsidered judgment, sanctioning the public desecration of the flagwill tarnish its value _ both for those who cherish the ideas forwhich it waves and for those who desire to don the robes ofmartyrdom by burning it.</TEXT></DOC>