<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890731-0095 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-31-89 1459EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u i PM-Lebanon-Hostage 13thLd-Writethru a0591 07-31 1346</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Lebanon-Hostage, 13th Ld-Writethru, a0591,1388</SECOND><HEAD>Kidnappers Say They Killed U.S. Marine; Another American Threatened</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: Leads with 10 grafs to UPDATE with American hostage threatened.Pickup 9th graf `A diplomatic source...'; ADDS 4 grafs with telephonedthreat to British hostage.</HEAD><BYLINE>By RIAD KAHWAJI</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pro-Iranian Shiite Moslems claimed todaythey executed Lt. Col. William R. Higgins, and another groupthreatened to kill another American hostage if Israel does not freea Moslem cleric within 24 hours.   A statement signed by the Organization of the Oppressed on Earthsaid the 44-year-old Higgins was hanged at 3 p.m. (8 a.m. EDT), thedeadline they set for Israel to free Sheik Abul-Karim Obeid, whowas captured in south Lebanon Friday.   Both the tape and statement, typewritten in Arabic, weredelivered to a Western news agency an hour after the deadline.   Higgins, of Danville, Ky., was serving as head of an observergroup attached to the U.N. peacekeeping force in south Lebanon whenhe was seized Feb. 17, 1988. His captors accused him of spying forthe CIA.   The new threat came in a handwritten statement from theRevolutionary Justice Organization, saying its resolved to executeJoseph James Cicippio unless Israel freed Sheik Abul-Karim Obeid by6 p.m. (11 a.m. EDT) Tuesday.   The statement was delivered to the independent Beirut newspaperAn-Nahar along with an snapshot showing a smiling Cicippio wearinga brown and pink wool sweater over a blue pullover.   Cicippio, 58, acting comptroller of the American University ofBeirut, was kidnapped Sept. 12, 1986.   The videotape showed a man the captors identified as Higginsdangling from a makeshift gallows with both his hands and feet tiedby rope. Taken in two 15-second sequences, the victim wore a whiteblindfold in one and was shown without a blindfold in another, withhis head tilted.   There was no way to immediately verify today's claims by theMoslem group that held Higgins, and whether the purported hangingoccurred today.   State Department officials in Washington, speaking on conditionof anonymity, described as credible news reports that the victim inthe videotape was Higgins. They were unable to say, however,whether the taping was done this morning or earlier.   A diplomatic source told The Associated Press the United Nationsreceived unconfirmed reports that Higgins was shot to death afterthe shooting down of the Iranian airbus by the U.S.S. Vincennes onJuly 3, 1988. At the time, no specific date for the death was given.   In Chicago, President Bush said he has no independentconfirmation that Higgins has been hanged and said he was cuttingshort his trip to return to Washington to try to find out whathappened to Higgins.   ``I know I speak for all here when I try to express to theAmerican people the sense of outrage that we all feel about thiskind of brutality, this uncalled-for terrorism,'' he said.   A Pentagon official, speaking on condition of anonymity, alsosaid the Defense Department has no independent confirmation thatHiggins has been executed.   A sister of Higgins said she was in a state of shock after theannouncement today.   ``Yes, I've just spoken with the State Department and I will notreveal what they said,'' Mary Fischer said at her home in theLouisville, Ky., suburb of Okolona. ``Right now, I'm in a state ofshock. I just don't know.''   The 30-second videotape was of extremely bad quality and therewas no indication when it was filmed.   The tape released in Beirut apparently was taken in twosequences of 15 seconds each.   In one sequence, the man purported to be Higgins appeareddangling from a scaffold and tied to a ceiling with his head tiltedto the left and the body swirling slowly. He was wearing a whiteblindfold.   The second sequence showed him without a blindfold, his eyesbulging. He was barefoot and wearing a dark jacket and lighttrousers.   In Israel, officials repeated their offer to trade all theShiites they hold from south Lebanon for three Israeli servicemenand all foreign hostages held in Lebanon.   Avi Pazner, spokesman for Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, saidMonday Israel was awaiting clear evidence that Higgins was killedbefore making official statements.   But he said the exchange offer stood.   The offer was made in Jerusalem earlier today by DefenseMinister Yitzhak Rabin, in an announcement broadcast on state-runIsrael radio.   Shiite groups in Lebanon are believed to hold three Israelisoldiers and 17 foreigners, including nine Americans. Israelisecurity sources estimate 50 to 60 Shiite Moslems from Lebanon areheld in Israeli prisons.   In Tehran earlier today, Iranian Foreign Minister Ali AkbarVelayati condemned both the death threat and the kidnapping ofObeid.   Lebanese security sources and Israeli officials say Obeid playeda role in the kidnapping of Higgins last year, but Obeid denies it.   Hezbollah and the Syrian-backed mainstream Shiite Moslem Amalmilitia called a general strike in Lebanon today to protest Obeid'sabduction.   Businesses were closed throughout Moslem west Beirut and itsShiite-populated southern slums, as well as the cities of Sidon,Tyre, Nabatieh and Baalbek in south and east Lebanon.   Israeli Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres defended the decisionto abduct Obeid, whom Israeli officials have accused of instigatingattacks on Israel. He would not say what Israel's response to thedeath threat would be. ``I am not willing to relate either todetails or to threats,'' Peres said.   The group holding Higgins said in a Dec. 12 statement that ithad sentenced the Marine to death and said he ``made fullconfessions about his espionage activities.''   On Sunday, a statement by the group said: ``we shall carry outby hanging the death sentence handed down against proven spyHiggins at exactly 3 p.m. (8 a.m. EDT) Monday if Sheik Abdul KarimObeid and his two brethren have not been freed by then.''   Israeli commandos stole into the southern Lebanese village ofJibchit early Friday, kidnapped Obeid from his apartment and flewhim to Israel in a helicopter.   His cousin, Ahmed Obeid, and a friend, Majid Fahs, also wereseized, Lebanese police said.   Israel described Ahmed Obeid and Majid Fahs as ``assistants'' ofObeid.   Israeli sources say Obeid was involved in the operation tokidnap Higgins and held the Marine for a time in his home.   On Sunday, a leading Iranian official defended the threatagainst Higgins.   ``It is very natural that the Islamic clergy ... and militantgroups throughout the world will take action against the interestsof Israel and the United States,'' Iranian Interior Minister AliAkbar Mohtashemi told a news conference in Tehran. ``They will notallow them to live comfortably.''   He named pro-Iranian Hezbollah as one of the Moslem groups thatshould retaliate.   Asked about the fate of hostages in Lebanon, Mohtashemi said:``The issue of the hostages has no direct connection with us.''   An Iranian newspaper said Obeid's abduction jeopardized moves tofree the hostages. The longest-held hostage is Terry Anderson,chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press. He wasabducted March 16, 1985.   ``The Zionists have introduced a new threat to humanitarianefforts to release hostages in Lebanon,'' the Tehran Times said inan editorial Sunday.   In Nicosia, Cyprus, an anonymous caller claiming to speak forOppressed on Earth today telephoned the office of The AssociatedPress and said that unless Obeid is released, the organizationwould kill a British hostage, Anglican Church envoy Terry Waite, onTuesday at the same hour they said they killed Higgins.   The caller, speaking in Lebanese Arabic and English, said thebody of Higgins was dumped behind St. Joseph hospital in westBeirut, that Syrians picked up Higgins' corpse at 4 p.m., ``and weare no longer responsible for the body.''   It could not be immediately verified if the caller was from theorganization, which had not made previous calls to the Cyprusoffice of The AP.   No body was found at the hospital and police said they could notconfirm the killing. The Syrian military command, whose troopspatrol Moslem areas of Lebanon, would not comment.</TEXT></DOC>