<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890627-0070 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-27-89 1041EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-Bush-Text 2ndadd   06-27 1058</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Bush-Text, 2nd add,1060</SECOND><HEAD>WASHINGTON: over there?</HEAD><TEXT>   A. John, something might be happening in some department todaythat I know nothing about. We've got an enormous bureaucracy. We'vegot a tremendous bureaucracy that extends all around the world. Andthere might well be some corruption out there that's going on that Iwould be responsible for, but that I don't know about. But I am notgoing to try to assign blame; I want to look to the future. Andthat's the way I'm going to handle that one.   Yeah, Lesley?   Q. Mr. President, you've spoken out emotionally, obviously, aboutthe Supreme Court's decision on the flag. I wonder if you'd like totake this chance to speak out emotionally on their affirmativeaction decisions, which make it harder for women and minorities tosue for discrimination?   A. I'm not sure that I agree with your _ the hypothesis of yourquestion. As I said at a _ the last press conference, formal pressconference _ I was going to ask our attorney general and our generalcounsel to look into this matter. And I am strongly committed toequal opportunity for all Americans. And I am advised that nothingin these decisions jeopardizes that principle or calls into questionaffirmative action or minority outreach efforts. This was _ this isthe opinion of the attorney general, who, I understand, will bespeaking on this at noon today.   The Justice Department has told me that the decision reflectsinterpretation of the civil rights laws by the court on technicalsubjects, and we're talking about burdens of proof and statutes oflimitations. But, that is the advice I am getting, and I willcertainly support the attorney general.   Q. All right. Constitutional scholars say, for instance, that ifa minority student is _ faces racial harassment at school, atprivate schools _ they are no longer covered. There are somesituations where people cannot sue for racial harassment, forinstance, and there are other sort of niggling things, but it'sreally the question of your emotional response, because you jump outof the box on the flag.   A. I have just given it to you. Affirmative action I've _ youknow my position on that: commitment to equal opportunity. I hopepeople know my commitment on that, but we're getting into atechnicality that neither you or I are competent to discuss. And Iam going _ you are going on the advice of who you call ``legalscholars,'' and I'm going on the advice of the attorney general anda very fine general counsel. So, I think we have a difference on theinterpretation of what this means, and I've seen that some of thecivil rights leaders disagree. But, I am committed, and if thedecisions actually turn out to hamper civil rights enforcement,along the lines you're talking about, obviously I would want to takesteps to remedy the situation.   Q. But are you saying you won't support legislation...   A. Is this your third question. Come on, Lesley.   Q. I'm sorry.   A. Go ahead.   Q. Are you saying you won't support legislation that...   A. I'm saying that my advice from the attorney general is thatlegislation isn't necessary.   Back here in the middle. Yeah.   Q. Mr. President, you've expressed your strong feelings again onthis Supreme Court decision on the flag burning, but the SupremeCourt is expected to make a decision this week on the abortionissue, which is among the most emotional in the country. And Iwonder, going into that decision, if you view your role as a healerafter this decision, as simply to enforce the law? What is yourview, going into that decision as the president, and this veryimportant emotional issue?   A. It is an emotional issue. And I am firmly positioned in favorof, you know, overturn of Roe-Wade. And that's my position, and I'mnot going to change that position. But I don't want to see it _ thedivisiveness that that whole issue causes _ split this country. Andyet the decision is going to be _ I don't know what they're going todecide. But my position on it is very clear.   Owen.   Q. During the campaign, you came out many times for aconstitutional amendment to balance the budget. I'm curious why nowyou've moved so quickly to call for a constitutional amendmentconcerning flag-burning, which is solely a symbolic issue, and yetyou haven't moved at all on balancing the budget in terms of aconstitutional amendment, which is substantive and which a lot ofpeople in this country think would accomplish a lot more for theeconomy. Can you explain that?   A. Yeah _ oh, easily. Let me take this opportunity to make aclarion call for a balanced budget amendment. Absolutely. It has tobe phased in, but I'd like to see it.   Q. Why do you have to be prompted to do that? Why do you givesuch a high priority...   A. Because my position is so well-known on it, Owen.   Q. Why do you give such a high priority to the issue offlag-burning, and you haven't said anything until now about abalanced budget amendment?   A. I said a lot about it all last year. I thought you got tiredof hearing it. But I will repeat it. And _ but if you want to know,I've got to confess, I do feel viscerally about burning the Americanflag. And I don't _ and therefore, I express it. And I feelviscerally about fiscal sanity, also. But this decision just camedown and it is one that causes, I think, the American people, andcertainly this president, great concern. And I think it can beremedied without doing violence to a person's right to protest.   Yeah, David, and then Charles.   Q. Mr. President, you're going to Poland in a few weeks, and Iwonder, a lot's happened since your Hamtramck speech; we've had freeelections, Solidarity now may have a much bigger role in whathappens in Poland. When you go, are you interested in bringing someexpanded debt relief, financial aid? Walesa has been saying to theworld that he really needs help now. Do you think you are in aposition to bring it?</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>