<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891228-0070 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-28-89 1236EST</FILEID><FIRST>r a AM-Top10Stories 2Takes   12-28 0901</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Top 10 Stories, 2 Takes,0921</SECOND><HEAD>Editors Vote: Fall of Communist Regimes Tops 1989's Stories</HEAD><BYLINE>By JOHN BARBOUR</BYLINE><BYLINE>AP Newsfeatures Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   The overwhelming story of 1989 was the disintegration ofcommunism in Eastern Europe and Mikhail S. Gorbachev's efforts tolead the Soviet Union into a freer society, according to a poll ofAssociated Press newspaper editors and broadcast news directors.   The communist turnaround received 3,256 points, almost the sumof the two stories that finished second and third, the crushing ofChina's Tiananmen Square pro-democracy movement, and the Alaskanoil spill.   The China story narrowly outpolled the oil spill in editorinterest, 1,690 points to 1,687.   In the poll, 315 editors and news directors ranked the stories.A first-place vote earned a story 10 points and a 10th-placelisting one point.   Late-developing stories were not on the ballots, which were dueby Dec. 15, five days before the United States invaded Panama andseven before the bloody ouster of dictator Nicolae Ceausescu inRomania.   The decline of communism was voted No. 1 by almost the samemargin as in an earlier AP poll of the top stories for the decade,a poll in which the AIDS epidemic was voted No. 2 for the 1980s.   The No. 4 story for 1989 was the San Francisco earthquake, with1,616 points, followed by: the continuing abortion controversy,1,225; the international drug war, 1,061; Hurricane Hugo, 935;government ethics, including scandals involving the Department ofHousing and Urban Development and the Pentagon, 751; the federalbailout of savings and loans, 515; the conviction of Oliver Northand the lingering investigation of the Iran-Contra affair, 511.   Notable stories of 1989 that did not make the top 10 includedthe Malta summit; the crash of United Flight 232 and the skill ofits crew in saving 184 lives; the conviction and 45-year sentenceof TV evangelist Jim Bakker; the lifetime ban of Pete Rose frombaseball; the unprecedented meeting of Gorbachev and the pope; theUSS Iowa gun turret explosion; the death of Iran's AyatollahRuhollah Khomeini; the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan; theplight of the hostages in Lebanon, and the election of New YorkCity's first black mayor and Virginia's first black governor.   The top 10 stories:   1. When Mikhail Gorbachev rose to power in 1985 and gave theworld two new words, glasnost and perestroika, no one could haveguessed the incredible changes that would burst forth, like a geniefrom a bottle, four years later.   But there it was in 1989: thousands standing in the streets ofHungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and East Germany, demanding avoice in government, a more open society, and eviction of the oldCommunist guard. In Poland, Solidarity won an election and began tobuild economic ties with the West to try to pull the country out ofpoverty.   In the Soviet Union, Gorbachev had to slow the rate of changewhile he struggled to improve the economy with links to the West.But even there, ethnic republics pressed for more independence.East-West relations also underwent change, leading even the mostresistant American doubters wondering whatever had happened to``the evil empire.''   2. Beijing was hosting the first Chinese-Soviet summit in 30years, but the historic event was upstaged by the drama unfoldingin Tiananmen Square.   For seven weeks, the hundred-acre square had been occupied bythousands of demonstrators, demanding greater democracy andhumiliating the government. For seven weeks, the government hadresponded with tolerance and restraint.   Then, at 2 a.m. Sunday, June 4, barely two weeks after Gorbachevleft Beijing, a convoy of trucks accompanied by 10,000 footsoldiers of the People's Liberation Army swept through the streetsand opened fire on the crowds.   By 5 a.m., the square was empty, except for the charred hulks ofvehicles and debris left by the protesters. Hundreds _ perhapsthousands _ were dead.   The United States condemned China's military crackdown on thepro-democracy demonstrators. At year's end, controversialfence-mending visits by National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroftwere followed by signs of a warming between the two countries.   3. Early on March 24, the tanker Exxon Valdez strayed off courseand struck a reef in Alaska, spilling 11 million gallons of crudeoil into the pristine waters of Prince William Sound.   The spilled oil contaminated 1,000 miles of coastline and killedtens of thousands of shore birds, including 138 bald eagles.   Volunteers from the lower 48 states, responding to news photosof oil-soaked otters and crippled birds, joined Alaska fishermenhosing down beaches, rescuing wildlife and wiping off rocks, one ata time. Ultimately, more than 2.6 million gallons of oil wasrecovered.   The worst oil disaster in U.S. history sullied Exxon'sreputation as well as Alaska's coast. It also resulted in criminalcharges against Exxon Valdez Capt. Joseph Hazelwood, 42, who wasfired amid allegations he'd been drunk at the time of the accident.is trial is scheduled to begin Jan. 22.   4. As 58,000 fans packed San Francisco's Candlestick Park with21 minutes to go before the start of the World Series' third gamebetween the Oakland A's and the Giants, television screens acrossAmerica suddenly went black.   The nation's next look at San Francisco was of a city indarkness except for a fire fed by open gas lines in the MarinaDistrict and the headlights of thousands of vehicles inching alongin countless traffic jams.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>