<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890407-0097 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-04-07-89 1106EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Gorbachev-Text 2ndAdd   04-07 0957</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Gorbachev-Text, 2nd Add,0982</SECOND><HEAD>LONDON: our deeds.</HEAD><TEXT>   As I have already announced, our armed forces will be reduced by500,000 men, which is 12 percent of their total strength, during1989-1990. The military budget will be cut by over 14 percent, andthe production of weapons by nearly 20 percent. We have alreadyactually started implementing this program.   I take this opportunity to tell you that we have recentlydecided to cease this year the production of enriched weapons-gradeuranium.   In addition to the industrial reactor for the production ofweapons-grade plutonium shut down in 1987, we plan to shut down twoother such reactors this and next year without commissioning newunits to replace them. This is yet another major step towards thecomplete cessation of production of fissionable materials for usein weapons.   The elimination of chemical weapons is a most important problemin efforts to demilitarize international politics.   We appreciate the position of Great Britain which has eliminatedits chemical weapons unilaterally and was the first to raise thisissue at an international conference. Our bilateral cooperation hasbeen quite good.   Soviet experts have visited the British research center inPortadown while British experts have visited our center. We havecompleted the construction of a facility for the destruction ofchemical weapons and intend to invite soon your representatives tovisit it.   The Soviet Union will be vigorously working for an earlyconclusion of a global international convention on the completeprohibition and elimination of chemical weapons.   We have adopted several important decisions for the conversionof our military industries. A considerable number of defensefactories and design bureaus and their related research potentialare becoming involved in manufacturing consumer goods, machinery,equipment and other facilities and products for agriculture and thelight and food industries.   A substantial number of military transport aircraft will be usedfor carrying civilian cargoes.   The Soviet Union has made several major steps towardtransparency of its military activities.   We have already stated that we are going soon to make public ourdefense budget data. This will be done by the new Supreme Soviet ofthe U.S.S.R. The difficulty here is that the non-convertibility ofthe ruble hampers an objective comparison of our militaryexpenditures with those of the West. We are looking for the mostappropriate way of presenting our data.   As for the numerical strength of the armed forces, I can now saythe following. As of Jan. 1 this year, they number 4,258,000 menincluding 1,596,000 in the ground forces and 437,300 in the navy,while missile forces, air defense troops, the air force and combatsupport and logistics forces account for the rest of that figure.   After the unilateral reduction of our armed forces their totalstrength by the end of 1990 will be approximately 3,760,000.   By way of comparison, the total strength of the U.S. armedforces including the National Guard (in our country similarcomponents are integrated in the armed forces) exceeds 3,000,000.It should be noted that the strength of the U.S. Navy is more thandouble that of the Soviet Union.   We have published data on the military potentials of the WarsawTreaty organization and NATO in Europe. They show approximateparity.   The comparison between the armed forces of the Warsaw Treatyorganization and NATO as a whole, including strategic nuclearforces, gives the following figures for the Warsaw Treatyorganization: 5.3 million men, 10,500 aircraft, 4,200 combathelicopters, 80,000 tanks, 160 large surface ships. NATO issuperior to the Warsaw Treaty organization in all those componentswith the exception of tanks.   In short, fears about the ``Soviet military threat'' aregroundless.   Negotiations and a search for compromise between major countriesinvolved in the protracted arms race would clear the way to areduced level of military confrontation, fewer weapons and a lessonerous burden of military expenditures.   In this regard the Vienna document and the start of the talks onreductions in the armed forces and armaments in Europe and onconfidence-building measures are an event without precedent in thenuclear age. The Soviet Union is prepared to take very far-reachingsteps toward a demilitarization of Europe and in the overallEuropean process.   We are prepared to engage in a most constructive dialogue andcooperation with Great Britain concerning all matters relative tothe concluding document of the Vienna meeting.   It is well known that we are opposed to unjustified linkages indisarmament matters. We do not make agreement on one issuecontingent on a solution to another. But this is rather a problemof how best to organize the negotiating process. Objectivelyspeaking, in our century everything is linked.   So, of course, there can be no doubt that, if for instance, NATOgoes ahead with its program of ``modernizing'' tactical nuclearweapons, this is bound to affect the Vienna talks,confidence-building measures and the situation in Europe ingeneral. This is bound to devalue much of what has been achievedunder the INF treaty.   In this context it is appropriate for me to recall once againthat Britain contributed to creating conditions for making thetreaty possible.   We strongly oppose any plans for the modernization of nuclearweapons. We are not modernizing, nor do we intend to modernize themunless we are made to. I believe that common sense will prevail.   We are convinced that the time has come to start negotiations onreducing Soviet and U.S. naval forces and those of the Warsawtreaty and the north Atlantic alliance.   The question of 50 percent reductions in Soviet and U.S.strategic offensive arms continues to be on top of the agenda ofour relations with the United States. We are ready to resumenegotiations at any time.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>