<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891116-0198 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-11-16-89 2218EST</FILEID><FIRST>u a AM-SouthernTornadoes 3rdLd-Writethru a0813 11-16 1138</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Southern Tornadoes, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0813,1167</SECOND><HEAD>Huntsville Picks Up Pieces One Day After Killer Tornado</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: Fixes paragraphing in 1st 2 grafs; SUBS 2nd graf to raise referenceto Illinois death; SUBS grafs 10-13, `The cafeteria ... Hughes said' with6 grafs to UPDATE with up to 125 children in school, dead ages 7 to 8,four injured critically, power outages in Connecticut; picks up 14th graf,`Tornadoes were ...'</HEAD><HEAD>LaserPhotos HUN1,2,3,5,10,13, MFD1, LaserColor HUN10</HEAD><BYLINE>By PAUL NEWBERRY</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   A violent storm that spun tornadoes across the South and Midwestblew north Thursday, knocking a cafeteria wall down on top oflunching schoolchildren in upstate New York. The two-day toll wasat least 27 dead and hundreds injured.   The cafeteria cave-in claimed the lives of seven children nearNewburgh, N.Y., and deaths also were reported in New York City, NewJersey and Illinois. Seventeen people died Wednesday in Huntsville,Ala., when a tornado packing 250 mph winds struck virtually withoutwarning, laying waste to a wide swath of the city.   The storm churned around a collision of record warm air andextremely cold air. The result was tornadoes and unusually severethunderstorms.   By far the worst damage was in Huntsville, where an estimated1,000 people were left homeless and National Guardsmen stood watchagainst looting Thursday.   No bodies were believed left in the rubble, but portions of thecity resembled a bombing target. A shopping center and clusters ofapartment buildings were leveled. Cars were piled atop each other.Utility poles had been snapped like twigs.   The National Weather Service said the tornado path had coveredbetween eight and 10 miles and that its wind speeds were as high as250 mph.   ``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in ablender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker Bob Caraway.   As the storm moved north on Thursday, it knocked over trees andripped the the roofs off houses in West Virginia, injuring fourmembers of one family, two seriously. The storm also causedflooding in Washington, D.C., blew the windows out of skyscrapersin Philadelphia and destroyed a house in Piscataway, N.J.   A truck driver died when his tractor-trailer overturned in highwinds on a bridge connecting Elizabeth, N.J., and New York City. ANew York City woman died after being hit by a steel beam blown offa water tower.   In Wyckoff, N.J., high winds knocked a power line onto a gasline, sparking a fire that forced the evacuation of 20 homes,according to police. No houses were burned.   The cafeteria collapse occurred at the East Coldenham ElementarySchool in Newburgh at about 12:30 p.m., when from 113 to 125students in first, second and third grades were eating lunch, saidNewburgh police Chief John Kulisek.   State Police and survivors said they believed the school was hitby a tornado, but the National Weather Service said it could notconfirm that until investigators went to the scene.   The center section of a cinder-block and glass wall fell in onthe cafeteria, showering the pupils with glass and concrete.   ``You are talking about huge concrete blocks that fell on top ofthe kids,'' state police Lt. Robert Hughes said.   Seven children ages 7 and 8 were killed and 18 others wereinjured, four critically, officials said.   In eastern Connecticut, more than 75,000 Northeast Utilitiescustomers lost power in the afternoon, and 18,000 remained withoutpower at 9 p.m., spokeman Jeffery Kotkin said.   Tornadoes were reported Wednesday in Mississippi, Alabama,Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Kentucky, Ohio andIndiana. A severe thunderstorm in Illinois claimed one life andcaused several million dollars in damage.   Altogether, the storms were blamed for at least 27 deaths andmore than 500 injuries over the two days.   In Alabama, Gov. Guy Hunt said he would ask President Bush todeclare Huntsville a disaster area to open the door to millions ofdollars in federal relief. Mayor Steve Hettinger said no firmdamage estimates were expected until Friday, but he put the numberof homeless at 1,000.   Hunt assigned nearly 200 Guardsmen to assist in the cleanup andhelp law officers guard against looting. Police spokeswoman SusanWilliamson said there had been minor looting the night of the stormbut no arrests.   The temperature, which had risen to 73 before the stormWednesday, plunged into the 30s early Thursday while rescuersworked through the night under the glare of floodlights.   The lights, powered by generators, produced an eerie glow in aarea that was otherwise largely without power. Tall cranes liftedthe heavy rubble, while workers with flashlights picked through thesmaller pieces.   As daybreak came, people began returning to the scene, some tolook for valuables in ravaged cars or businesses, others simply outof curiosity. Many carried cameras or videocassette recorders.   Police Maj. Robert Moder said there was no indication thatanyone was left in the rubble.   ``We don't have any reports of people missing,'' he saidThursday morning.   Moder said 463 people were injured and more than 150 of thoserequired at least overnight hospital treatment. Authorities hadsaid 19 people were killed but later lowered the death toll by two.   All but one of the victims, who ranged in age from 7 to 67, werekilled along Airport Boulevard, a busy thoroughfare that seemed tobe a guide for the tornado on its deadly march. The other victimperished on the city's outskirts, authorities said.   Most of the dead were in apartments and stores that were torninto twisted wreckage, or in cars blown off the pavement.   The tornado seemed to catch everyone by surprise.   ``It was fast,'' said Lucy Lee Rusk, who moved to a Red Crossshelter after her apartment was battered by debris. ``It was likeone big pop and that's when everything went.''   The National Weather Service had issued a severe thunderstormwarning at 3:54 p.m., but the tornado struck with no real warning,said Brenda Page of the service's office. A tornado warning wasbroadcast at 4:39 p.m., two minutes after the twister was sightedon the ground at the old Huntsville airport.   Ms. Page said radar showed a strong storm but not the conditionsusually visible during tornadoes.   Danny Cooper, director of the Alabama Emergency ManagementAgency, said three people were seriously injured in an earliertornado that hit a home in Clay County in eastern Alabama. He saida tornado in northwestern Alabama's Lauderdale County destroyedthree homes.   Alabama Power Co. reported Thursday that violent winds hadbattered the switchyard of the Farley Nuclear Power Plant nearDothan on Wednesday night, causing about three gallons ofconcentrated PCBs to spill. A spokesman said no one was injured,the nuclear plant was not affected and a cleanup of thecancer-causing chemicals was under way.</TEXT></DOC>