<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890510-0269 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-05-10-89 1233EST</FILEID><FIRST>u f PM-FSLIC-KidderPeabody     05-10 0275</FIRST><SECOND>PM-FSLIC-Kidder Peabody,0284</SECOND><HEAD>Sue Brokerage Over Collapsed Calif. Thrift</HEAD><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Federal regulators said today they've suedWall Street brokerage Kidder Peabody andamp; Co. and a California-basedinvestment group for $24 million over activities linked to thefailure of a savings and loan.   The civil complaint of the Federal Savings and Loan InsuranceCorp., filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleges thatthe insolvency of Seapointe Savings and Loan in Carlsbad, Calif.,was the result of the defendants' violation of laws and regulationsgoverning trading by Sandamp;Ls in securities, futures and commodityoptions, as well as breaches of duty.   Also named in the suit were Strategic Investment Services;Robert Peacock, an account manager at Kidder, Peabody; Dirk Rose,president of SIS; and Robert Forrest, a director of SIS.   The complaint charges that, rather than hedging to protectSeapointe's assets, the trading conducted by Kidder, Peabody andSIS amounted to risky speculation.   In addition, the regulators charged that the defendants knewthat Seapointe's directors were inexperienced in securities,futures and commodity options trading, and that SIS maderepresentations to further its own interests without regard tothose of Seapointe Savings.   Kidder, Peabody allegedly abetted SIS by failing to warnSeapointe of SIS's fraudulent acts, according to the complaint.   On May 30, 198l replied: ``In one year, he will speak English verywell.''   ``A real interesting diplomatic challenge,'' Steger called it.   Other international support includes the use of China's GreatWall Station on King George Island as a staging point. NewZealanders stationed at the Scott McArdle base donated 12 dogswhose lineage can be traced to dogs owned by polar explorer RichardByrd. The Soviet Union provided an icebreaker to transport 15 tonsof food for the men and 36 dogs; the provisions were cached on theroute in November. The USSR also plans to send a military cargoplane to pick up the team from its rendezvous at Steger's Minnesotacamp; the U.S. State Department, while not officially sanctioningthe trek, is expected to let the plane land.   After refueling in Cuba, the team will fly to the Great WallBase, about 600 miles south of the tip of South America. Theexpedition, which will set out in the middle of the Austral winter,will at first follow known landmarks.   ``We'll have maps for the first 1,500 miles. The last 2,500miles there is virtually nothing. It's flat. There's nothing tomap,'' Steger said.   They'll cross the Ellsworth Mountains and skirt Mt. Vinson, thecontinent's highest spot at 16,860 feet. They'll visit threeAmerican bases _ Palmer, Siple and Amundsen-Scott at the SouthPole, where they plan to celebrate Christmas.   The next dot of civilization they'll aim for is the Soviet baseat Vostok, near the magnetic south pole. Vostok, the coldest placeon Earth, will serve as a base for a French documentary film crewthat will travel with the expedition for three weeks, and for theteam's pilot.   By March, the trekkers should reach the Soviet base of Mirnyy onthe east coast, also known as Queen Mary Coast, ending the longestpossible traverse.   They'll be picked up by the expedition ship, built in Francewith a special aluminum hull designed to pop up and settle intacton top of the ice rather than be trapped and crushed.   So far, about 45 nations have signed television contracts withthe expedition. ABC has bought exclusive U.S. TV rights. ``We wantthe world to know much, much more about Antarctica after ourexpedition than it did before we set out,'' Steger said.   The continent is roughly the shape of a bottle cap. It risessharply at the perimeter, then flattens out in a vast, high plateauat an average elevation of 9,500 feet. Antarctica's 5.4 millionsquare miles is more than China and India combined. It has noindigenous people, and wildlife is confined to the coast.   A treaty signed in 1959 by a dozen nations, with additionalsignatories in subsequent years, put all territorial claims onAntarctica on hold, banned military activity and establishedfreedom of scientific inquiry.   But many countries now have designs on the land for strategic,political and even economic reasons _ some expect to find oil, coaland mineral deposits under the ice. Some want to see the continentcut into pie-shaped wedges, but Steger wants the people of theworld to demand that it be protected, intact.   ``It sounds like a very lofty goal, but Antarctica is a going toplay a very important role in the future of the planet,'' he said.   Planetary warming of just a few degrees could melt the polar icecaps, raising sea level and flooding coastal areas, but Steger saidit's simplistic to worry about submerged cities. With 85 percent ofthe planet's fresh water stored in the snow and ice of Antarctica,a thaw would reduce the salinity of the oceans, change oceancurrents and wreak havoc with weather patterns.   The other environmental nightmare awakening interest inAntarctica is the discovery of a giant hole in the ozone layerdirectly over the continent. Ozone screens the planet from excessultraviolet radiation.   Scientists predict continued ozone depletion will increase skincancer, but such thinking is ``myopic,'' Steger said. Mostsignificantly, increased solar radiation could disrupt thereproduction cycles of plankton, the microscopic oceanic plants andanimals that are the basis of the global food chain.   These ominous changes are most apparent in Antarctica, making it``like a canary in a mine,'' Steger said.   The team will be under the ozone hole for about 40 days and 500miles as they cross a 13,000-foot high plateau known as the Area ofInaccessibility. It's the worst possible place on earth forultraviolet exposure.   The team will carry a monitor and Boyarsky will record ozonelevels at regular intervals, the first cross-section of ozoneacross the continent.   Qin will take snow and ice samples all the way acrossAntarctica, recording temperatures and oxygen content for ageological history of the icecap.   Etienne, a physician, will monitor cholesterol levels of theteam members, who will rely on the high-fat diet typical ofcultures in cold regions.   But the experiments that can be done along the way are limitedby time and weight. The trekkers plan to travel 30 miles a day oncross-country skis, and the three dogsleds can carry no more than900 pounds of gear.   Steger admits they won't attempt ``pure science'' but he hopesthe findings will contribute to the knowledge of this frontier.``We need international cooperation. Solutions to environmentalproblems must be global.''</TEXT></DOC>