<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890910-0023 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-09-10-89 1338EDT</FILEID><FIRST>u w AM-DoomsdayProject Bjt   09-10 1067</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Doomsday Project, Bjt,900</SECOND><HEAD>Burglaries Alleged in Secret Project for Surviving Nuclear War</HEAD><BYLINE>By PETE YOST</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   A federal contractor who reported problems inthe so-called ``Doomsday Project,'' a top-secret program designed tokeep the government running after a nuclear war, asserts in a sealedlawsuit that the Federal Emergency Management Agency burglarized hisoffices.   The alleged break-ins occurred after the contractor, retired Armymajor Fred Westerman, rejected a demand by FEMA to turn over all hiscorporate records to a business competitor, according to the suitfiled in federal court.   Westerman was kicked out of the secret program less than twomonths after he refused to surrender the documents, which he stillhas.   An Army counterintelligence officer for 20 years, Westermanstarted telling superiors about security and management problems inthe Continuity of Government program in 1986, according togovernment sources, speaking on condition of anonymity.   COG is the nation's contingency plan for reconstituting thegovernment in the event of a nuclear attack. While almost alldetails are secret, it is known to involve mobile communicationsnetworks, supply depots and a system of underground bunkers.   The program was dubbed the ``Doomsday Project'' in a recent U.S.News andamp; World Report article. The magazine reported that thePentagon, the Justice Department and the House Armed ServicesCommittee all are conducting investigations into security andperformance problems in the program.   FEMA and the Justice Department both refuse to discuss the COGprogram or Westerman's lawsuit. In addition, the government obtaineda gag order to prevent the contractor from discussing his case.   Westerman and his lawyer, Frank Mroz, both declined to commentwhen asked about the suit.   Under a contract with the Army Corps of Engineers, Westerman'ssmall company provided security and other services to FEMA forportions of the COG program in five states.   He reported that alarm and security systems at highly classifiedlocations were faulty and that his employees were exposed todangerous chemicals that had leaked from containers at severalfacilities, according to the sources. Westerman also reported thatwater had seeped onto high-voltage electrical lines in one area andthat engine parts were falling off emergency vehicles parked atseveral facilities, the sources said.   In one instance, Westerman reported that the government removedan alarm system and installed a new one that provided less securitythan the one it replaced, said the sources.   Westerman frequently was pressured by his superiors not to makeany complaints at all, the sources added.   On Nov. 20, 1987, representatives from FEMA, the Army Corps ofEngineers and the Maryland company of Brogan Associates Inc. came toWesterman's offices, according to copies of the lawsuit obtained byThe Associated Press from sources other than parties in the case.   FEMA employee Robert Lorenz and Army Corps officer Gerald Boggsdemanded that Westerman turn over all his corporate documents,communications, records, invoices and checkbooks to Brogan presidentArthur Hutchins, the suit says.   Boggs told Westerman then and in subsequent weeks that if herefused to turn over the documents, he would not be awarded a newfive-year contract, according to the lawsuit.   Lorenz, a specialist in FEMA's operations security division,threatened to put Westerman's company out of business, according tothe lawsuit.   The meeting ended with Westerman in possession of his corporaterecords.   FEMA, Brogan's company and the Corps of Engineers then ``didunlawfully ... break into Corporate Headquarters'' of Westerman'scompany, Systems Evaluation Inc., Westerman alleges in the suit.   Westerman, according to several sources, says that the first ofat least four burglaries occurred within 48 hours of his Nov. 20meeting and that the others occurred over the next three months.   Four weeks after the meeting, Boggs told Westerman thatnegotiations for the new five-year contract were being terminated``due to all the things that ... (had) taken place,'' the suit says.   Last month, U.S. District Court Judge Norma Johnson placed a gagorder on Westerman which prohibited him from discussing his casewith anyone, even members of Congress. Westerman subsequentlywithdrew his suit and refiled it in federal court in Alexandria, Va.   Government searches of premises ordinarily require a searchwarrant signed by judges, and law enforcement agencies such as theFBI ordinarily are the agencies that execute them. Under a nationalsecurity directive, the attorney general can approve a surreptitiousentry for intelligence purposes targeting a foreign power or anagent of a foreign power.   Westerman suspects FEMA placed him under surveillance and tappedhis telephones, according to another suit he filed against thefederal agency.   That suit invoked the Freedom of Information Act in demandingthat FEMA turn over any records gathered as the result of``surveillance ... telephone taps ... or any other electroniclistening device.''   U.S. District Court Judge Albert Bryan dismissed that case Sept.1 at a hearing where government lawyers refused to confirm or denythat the agency had any such records pertaining to Westerman.   In dismissing it, Bryan relied on a secret declaration thegovernment filed with the judge and which Westerman and his attorneywere not permitted to see.   After being pushed out of the program in January 1988, Westermanwent to the FBI, the inspector general's office at FEMA and theJustice Department to detail ``irregularities'' in COG, according toan affidavit he filed with the U.S. Court of Claims.   The affidavit does not elaborate on the irregularities.   In June, the U.S. attorney's office informed Westerman that hehimself had become the target of a criminal investigation inconnection with his work for COG.   The criminal inquiry has frozen Westerman's case in claims court,where he is seeking to recover $500,000. Even though he is no longerdoing work for the government, he is locked into paying long-termleases for office space and equipment that he would have used in hiswork for COG.   The FEMA public affairs office refused to comment on the suit.The public affairs office at the Army Corps of Engineers referredquestions to the Army judge advocate general's office, which saidthe Justice Department would handle any inquiries. JusticeDepartment lawyer Alan Ferber, who is defending the government inthe lawsuit, referred questions to spokeswoman Amy Brown, whodeclined to comment.   Brogan president Arthur Hutchins has not returned telephone callsfor the past month, and a lawyer representing the company did notrespond to calls the past week.</TEXT></DOC>