<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890604-0018 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-04-89 1156EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i AM-Obit-Khomeini 1stAdd a0692 06-04 0874</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Obit-Khomeini, 1st Add, a0692,0898</SECOND><HEAD>UNDATED: not exist.</HEAD><TEXT>   It exploded in January 1978, after a Tehran newspaper printed ananti-Khomeini letter, reportedly instigated by the informationminister, and the ayatollah's supporters took to the streets.Government forces crushed the demonstrations.   Khomeini, from his distant sanctuary, emerged as the moral focusof a burgeoning revolution, and Iran's 150,000 Shiite clergymen andtheir network of mosques were the organizational structure.   The shah, his rule threatened, had Khomeini expelled fromneighboring Iraq. The ayatollah and his close advisers settled inFrance in October 1978. His four months there formed his onlyexperience outside the Middle East.   From a Paris suburb, Khomeini sent his political message intoIran through thousands of cassette recordings and the moderntelephone system the shah had installed to link Iran with Europe.   In Tehran, the cycle of protest and strike built to a bloodycrescendo, and on Jan. 16, 1979, Pahlavi fled the country. On Feb.1, after more than 14 years in exile, Khomeini returned to hishomeland amid the adulation of millions. The shah's last governmentcollapsed 10 days later.   But the revolution was far from finished. Bloodletting far worsethan anything seen in the struggle against the shah loomed as therevolution, like others before it, began to devour its children.   In March 1979, Iranians voted overwhelmingly for an ``IslamicRepublic.'' Its constitution made Shiite Islam the state religion,gave a council of clergymen veto power over legislation, andenshrined Khomeini as supreme leader for life.   Leftists, liberals, Western-trained technocrats and othersresisted the clergy's attempts to rule solely by the Koran, theIslamic holy book. Even some high-ranking clergymen disputedKhomeini's claims to power. The grand coalition that overthrew theshah began to fall apart.   Then, on Nov. 4, 1979, Iranian militants describing themselvesas followers of the ``imam's line'' seized the U.S. Embassy andhostages in Tehran. The showdown with the United States, whichKhomeini described as a ``war between the Moslems and the pagans,''heightened tensions between hard-liners and moderates in Iran.   Within days, the revolution's first prime minister,Western-educated Mehdi Bazargan, resigned. By the time the 52hostages were finally released in January 1981, the hard-liners hadwon.   The power struggle climaxed five months later when PresidentAbolhassan Bani-Sadr, a layman economist open to compromise withthe outside world, was fired by Khomeini and fled into exile.   Opposition to the theocracy grew bloodier. The leftistunderground Mujahedeen Khalq, or People's Holy Warriors, embarkedon an assassination and bombing campaign that killed thousands ofrevolutionary officials and security men. The Khomeini regimeresponded with mass arrests and executions.   The confirmed toll of executions reached 6,108 by 1985 _including former officials of the old regime, dissidentrevolutionaries, members of the Bahai religious sect, and sex anddrug offenders.   But the human rights group Amnesty International said the actualtotal must have been considerably higher. The Mujahedeen Khalqclaimed 40,000 people had been executed.   A new wave of executions killed hundreds and perhaps thousandsin 1988 and 1989 during maneuvering for post-Khomeini power.   In the war with Iraq, meanwhile, Khomeini for eight yearsdemanded the ouster and trial of Iraqi President Hussein as acondition for peace.   By 1982, Iranian forces had driven the invaders back into Iraq,and later Iranians conquered some Iraqi territory but at a terriblecost. U.S. officials estimated at least a half-million Iranianswere killed or wounded in the war.   The war ended with a cease-fire in August 1988 after a series ofIraqi victories drove the Iranians from Iraqi territory.   Khomeini said acceptance of the cease-fire ``is more deadly tome than poison'' but that it was the will of God and therecommendation of his political and military advisers.   Because of the war, revolutionary turmoil and mismanagement,Iranians endured economic hardship under Khomeini. Food staples andother essentials were rationed, and possibly one-third of Iran'sworkers were jobless.   The hardship and turmoil was a fertile field for potentialsuccessors to till, particularly after Khomeini dumped hisdesignated successor, Montazeri. A leading contender was HashemiRafsanjani, the parliament speaker and, since June 1988, actingcommander-in-chief, credited with bringing Iran to the cease-fire.   But the ayatollah was a deft politician, ``sitting on top of itall, balancing factions off against each other,'' said one U.S.official.   His death sentence against British author Salman Rushdie inFebruary 1989 for Rushdie's harsh anti-Islamic satire in the novel``The Satanic Verses'' was seen as a move to counter a moderatetrend among Iranian leaders who wanted to normalize relations withthe West.   Khomeini continued the effort to institutionalize the Islamicrevolution, naming in April 1989 a 20-man committee to revise theconstitution and ensure a strong leadership system.   The Iranian leader usually sounded uncompromising, but he couldbe thoroughly pragmatic.   ``According to need, I say one thing today that I contradicttomorrow,'' Bani-Sadr, a longtime Khomeini protege, once quotedKhomeini as saying.   His daughter Zahra, head of the Iranian Women's Association,said Khomeini was absorbed in the Koran, the Moslem holy book, andaffairs of state from morning until night, even taking the radio tothe bathroom with him.   ``His self-discipline is unbelievable,'' she said in a talk topupils reported by a Tehran paper.</TEXT></DOC>