<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890517-0172 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-05-17-89 1803EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i AM-Afghanistan-Rebels     05-17 0618</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Afghanistan-Rebels,0641</SECOND><HEAD>Rebels Deny They Have Abandoned Fight for Jalalabad</HEAD><HEAD>With AM-Afghanistan</HEAD><BYLINE>By BRYAN WILDER</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Afghan rebels said Wednesday theyhave not abandoned their fight for the besieged eastern city ofJalalabad, but are reorganizing for assaults on othercommunist-held cities in Afghanistan.   The Moslem guerrillas and Western diplomats reported freshfighting in the war-torn country, including the destruction byguerrillas of a northern ammunition dump laden with Soviet weapons.   A seven-party guerrilla alliance based in Pakistan issued astatement Wednesday describing reports they had given up the fightfor Jalalabad as ``baseless.''   An Afghan Foreign Ministry spokesman told Western reporters inKabul, the capital, Tuesday that guerrillas had given up onJalalabad and turned their attention on Khost, about 84 miles tothe south.   Rebels confirmed the fighting at Khost and said a recent lull infighting at Jalalabad probably was due to a visit there byguerrilla leader Yunis Khalis.   Khalis, elderly head of the hardline Hezb-i-Islami rebel group,is reportedly meeting with field commanders to map out new tacticsto break a nearly three-month old stalemate at Jalalabad.   Communist government forces finally launched a counterattacklate last week but guerrillas pushed them back, using some of theirown captured tanks, according to combined reports.   The rebels, backed primarily by Pakistan and the United States,have vowed to fight on until the collapse of Kabul's rulingMarxists and the establishment of an Islamic republic ofAfghanistan.   The People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan seized power in abloody 1978 military coup, sparking the Moslem insurgency. Sovietforces intervened in December 1979 to prop up the government butfinally withdrew in February under a U.N.-brokered acord.   With a harsh winter behind them, the rebels say they arepreparing major assaults on Kabul and the southeastern city ofKandahar.   One rebel commander, Mohammad Nasir, said about 30,000 rebelswere organizing to attack the heavily fortified capital as early asthis weekend.   However, a rival commander said he thought Nasir was boasting.   ``We are making careful plans for Kabul to avoid the samemistakes as Jalalabad,'' said Abdul Haq of the Khalis faction,reputed to be the most powerful of rebel commanders in the Kabularea.   He was referring to criticism that rebels attacked Jalalabadbefore they were sufficiently armed and organized.   ``We're working on detailed plans as to how and when. ... ButI'm not going to print my plans in the newspapers,'' Haq said on avisit to Peshawar, Pakistan.   Rebel sources said some rebel commanders are holding out fornegotiations with government troops in order to avoid civilianbloodshed.   Rebel reorts Wednesday said guerrillas blew up a majorammunition dumpat Mazar-i-Sharif, capital of northern Balkhprovince some 36 miles from the Soviet border, around May 7.   Masood Khalili, a spokesman of the Jamiat-i-Islami rebel group,said the blast killed 360 communist soldiers and wounded 100. Hesaid at least 175 Soviet-built tanks and armored personnel carrierswere destroyed in two days of fires and secondary explosions.   Unconfirmed reports said the communists plan to shift theircapital to Mazar-i-Sharif if Kabul falls to the rebels.   In another development, a Soviet official in London chargedWednesday that the United States and Pakistan have failed to honorthe accord on Afghanistan by continuing to provide military andmoral support to the guerrillas.   ``Pakistan and the United States, when they were signing theGeneva accords, it se They can't tellauthorities wh options to utilize,'' said Rep. Frank Pallone Jr.,as a House rine and fisheries subcommittee presentations on a range of technologies used he subcommittee, in its secondday of reports on compliancewith the Ocean Dumping Act of 1988, examined ways that nine NewYork and New Jersey sludge dumpers could dispose of their wastesand meet the Dec. 31, 1991, deadline to cease sludge dumping.   Sally Lentz, staff attorney for the non-profit Oceanic Society,said a lawsuit filed by six New Jersey communities against EPA tochallenge stiff fines being imposed for an inability to stopdumping by 1991 has set back the process and could jeopardize thepublic's input into local compliance plans.   Ms. Lentz also cautioned the committee that it is virtuallyimpossible to quantify environmental damage from sludge dumped at adesignated site 106 miles off the New Jersey shore, and, on thatbasis, said she was disappointed in the way the EPA has discountedpotential health effects linked to sludge.   New Jersey Democratic Rep. William J. Hughes said Garden Statecommunities trying to implement dumping alternatives could benefitfrom an information clearinghouse. However, he was quick to praisethe EPA's overall performance in encouraging compliance from thedumpers.   ``I recognize it's often popular to jump on the EnvironmentalProtection Agency. My constituents want us to stop dumpingyesterday,'' Hughes said.   ``Region II (of the EPA) is making an impressive and enormouseffort,'' said Lynne Edgerton, a coastal protection attorney withthe Natural Resources Defense Council. However, she warned thatcommunities' commitment to a single solution, such as incineration,``excludes any opportunity to re-use this material.''   L. Jack Davis, a former EPA regional administrator in Atlantaand Dallas who now serves as president of Dallas-based OxidyneCorp., acknowledged the need to provide guidance to communitiesseeking to dispose of their sludge.   ``EPA has a very undirected research program,'' said Davis,whose company injects the sludge and organic waste into a mile-deepwell, where it is treated and converted into carbon dioxide, ashand water that requires further purification.   David Greenhut, director of marketing and new productdevelopment for Kubota America Corp., said Kubota transforms sludgeinto a chemically stable, glass-like material ``which in turn isused in the production of ceramic tiles, cinder blocks, groundcover, drainage fill, and in asphaltic and cement mixes.''   The Kubota end-product contains the metals found in sewagesludge, but in an inert form, he said. Japan has approved the finalproduct as a substitute for landfill sand, improving agent for poordrainage land, anti-water penetrant agent for tennis courts andplaygrounds, pavement material for light-load roads and bedding forpipes.   Ernest A. Kollitides, president and chief operating officer ofDehydro-Tech Corp., of East Hanover, N.J., said his firm has beenusing its patented Carver-Greenfield Process to evaporate theliquid from sludge using a light oil. With that process, which isbeing installed at sludge plants in Mercer and Ocean counties inNew Jersey, the resulting dry solids can be used as fertilizer oras fuel to produce steam and electricity.   The left-over water is clean and requires only minimaltreatment, he said, and the oil-soluble compounds in the sludge areremoved, such as pesticides, herbicides, polychlorinated biphenyls,dioxins and cleaning fluids.   Kollitides said Mercer County Improvement Authority communitiesin New Jersey will feed raw sludge to their Carver-Greenfieldfacility, which will produce fertilizer and burn sewage oil fromthe sludge to produce steam to power the process.</TEXT></DOC>