<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890305-0050 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-03-05-89 1706EST</FILEID><FIRST>u a AM-WeatherpageWeather     03-05 0787</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Weatherpage Weather,0803</SECOND><HEAD>Severe Weather, Flooding Rain, And Winter Weather</HEAD><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Severe thunderstorms spread large hail, heavy rain and damagingwind across parts of the South on Sunday, and a cascade of frigidair dropped temperatures to record lows from the northern Plainsinto Texas.   Scottsbluff, Neb., hit its second coldest day on record for anytime of year at 21 degrees below zero, 13 degrees below the formerrecord for March 5. The day's official low for the Lower 48 stateswas 24 below zero at Chadron, Neb., the National Weather Servicesaid.   An area of low pressure over east-central Mississippi and warm,moist, unstable air produced an area of intense thunderstorms oversections of Mississippi and Tennessee.   Severe thunderstorms toppled trees in Covington County, Miss.,near Guin, Ala., and at Wayside Community, Ala. Homes were damaged,and trees and power lines were blown down by thunderstorm wind nearPhil Campbell, Ala., the weather service said.   In Russellville, Ala., two children died in a house fire that wasset by lightning, but their father saved his wife and two otherchildren by hurling them through a second-story window.   Hail as big as golf balls fell from severe thunderstorms inMississippi at Morgantown, Goss, west of Magee, near Stringer and inCovington County, and north of Birmingham, Ala., the weather servicesaid.   During the six hours up to 1 p.m. EST, 2.04 inches of rain fellat Columbus, Miss.; 1.71 inches fell at London, Ky.; 1.54 inchesfell at Meridian, Miss., and 1.10 inches fell at Huntington, W.Va.   An area of snow, freezing rain and sleet spread fromnorth-central Texas across Arkansas and southern Missouri, with 3 to6 inches of snow over much of north-central Texas. Wichita Falls,Texas, had 9 inches of snow and Nocona, Texas, got 11 inches andstrong northwesterly wind piled up snow drifts 2 to 3 feet deep, theweather service said.   Freezing rain and sleet blanketed much of central Arkansas andeastern Oklahoma.   Freezing rain also extended from east-central Indiana acrossnorthern Ohio into western New York state.   The low pressure system over Mississippi was expected to moveacross sections of the Ohio Valley during the night and throughMonday, and winter storm watches were posted for southeasternMissouri, west-central Illinois, southern and central Indiana,western Kentucky, southern Ohio and sections of Pennsylvania.   Lake effect snow fed by moisture from Lake Michigan fell oversoutheastern Wisconsin, with up to 2 inches reported.   Elsewhere, a cold front over the Pacific Northwest spread rainacross Oregon and Washington state, and a mixture of snow andfreezing rain fell over the Cascade range in Washington state. Inthe six hours up to 1 p.m. EST, Eugene, Ore., got 1 inch of rain.   Unseasonably cold weather spread over much of the Plains states,with overnight temperatures expected to plunge to the 20s and 30s asfar south as south-central Texas. McAllen, in the southern tip ofTexas, had a high of 99 on Saturday but reached only about 58 Sunday.   Other record lows for the date were 27 at Austin, Texas; 20 atDallas-Fort Worth; 5 below zero at Denver; 14 below at Huron, S.D.;11 at Lubbock, Texas; 11 at Midland, Texas; 23 at Waco, Texas, and16 at Wichita Falls, Texas. Grand Island, Neb., tied its record of 1below zero.   Temperatures around the nation at 2 p.m. EST ranged from 4degrees at Lemmon, S.D., to 87 at Valdosta, Ga., and St. Petersburg,Fla. Sunday's low in the Lower 48 states was 24 degrees below zeroat Chadron, Neb.   For Monday, snow was forecast from western Missouri acrosseastern sections of the upper Great Lakes, the Ohio Valley and lowerGreat Lakes to sections of northern New England, with freezing rainor sleet over sections of the central Appalachians. Showers andthunderstorms were forecast from the Tennessee Valley acrossnorthern Florida, the southern and middle Atlantic coast tosoutheastern New York state. Showers were forecast over the PacificNorthwest and the northern half of California.   Highs in the teens were predicted from northern Minnesota acrossnorthern sections of the upper Great Lakes to northern New England;in the 20s and 30s from the northern and central Plains acrossOklahoma and north-central Texas, southern Minnesota, the centralMississippi Valley, northern sections of the southern MississippiValley, the Ohio Valley, southern sections of the upper Great Lakesand the lower Great Lakes to the Atlantic Coast from Maryland tosouthern New England; in the 60s and 70s over much of California,the southern Rockies, the northern Florida Peninsula, southeasternGeorgia and the Carolinas; and in the 80s over the desert Southwestand the southern half of the Florida Peninsula.</TEXT></DOC>