<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890205-0064 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-02-05-89 1821EST</FILEID><FIRST>u a AM-WeatherpageWeather     02-05 0722</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Weatherpage Weather,0737</SECOND><HEAD>Ice Storm From Texas To Tennessee</HEAD><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Heavy snow fell Sunday over the southern Rockies, more lowtemperature records were broken and freezing rain and sleet icedroads over parts of the South.   A low pressure system over northwestern New Mexico produced heavysnow over parts of New Mexico and southern Colorado during thenight. Two feet of snow fell at Taos Ski Valley in New Mexico with12 inches at Angel Fire, N.M.   Snow made driving difficult from sections of New England acrossthe mid Atlantic states, and the Ohio and middle Mississippi Valleyto the central Plains.   Most of the snowfall was 1 to 3 inches, but 3 to 6 inches fellalong the southern shore of Lake Erie in Ohio, and in parts ofnortheastern Illinois including the Chicago area.   Freezing rain and sleet and a continuation of freezingtemperatures made driving difficult or impossible across a largearea of southern and eastern Texas, the lower Mississippi Valley tosections of the Tennessee Valley.   Many major roads in south-central and southeastern Texas wereclosed and in Austin only the most heavily traveled and sandedroadways were passable, the National Weather Service reported.Bridges and roadways became ice covered in southern Arkansas andwestern and northern sections of Mississippi.   Ice also closed some major roads in parts of northern andwest-central Louisiana. In northeastern Louisiana, morningthunderstorms left heavy ice on trees and utility lines.   Patches of freezing drizzle and freezing rain fell over parts ofTennessee, Kentucky and Virginia.   Showers occurred over parts of the Southeast from the centralGulf states to the Carolinas and southeastern Virginia.   Temperatures in the 80s continued over southern Georgia andFlorida, the remnants of the record warm weather that moved across alarge section of the nation last week.   More than two dozen cities reported record lows Sunday:   Abilene, Texas, 9; Alameda Naval Air Station, Calif., 34;Astoria, Ore., 9; Billings, Mont., minus 19; Boise, Idaho, minus 15;Calico Rock, Ark., 8, tie; Denver, minus 24; Ely, Nev., minus 27;Eugene, Ore., 4; Hot Springs, Ark., 11; Houston, 27; Klamath Falls,Ore., minus 10; Lewiston, Idaho, minus 5; Midland, Texas, 10;Oakland, Calif., 31; Oklahoma City, 3; Pendleton, Ore., downtown,minus 15; Portland, Ore., 9; Reno, Nev., minus 5; Sacramento,Calif., downtown, 24; Salt Lake City, minus 6; San Angelo, Texas,14; San Francisco, airport, 31; Seattle, airport, 14; Walla Walla,Wash., minus 13; Wichita Falls, Texas, 7.   It was Denver's coldest day since Jan. 12, 1963, and Ely's lowwas within one degree of the town's all-time low. Some places inOregon and Washington were more than 10 degrees off their formerrecords.   Some parts of Alaska still had temperatures in the 15 to 30 belowzero range, but Point Barrow, on the Arctic coast, warmed to 24degrees. Nome, which hit an all-time high of 54 below zero lastmonth, warmed to 30 degrees.   Temperatures around the nation at 2 p.m. EST ranged from 18degrees below zero at Craig, Colo., to 86 at Fort Myers, Fla. Sundaymorning's low in the lower 48 states was 46 below zero at Wisdom,Mont.   For Monday, scattered snow was forecast from the Rocky Mountainsacross the central and southern Plains, the middle Mississippi andOhio valleys, and the Great Lakes region to the northern and middleAtlantic Coast states. Freezing rain and sleet were forecast fromsouthern and eastern Texas across much of Louisiana and Arkansas tothe lower Tennessee Valley. Rain was forecast over parts of theSoutheast from the central Gulf Coast across Alabama and Georgia tothe Carolinas.   Highs remaining below zero were predicted from southeastern Idahoacross parts of Wyoming to northern Colorado; in the single digitsand teens over northern and central sections of the Rockies and theIntermountain region between the Rockies and the Sierra Nevada; inthe teens from northern Texas to the Dakotas, and across the upperhalf of the Mississippi Valley to western sections of the GreatLakes; in the 40s and 50s over much of California, southern Arizona,southwestern New Mexico and extreme western Texas; in the 40s, 50sand 60s from the central Gulf Coast to much of the Carolinas; in the70s and lower 80s over Florida; and in the 20s and 30s elsewhere.</TEXT></DOC>