<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890408-0027 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-04-08-89 0228EST</FILEID><FIRST>u w BC-NorthTrial-Testimony 4thAdd   04-08 1096</FIRST><SECOND>BC-North Trial-Testimony, 4th Add,1,070</SECOND><HEAD>WASHN: Europeans, nobody.</HEAD><TEXT>   SULLIVAN: What happened next?   NORTH: Immediately thereafter Mr. McFarlane returned to theUnited States in late November, early December, and very shortlythereafter submitted his resignation from the NSC. We were beingpressed by the Israelis, I was personally, as to where we weregoing from here. And so Mr. McFarlane agreed to go to a meetingwith the Israeli agents and the Iranian in London. I flew over tothe meeting, met General Secord there. He had established that itwas a safe meeting. We sat down and talked with Mr. McFarlane andthe Israelis and their agent who was an Iranian, and we came backto the United States.   (North describes three separate presidential intelligencefindings that were signed in connection with the Hawk missileshipments to Iran.)   SULLIVAN: Now, did each of these findings state that thereshould be no immediate reporting to Congress?   NORTH: All of them said that Congress shall not be notified atthis time and that the president had the authority to withhold thatnotification until he deemed it was appropriate.   SULLIVAN: During the time that you had operational control overit, was it considered to be among the most secret of governmentactivity that was being undertaken in 1986?   NORTH: Absolutely. ...   (Sullivan asks North in detail about terrorists threats leveledagainst him and a decision by North to accept installation of asecurity system at his home. The system was provided by RichardSecord, a former Air Force major general who had been enlisted byNorth to run arms to the Contras.)   SULLIVAN: Did you pay for the security system?   NORTH: No, I did not.   SULLIVAN: Did you receive a security system for or because ofany official act that you had performed or that you were going toperform in the future?   NORTH: No.   SULLIVAN: Did you receive it as any form of compensation becauseyou were a government official at the National Security Council?   NORTH: No.   SULLIVAN: Did you intend to violate any law by receiving thesecurity system without paying for it?   NORTH: No. I intended to pay for it.   SULLIVAN: But did you ever pay for it?   NORTH: No, I did not.   SULLIVAN: Colonel North, would you tell the jury briefly,please, why you and McFarlane went to Iran on a secret trip in May1986?   NORTH: The purpose of the trip was to carry out the expressintention of the president that we open a dialogue with Iran aboutthe Iran-Iraq war, stop Iranian terrorism and get the Americanhostages home. ...   SULLIVAN: Colonel, was there hope that on this particular tripthat all the hostages would come back with you after thenegotiations and after the United States provided certain parts formissiles?   NORTH: Not so much come back with us, but there was great hopebecause of what the Israeli agent, or intermediary, had told uswere the conditions that the Iranians had, that as a consequence ofgoing on this trip we would have the hostages released that werebing held in Beirut, Lebanon, not in Iran; that we would getWilliam Buckley or his body _ we weren't too sure which at thatpoint, although we had fairly good intelligence that he was dead _and that we would get a 400-page interrogation (of Buckley) thatthey had done.   SULLIVAN: Did you leave without accomplishing your objectives onthat trip?   NORTH: Yes, we did.   SULLIVAN: Now, Colonel, I would like to focus your attention onthe last couple of months of your service at the National SecurityCouncil ... in early October, one of the planes flying resupplymissions to the (Nicaraguan) freedom fighters was shot down,correct?   NORTH: Yes, sir, it was. ...   SULLIVAN: And did you have a plan how to deal with it?   NORTH: Yes, we did and the press guidance was basically the sameas what President Eisenhower had done with Francis Gary Powers whenhe was shot down over Russia. That was to deny it. ...   When the airplane was shot down over Nicaragua I was in Europeworking with what we began to call the second channel on theIranian initiative. And the initial exposure on the shootdown wasthat we would ... deny it. When I got back from Europe (CIA)Director (William) Casey asked me to come out to the CIA. ... Heasked me pointedly, he said, are we going to be clean on this?   We being the CIA. And I said yes, I don't think that there'sgoing to be any way for anybody to take the wreckage or the people,the survivor and make any connection back to the CentralIntelligence Agency.   The CIA had, because the rules had changed, the law had changed,the CIA had been providing weather data and drop zone data,intelligence data but they didn't have any CIA employees on theairplane, they didn't have any CIA mechanics working on it, no CIApurchased equipment was on it because we were still living withinthose constraints of the Boland amendment and he wanted myassurance because he knew that I was basically the operationsofficer for this activity, that there was nothing that was going totrace back to the CIA and I assured him, incorrectly, that no,everything would be fine.   And it turned out that there was data aboard the airplane, thatthe information that Mr. Hasenfus gave his captors traced back towhere they had launched from, the house that they were living in,documents that were able to trace it back to the fact that they hadgotten information from the CIA.   SULLIVAN: Colonel, did you also learn that Casey had receivedinformation that perhaps the Iranian initiative would be exposedbecause certain creditors of the operation had not received theirmoney?   NORTH: At that same luncheon Director Casey also told me that anold friend of his, a source I think he told me, of many years backhad revealed to him that certain of the people who had been fundingthe purchases of U.S. equipment (for the Iranian arms deal) wereupset by the fact that they had not been paid (and) ... that it wasabout to be revealed, that there was a secret arms deal going withIran and that monies from the Iran initiative were going to helpthe Contras.   Directory Casey knew all that but his concern was that we dowhatever we could to keep this from coming out.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE><TEXT/></DOC>