<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890714-0232 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-14-89 1339EST</FILEID><FIRST>s a BC-Abortion-States Adv16   07-14 1223</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Abortion-States, Adv 16,1252</SECOND><HEAD>$Adv16</HEAD><HEAD>For Release Sunday, July 16</HEAD><HEAD>With BC-Abortion Legislation</HEAD><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Following are the results of a 50-state survey by The AssociatedPress of abortion-related activities since the Supreme Court'sruling in the Missouri abortion law case. The list omits thosestates where no significant activity has taken place or no majorchange in laws is expected.   ALABAMA: A newspaper survey of 106 of the 140 members of theLegislature found that 61 percent would vote to ban abortion exceptin cases of rape, incest or danger to a woman's life. Gov. Guy Huntsaid the issue will be addressed when the Legislature convenes inJanuary.   CALIFORNIA: Pro-choice groups are challenging restrictions onstate-financed abortions for poor women. Although 11 similarlawsuits in the past succeeded, the administration of Gov. GeorgeDeukmejian plans to invoke the Missouri case in its defense of therestrictions.   CONNECTICUT: Activists on both sides are expected to pack alegislative hearing Monday when the Assembly's Judiciary Committeehears testimony from the state attorney general on the Missouridecision. The committee is not expected to take any action. StateRep. George Jepsen is leading a movement to repeal Connecticut's1972 anti-abortion law and replace it with an unequivocal law givingwomen the right to an abortion.   FLORIDA: A bill filed after the Missouri ruling by state Rep. TomBanjanin would prohibit tax dollars from going to anyabortion-related activity, even counseling. The measure would definehuman life as beginning at conception, and would prohibit abortionsin public hospitals or by public employees. Gov. Bob Martinez plansto call a special fall session of the Legislature to take up theissue.   HAWAII: State Rep. Cam Cavasso plans to introduce bills thatwould require parental consent and notification for minors'abortions and would limit or ban state financing. A similar parentalconsent proposal failed earlier this year.   ILLINOIS: When the Legislature reconvenes in October,anti-abortion lawmakers plan to seek legislation as restrictive aspossible under the Missouri ruling. A bill already pending wouldrequire doctors to determine whether a 20-week-or-older fetus couldsurvive outside the womb.   INDIANA: Anti-abortion legislators are preparing bills that wouldcontain the same provisions as the Missouri law and go beyond it.Gov. Evan Bayh said he would be willing to sign a measure requiringfetal viability testing at 20 weeks, but was undecided about bans onthe use of public facilities and public employees in abortions.   IOWA: Gov. Terry Branstad said he would ask the Legislature forrestrictions on abortion, but wanted to ``consult with a broad rangeof Iowans'' before deciding which to seek.   KANSAS: Senate Majority Leader Fred Kerr said his staff isresearching the Webster decision ``to see what we can and cannotdo,'' but he doesn't expect any movement for several months.   KENTUCKY: State Rep. Bill Donnermeyer is having a bill draftedfor next January's legislative session that would include the sameprovisions as the Missouri law and perhaps go further.   LOUISIANA: New Orleans District Attorney Harry Connick asked afederal judge to lift a 1976 injunction prohibiting enforcement of astate law making it a crime to perform an abortion. A hearing isscheduled for Aug. 9.   MAINE: House Minority Leader Mary Clark Webster named aRepublican committee to study the issue. House Speaker John Martindoesn't want any abortion legislation passed during the next regularsession, in 1990.   MICHIGAN: Four bills were introduced in the Senate on Wednesday.They include measures modeled after the Missouri statute and otherbills that would require girls under 18 to obtain the consent ofboth parents to get an abortion and would propose a stateconstitutional amendment prohibiting state employees from receivingabortions under their state health insurance plan.   MINNESOTA: The Human Life Alliance of Minnesota started acampaign to urge Gov. Rudy Perpich to call a special session solelyto enact abortion restrictions.   MISSOURI: Gov. John Ashcroft announced plans for a task force tostudy ways to make Missouri's abortion laws more restrictive. Anyproposal would have to wait until the Legislature returns in January.   NEVADA: An anti-abortion group, Operation Rescue, targeted sevenAssembly members for ouster because of their pro-choice views.   NEW HAMPSHIRE: Pro-choice legislators want to try again tooverturn an unenforced, century-old law making abortion a crime.Gov. Judd Gregg vetoed a similar bill this year.   NEW JERSEY: Assembly Speaker Chuck Hardwick intends to launch``the great debate'' in September by convening a committee of theentire 80-member Assembly to question witnesses and consider billson abortion. Abortion has become a major issue in the fallgovernor's race.   NORTH CAROLINA: A bill modeled after the Missouri law wasintroduced months ago but is lying dormant in a House committee. Thesponsor, state Rep. Paul Stam, said he will wait until the 1990session to push it.   OHIO: House Speaker Vern Riffe said he is considering naming acommittee to study Ohio's abortion laws and the Missouri decision.One bill introduced July 6 by state Rep. Joan Lawrence, a pro-choiceadvocate, proposes that abortions be allowed up to the 25th week. Atleast one anti-abortion bill is in the works.   OKLAHOMA: Conservative legislators plan to introduce bills nextFebruary to restrict abortion at least as much as in Missouri.   PENNSYLVANIA: State Rep. Stephen Freind said he will introducelegislation that would restrict abortions in line with the Missouriruling, but said he didn't have a timetable for introducing the bill.   SOUTH CAROLINA: Members of the Legislature's Pro-Life Caucus saidthey will propose legislation in the fall, when bills can bepre-filed for next year's session, to graft some of the Missourilaws onto existing statutes.   SOUTH DAKOTA: Law already bars use of state funds to pay forabortions not needed to save a woman's life, but legislative leadersexpect a bill next year that would impose a 20-week viability testsimilar to Missouri's.   TEXAS: Gov. Bill Clements, who is against abortion, said heprobably would ask the Legislature to consider abortion restrictionsif another special session is held later this year. House SpeakerGib Lewis said he would prefer to wait until the next regularsession, in two years.   VERMONT: Anti-abortion activists are expected to pursue at leasttwo bills, one on parental notification for minors seeking anabortion and another on banning the use of Medicaid funds forabortions. However, the Legislature and Gov. Madeleine Kunin areconsidered strongly pro-choice. So far, 46 of 150 lawmakers havesigned a statement supporting abortion rights.   VERMONT: Abortion is an issue in the fall governor's race.Democrat L. Douglas Wilder says current law shouldn't be changedexcept to require that parents be notified when minors seek anabortion. Republican J. Marshall Coleman supports a constitutionalamendment to ban abortions.   WASHINGTON: The state attorney general is analyzing the Missouridecision to determine whether it applies to a 1970 voter-approvedlaw that restricts abortions to the first 16 weeks of pregnancy. Thestate had been operating under the assumption that Roe v. Wadesuperseded that law.   WEST VIRGINIA: State Delegate David McKinley said he willintroduce a bill for the January legislative session that wouldparallel Missouri's law.   WISCONSIN: A bill is before the Legislature that would requireparental consent for minors' abortions. Another bill would allowpublic financing of most abortions.</TEXT><NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, July 16</NOTE></DOC>