<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890612-0108 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-12-89 1334EST</FILEID><FIRST>u w BC-Scotus-Glance     06-12 0748</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Scotus-Glance,700</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here, at a glance, are highlights of actionstaken Monday by the Supreme Court.      AFFIRMATIVE ACTION      The court, in a major setback for affirmative action, expandedthe ability of white men to challenge court-approved plans givingpreferential treatment to minorities and women in government jobs.   By a 5-4 vote, the justices handed civil rights advocates theirlatest defeat in the case of white Birmingham, Ala., firefighterswho say they are victims of reverse discrimination.   The case is Martin vs. Wilks, 87-1614.      DEATH PENALTY      The court ruled that a jury choosing between the death penaltyand a life prison term for a convicted murderer generally may not betold about the victim's personal characteristics.   By a 5-4 vote, the justices ruled that a South Carolina murdererunfairly was sentenced to death after a prosecutor told jurors thatthe victim was a religious, community-minded person.   The case is South Carolina vs. Gathers, 88-305.      DISCOUNTS      The court agreed to decide whether manufacturers legally may givesome discounts to wholesalers but not retailers.   The court said it will hear an appeal by Texaco Inc., ordered topay $1.38 million in antitrust damages to 12 service stations in theSpokane, Wash., area.   The case is Texaco vs. Hasbrouck, 87-2048.      HAZARDOUS WASTE      The court turned down an appeal by companies involved in treatinghazardous waste aimed at forcing the government to adopt tougherenvironmental rules.   The justices, without comment, refused to let the firms sue forstricter standards that could increase their business volume or givethem a competitive advantage over other waste-treatment companies.   The case is Hazardous Waste Treatment Council vs. EnvironmentalProtection Agency, 88-1532.      ASPIRIN      The court rejected an appeal by an aspirin manufacturer beingsued for $10 million by the parents of a child who contracted ReyesSyndrome.   The court, without comment, let stand a Wisconsin judge's orderthat the maker of Bayer aspirin reveal numerous company records.   The case is Sterling Drug vs. Circuit Court of Milwaukee, 88-1691.      DISABILITY      The court made it easier to recover lawyers' fees for people whowin disputes with the government over Social Security benefits.   By a 5-4 vote, the court said the government must reimburse legalfees incurred during administrative proceedings that a federal courthas ordered the Department of Health and Human Services to conduct.   The case is Sullivan vs. Hudson, 88-616.      GRIZZLIES      The court refused to let Montana sheep owners kill grizzly bearsthreatening their herds.   The court, over one dissenting vote, rejected arguments that theowners have a constitutional right to protect their property _ evenif it means killing animals designated an endangered species.   The case is Christy vs. Lujan, 88-1461.      MARINE`S DEATH      The court turned away the case of a Marine who died after hiswisdom tooth was pulled, and left intact a legal doctrine barringmembers of the military from suing over injuries suffered ``incidentto service.''   The court, without comment, refused to reinstate lawsuits againstthe government by the widow of Marine Sgt. Timothy Adkins, whosedeath in 1985 sparked three separate investigations by the Marinesand Navy.   The case is Adkins vs. U.S., 88-1776.      PLEA BARGAIN      The court bolstered the power of judges to impose harsherpenalties on criminal defendants who back out of plea-bargainedagreements that called for lighter sentences.   The justices, by an 8-1 vote, apparently reinstated the lifesentence of an Alabama man convicted of burglary.   The case is Alabama vs. Smith, 88-333.      SENIORITY      The court limited the deadlines for filing some lawsuits thataccuse employers of illegal sex bias.   In a 5-3 ruling, the court threw out a suit by three women whosaid a change in the seniority system at an ATandamp;T plant in Illinoisdiscriminated against them.   The court said the women waited too long to sue.   The case is Lorance vs. ATandamp;T, 87-1428.      MAGISTRATES      The court ruled unanimously that federal magistrates are notlegally authorized to preside over jury selection even whendelegated such duty by federal trial judges.   The justices threw out the federal convictions in New York Cityof two men accused of possessing cocaine with intent to distributeit. The court said the convictions were tainted because the judgewho presided over their trial assigned the task of presiding overjury selection to a federal magistrate.   The cases are Gomez vs. U.S., 88-5014, and Chavez-Tesina vs.U.S., 88-5158.</TEXT></DOC>