<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890716-0016 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-16-89 1140EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Summit-Text 3rdAdd   07-16 0844</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Summit-Text, 3rd Add,840</SECOND><HEAD>PARIS: environmental policies.</HEAD><TEXT>   Clear assessments of the costs, benefits and resourceimplications of environmental protection should help governments totake the necessary decisions on the mix of price signals (e.g. taxesor expenditures) and regulatory actions, reflecting where possiblethe full value of natural resources.   We encourage the World Bank and regional development banks tointegrate environmental considerations into their activities.International organizations, such as the OECD and the United Nationsand its affiliated organizations, will be asked to develop furthertechniques of analysis which would help governments assessappropriate economic measures to promote the quality of theenvironment. We ask the OECD, within the context of its work onintegrating environment and economic decision-making, to examineselected environmental indicators that could be developed. We expectthe 1992 U.N. Conference on Environment and Development to giveadditional momentum to the protection of the global environment.   38. To help developing countries deal with past damage and toencourage them to take environmentally desirable action, economicincentives may include the use of aid mechanisms and specifictransfer of technology. In special cases, ODA debt forgiveness anddebt-for-nature swaps can play a useful role in environmentalprotection.   We also emphasize the necessity to take into account theinterests and needs of developing countries in sustaining the growthof their economies and the financial and technological requirementsto meet environmental challenges.   39. The depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer is alarmingand calls for prompt action.   We welcome the Helsinki conclusions related, among other issues,to the complete abandonment of the production and consumption ofchlorofluorocarbons covered by the Montreal protocol as soon aspossible and not later than the end of the century. Specificattention must also be given to those ozone-depleting substances notcovered by the Montreal protocol. We shall promote the developmentand use of suitable substitute substances and technologies. Moreemphasis should be placed on projects that provide alternatives tochlorofluorocarbons.   40. We strongly advocate common efforts to limit emissions ofcarbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, which threaten to induceclimate change, endangering the environment and ultimately theeconomy. We strongly suppport the work undertaken by theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, on this issue.   We need to strengthen the worldwide network of observatories forgreenhouse gases and supoport the World Meteorological Organizationinitiative to establish a global climatological reference network todetect climate changes.   41. We agree that increasing energy efficiency could make asubstantial contribution to these goals. We urge internationalorganizations concerned to encourage measures, including economicmeasures, to improve energy conservation and, more broadly,efficiency in the use of energy of all kinds and to promote relevanttechniques and technologies.   We are committed to maintaining the highest safety standards fornuclear power plants and to strengthening international cooperationin safe operation of power plants and waste management, and werecognize that nuclear power also plays an inmportant role inlimiting output of greenhouse gases.   42. Deforestation also damages the atmosphere and must bereversed. We call for the adoption of sustainable forest managementpractices, with a view to preserving the scale of world forests. Therelevant international organizations will be asked to completereports on the state of the world's forests by 1990.   43. Preserving the tropical forests is an urgent need for theworld as a whole. While recognizing the sovereign rights ofdeveloping countries to make use of their natural resources, weencourage, through a sustainable use of tropical forests, theprotection of all the species therein and the traditional rights toland and other resources of local communities. We welcome the Germaninitiative in this field as a basis for progress.   To this end, we give strong support to rapid implementation ofthe Tropical Forest Action Plan which was adopted in 1986 in theframework of the Food and Agricultural Organization. We appeal toboth consumer and producer countries, which are united in theInternational Tropical Timber Organization, to join their efforts toensure better conservation of the forests. We express our readinessto assist the efforts of nations with tropical forests throughfinancial and technical cooperation, and in internationalorganizations.   44. Temperate forests, lakes and rivers must be protected againstthe effects of acid pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and nitrogenoxides. It is necessary to pursue actively the bilateral andmultilateral efforts to this end.   45. The increasing complexity of the issues related to theprotection of the atmosphere calls for innovative solutions. Newinstruments may be contemplated. We believe that the conclusion of aframework or umbrella convention on climate change to set outgeneral principles or guidelines is urgently required to mobilizeand rationalize the efforts made by the international community.   We welcome the work under way by the United Nations EnvironmentProgram, in cooperation with the World Meteorological Organization,drawing on the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Changeand the results of other international meetings. Specific protocolscontaining concrete commitments could be fitted into the frameworkas scientific evidence requires and permits.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE><TEXT/></DOC>