<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890205-0004 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-02-05-89 0057EST</FILEID><FIRST>u a AM-ColdRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0632 02-05 1257</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Cold Rdp, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0632,1279</SECOND><HEAD>Cold Spreads, Heavy Snow In Mountains, Travelers Rescued</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: SUBS 2nd-3rd grafs with 5 grafs to UPDATE with truck explosionin Oregon. Picks up 4th graf pvs., `In St. Paul ...' ^LaserPhotos BX4,NPT1; LaserColor VAIX8</HEAD><BYLINE>By ROGER PETTERSON</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   The arctic cold wave that shocked even Alaska moved far enoughsouth to chill Mardi Gras revelers Saturday, while blowing snow andtemperatures as low as 50 degrees below zero hampered travel in thenorthern Rockies and Plains.   A truck exploded in Oregon as a man tried to thaw the vehicle'slocks with a propane torch; there was too much snow for a major skicompetition in Colorado; a group of travelers had to be rescued froma snowbank by a freight train in Wyoming; and a small Idaho town wasisolated by drifting snow.   The Northwest's giant Bonneville Power Administration, whichnormally has electricity to spare, sought power and water fromelsewhere to meet demand for heat. Texas worried that its naturalgas wells couldn't keep up with demand.   Three people were injured, two seriously, in the truck explosion.The blast demolished the truck, damaged a nearby house, blew outwindows over a two-block area and spread tools over a half-block,Woodburn, Ore., police dispatcher Ann Flowers said.   The propane torch apparently set off propane leaking from aheater inside the truck, said Woodburn Fire Chief Keith Woodley.   The man using the torch, Scott Grasti, was listed in seriouscondition Saturday evening. His wife, Bonnie Grasti, was treated forfacial cuts and released from a hospital. Another man, whose namewasn't released, was hospitalized with second-degree burns to hisface.   In St. Paul, high school bands marching in a winter carnivalparade that was curtailed by subzero cold faked their routinesbefore TV cameras as loudspeakers played taped band music. Still,about 25,000 people lined the parade route.   ``The players will have the instruments in their mouths inplaying position. But we put athletic tape on the mouthpieces so thecold metal doesn't stick to their skin,'' said Don Glassel, banddirector at Simley High School in Inver Grove Heights, Minn.   The frigid air that built up over Alaska and pushed into theLower 48 states Tuesday brought below-zero wind chill factors tonormally balmy southern Texas and freezing rain to the Texas GulfCoast and New York City.   At least 25 deaths around the nation were blamed on the coldfront, including four in sledding accidents and two who apparentlyfroze to death in Oklahoma City.   ``I wonder why we live in Minnesota,'' said Gloria Ball, managerof a Rockford, Minn., mobile home park that lost gas service Fridayas temperatures dipped to as low as 42 below zero.   Record lows for the date Saturday included 7 degrees at Seattle;33 below zero at Great Falls, Mont.; 29 below at Duluth, Minn., and22 below at Billings, Mont. Records also fell as far south as Texas,with a low of 4 at Lubbock, 16 at Wichita Falls and 23 at Houston,while Midland tied its record of 9 degrees.   But the coldest official reading in the Lower 48 states was 50below zero at Wisdom, Mont., the weather service said, followed by44 below at Butte, Mont. By constrast, Anchorage, Alaska, had a lowof 12 below zero.   In New Orleans, thousands of Mardi Gras party-goers bundled upSaturday against a suddenly cold Carnival weekend. Saturdayafternoon's temperature hit the mid 40s, with light rain, but theforecast for Sunday was for a high in the 30s. Many people duckedinto bars along a parade route Saturday.   ``They're here anyway and they're going to go drinking,'' saidMatt Hendricks at Fat Harry's. ``Instead of standing outside, itjust gets packed inside. The cold weather makes no difference.''   Some, though, embraced the cold. In Perry, Iowa, nearly 300bicycle riders braved blowing snow and a wind chill factor of minus40 to take part in the 12th annual, 23-mile B-R-R Ride. Severaldropped out and most riders wore three and four layers of clothing,hats, gloves and face masks to try to stay warm.   A foot of snow fell overnight Friday at Alta, Utah, bringing theski resort's total since late Wednesday to 49 inches. Seven inchesfell within three hours in Cedar City, Utah. Some highways innorthern Utah were blocked by snowdrifts.   Snow fell at an inch an hour in parts of California's SierraNevada. Up to 4 feet of snow fell in the Lake Tahoe area and Nordenat Donner Summit got 40 inches of snow over two days, officialssaid. Interstate 80 through the Sierra was reopened Friday nightafter being closed more than a day by blowing snow, but some otherhighways remained closed by snow.   ``Basically, it's a real mess out there,'' said CaliforniaHighway Patrol dispatcher Gina Moran at Truckee. ``They're crashingeverywhere ... . It's snowing like crazy and they're still coming uphere. They still refuse to believe they shouldn't come.''   At Beaver Creek, Colo., the premier event of the World Alpine SkiChampionships, the men's downhill, was canceled Saturday becausemore than 8 inches of snow made it impossible for crews to groom thecourse in time.   Idaho Gov. Cecil Andrus declared a state of emergency Saturday inBonner County, where high wind Wednesday toppled hundreds of treesand left hundreds of people without electricity. The Bonner CountyCommission requested the declaration after utilities reported powermight not be restored until Monday.   Four people driving from Laramie, Wyo., to Fort Collins, Colo.,were rescued from a snowbank Saturday by a Union Pacific Railroadfreight crew, who put them aboard their locomotive near Tie Siding,Wyo.   Fourteen inches of fresh snow were on the ground and the windchill factor was minus 76 degrees. While the Highway Patrol wasalerted, a snowplow couldn't reach the travelers, said UP spokesmanJohn Bromley in Omaha, Neb. ``Apparently the car was running, butthey (engineers) were afraid to leave them if the car ran out ofgas,'' he said.   The Colorado highway patrol closed southbound Interstate 25 inDenver because there were so many accidents in whiteout conditions.   Most of 200 travelers stalled in the Idaho town of Dubois whenthe cold front hit Wednesday made it out in two caravans on Thursdayand Friday, but the town was shut and isolated Saturday by 25 belowzero cold, 40 mph wind, near zero visibility and drifting snow.   ``Everything's closed off. We can't use our main streets ornothing,'' said Ed Russell, a county road foreman. ``We're trying toget our equipment started, but it's so cold, nothing is starting forus. It's pretty serious.''   The Bonneville Power Administration cut back power deliveriesFriday by about 25 percent to 10 Northwest aluminum smelters becauseof high residential demand, spokesman Bob Reed said.   The BPA, which normally sells surplus power from its hugeColumbia River hydroelectric dams, was trying to buy electricityfrom California utilities to meet demand, and British Columbia Hydroagreed to release more water upstream to help generate power, Reedsaid.   Texas may face a natural gas shortage if the severe coldcontinues past Monday, said Texas Railroad Commission Chairman KentHance.   ``The gas wells simply will not be able to deliver all the gas weneed, and the storage facilities may not be able to supply more thanhalf of the gas volumes they did in 1983,'' when Texas nearly ranout of natural gas, Hance said.</TEXT></DOC>