<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890427-0041 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-04-27-89 0330EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-Scotus-AbortionExcerpts 1stadd   04-27 1107</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Scotus-Abortion Excerpts, 1st add,1100</SECOND><HEAD>WASHN: abortion case?</HEAD><TEXT>   Fried: Well, I would think that there are liberty interestsinvolved in terms, perhaps, of the contraceptive interest ... Atall points it is an interest which is matched by the state'sinterest in potential life. ...   I would like to make clear that, in our view, if Roe wereoverruled, this court would have to continue to police the farouter boundaries of abortion regulation under a due processrational basis test, and that test is muscular enough ... to strikedown any regulation ... which did not make proper provision forcases where the life of the mother was at risk. ...   Stevens: Is there a difference between the court's power in thecase of an abortion that would be life threatening to the woman andan abortion that would merely cause her severe and prolongeddisease? Is there a constitutional difference?   Fried: I think that is a matter of degree, and it is perfectlyclear that severe health effects shade over into a threat to thelife. I cannot promise the court that our submission would dispensethe federal courts from considering matter like that. ...</TEXT><TEXT>   Justice Byron R. White: Suppose there is a state that permitsabortions and they are done in public hospitals. Do you think thatis a _ you say that there is human life involved, that is destroyedin abortions _ is there some problem about the state permittingabortions?   Fried: I think the Constitution takes no position on this point.... The country's experience and the court's experience under theconstitutionalization of that issue has been so regrettable that Icould not in conscience recommend that it be constitutionalized insome other way at another point in the spectrum. ...</TEXT><TEXT>   Frank Susman for those who challenged the Missouri law: I think(Fried's) submission is somewhat disingenuous when he suggests tothis court that he does not seek to unravel the whole cloth ofprocreational rights, but merely to pull a thread.   It has always been my personal experience that when I pull athread, my sleeve falls off.   There is no stopping.   It is not a thread he is after.   It is the full range of procreational rights and choices thatconstitute the fundamental right that has been recognized by thiscourt.   For better or for worse, there no longer exists any bright linebetween the fundamental right that was established in Griswold andthe fundamental right of abortion that was established in Roe.   These two rights, because of advances in medicine and science,now overlap.   They coalesce and merge and they are not distinct.   Justice Antonin Scalia: You find it hard to draw a line betweenthose two but easy to draw a line between first, second and thirdtrimester. I don't see why a court that can draw that line can'tseparate abortion from birth control quite readily.   Susman: ... Things have changed.   The bright line, if there ever was one, has now beenextinguished.   That's why I suggest to this court that we need to deal with oneright, the right to procreate. ...   Kennedy: Do you agree that the state can forbid abortions saveto preserve the life of the mother after the fetus is, say, eightmonths old? Suppose the health rights of the mother are notinvolved? ...   Susman: Yes, I am willing to recognize the compelling interestgranted in Roe of a state in potential fetal life after the pointof viability.   Kennedy: But that is a line drawing, isn't it?   Susman: Yes, it is. But that is a line that is more easilydrawn. ...   Procreational interests are, indeed, implicit in the concept ofordered liberty and neither liberty nor justice would exist withoutthem.   It is truly a liberty whose exercise is deeply rooted in thisnation's history and tradition. ...   I suggest that there can be no ordered liberty for women withoutcontrol over their education, their employment, their health, theirchildbearing and their personal aspirations.   There does, in fact, exist a deeply rooted tradition that thegovernment steer clear of decisions affecting the bedroom,childbearing and the doctor-patient relationship as it pertains tothese concerns.   Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist: It is a deeply rootedtradition, but surely abortion was regulated by the state in the19th century and in the 20th century. ...</TEXT><TEXT>   Scalia: Let me inquire _ I can see deriving a fundamental rightfrom either a long tradition that this, the right to abort, hasalways been protected. I don't see that tradition. But I supposeyou could also derive a fundamental right just simply from the textof the Constitution plus the logic of the matter, or whatever.   How can you derive it that way here without making adetermination as to whether the fetus is a human life or not? It isvery hard to say it just is a matter of basic principle that itmust be a fundamental right unless you make the determination thatthe organism that is destroyed is not a human life. Can you as amatter of logic or principle make that determination otherwise?   Susman: I think the basic question ... whether this is a humanlife or whether human life begins at conception, is not somethingthat is verifiable as a fact. It is a question verifiable only byreliance upon faith.   It is a question of labels.   Neither side in this issue and debate would ever disagree on thephysiological facts.   Both sides would agree as to when a heartbeat can first bedetected. Both sides would agree as to when brain waves can firstbe detected.   But when you come to try to place the emotional labels on whatyou call that collection of physiological facts, that is wherepeople part company.   Scalia: I agree with you entirely but what conclusion does thatlead you to? That, therefore, there must be a fundamental right onthe part of the woman to destroy this thing that we don't know whatit is. Or, rather, that whether there is or isn't is a matter thatyou vote upon. Since we don't know the answer, people have to makeup their minds the best they can.   Susman: The conclusion to which it leads me is ... it must beleft as a fundamental right. ...   Women do not make these decisions lightly. They agonize overthem. And they take what we see out front (of the building) andwhat we see in the media and they personalize it.</TEXT><HEAD>End Scotus-Abortion Excerpts _ 2 Takes</HEAD></DOC>