<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891224-0005 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-24-89 1006EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i BC-Romania 5thLd-Writethru   12-24 1291</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Romania, 5th Ld-Writethru,a0693,1329</SECOND><HEAD>URGENT</HEAD><HEAD>Government Calls Cease-Fire, Halt Civilian Vigilantes</HEAD><HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 11 grafs with Ceausescu reportedly found in secretbunker, vast network of secret tunnels filled with army under the city;picks up 10th pvs: Fighting was ...</HEAD><BYLINE>By DUSAN STOJANOVIC</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>BUCHAREST, Romania (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Buildings burned out of control andbodies littered the capital Sunday as citizens and allied soldiersfought savage battles with secret police units loyal to deposedPresident Nicolae Ceausescu.   Some of Europe's most brutal street fighting since World War IIcontinued for a third day in Bucharest and at least four othermajor cities nationwide.   Romanian radio, in the hands of the revolutionaries, called acease-fire, but heavy fighting continued in the center of the cityand at the airport. Revenge-minded vigilante groups who pluckedweapons off the dead were adding a new element to the carnage.   Supporters of Ceausescu penetrated the headquarters of Romania'srevolutionary leaders, shooting and stabbing at random before theywere subdued by armed forces.   The National Salvation Committee is trying to lead the chaoticcountry from inside the television station building, and the armysaid the building remained secure after the attack, whichreportedly killed three people.   Heavily armed secret police forces loyal to the ousted rulerwere fighting fierce battles with army units who joined the popularuprising on Friday after a week of protests nationwide.   Fighting eased briefly in the capital after daybreak Sunday, andsome citizens were seen lugging Christmas trees and carryingshopping bags, as some merchants briefly opened their shops. Butrenewed sniping and hit-and-run attacks by Ceausescu loyalistscleared the streets again.   Romanian radio said Sunday that soldiers had found a vastnetwork of safe houses and secret tunnels criss-crossing the citythat Ceausescu forces stocked with arms, ammunition and electronicmonitoring equipment in recent years.   The tunnels, some with entrances masked by nondescript panels insubway stations, run for miles, linking Ceausescu's palace withparty headquarters and extending as far as a lake in the northernpart of the city, said the radio.   The provisional government said Saturday that Ceausescu hiswife, Elena, and other members of the ruling family were capturedby the army.   Soviet state television said without elaboration Sunday thatCeausescu and his wife were captured Saturday while hiding in anunderground bunker. Romanian radio said later Sunday thatCeausescu's daughter, Zoia, also was captured.   The revolutionary coalition, trying to halt the anarchy in thestreets and disarm civilians as well as Ceausescu loyalists,ordered a cease-fire and told all non-army personnel to turn intheir weapons by Monday at 5 p.m. local time.   People violating the cease-fire ``are committing crimes againstthe Romanian people and will receive the strictest punishment,''said the National Salvation Committee decree.   Fighting was heavy through the night in and around Bucharest andin the cities of Brasov, Szeben, Sibiu and Timisoara.   The revolution began Dec. 15 with protests in Timisoara.Thousands of people were killed when Ceausescu tried to staunch themassive protests, and hundreds, perhaps thousands more have died inthe armed struggles for control since Ceausescu fled his palace onFriday.   Ceausescu's security forces are elite, heavily armed police whoare essentially fighting for their lives against therevolutionaries, many of whom have vowed revenge for the massacresof unarmed citizens during the massive pro-reform protests.   The East Germany news agency ADN said 5,000 people have died inthe fighting Friday and Saturday. That could not be confirmed, buta head count at one of 14 Bucharest hospital's tallied 100 dead.   Army units have formed a cordon around the television building,a focal point of the struggle for the country and headquarters ofthe newly formed National Salvation Committee. The committee is ahastily formed provisional government of officials ousted byCeaucescu through the years, dissidents and sympathetic armyofficers.   During the night, witness said that at one point fanaticCeausescu supporters appeared in the TV building's corridors,shooting and stabbing randomly before being subdued.   People at the TV building said nobody knew where the attackers,dressed in civilian clothes, had come from. It was unclear whetherthey had penetrated army defenses from the outside or if they hadbeen in hiding within.   The assault left one woman dead and two men wounded.   The U.S. Embassy in Bucharest on Sunday was evacuatingdependents and some staff in a convoy to Sofia, said spokeswomanAgi Kuperman.   The army claimed control of all major strategic points acrossthe nation on Romanian radio. But it was difficult to tell howsecure was the revolutionaries' hold on the country.   In Timisoara, Associated Press correspondent John Daniszewskiwas shot and wounded by uniformed men who stopped his car androbbed him Saturday night, the Yugoslav Consulate said. He washospitalized in satisfactory condition. It could not immediately bedetermined whom his assailants were.   The Yugoslav news agency Tanjug said fighting had moved to theoutskirts of Timisoara, with army units apparently engaging fleeingCeausescu loyalists.   Youths armed with clubs or iron bars assumed control in the cityand were directing traffic and performing other routine functions,said Tanjug.   Romanian radio also reported fighting in Sibiu and Brasov, bothabout 60 miles north of Bucharest.   In Bucharest, sporadic machine gun and sniper fire could beheard near the downtown Intercontinental Hotel, and at least twosnipers were believed positioned on the hotel's roof, from wherefire could be heard before noon.   Firefights raged well into Saturday night in Bucharest, with theroutes once traveled by Ceausescu between his guarded private villaand the Communist Party headquarters the scene of intense battles.   The university library and nearby buildings, believed to be thestronghold of the Ceausescu loyalist forces, were burning out ofcontrol on Sunday, and there were no attempts to put out the fires.   Groups of teen-agers armed with automatic rifles and pistolswhich they took from the dead ``are trying to carry out a vendettaagainst the (Securitate) terrorists,'' Stephan Andreescu, spokesmanfor the National Salvation Committee, said, referring to thesecurity forces.   ``These ... forces are trying to escape and are extremelydangerous,'' Andreescu told The Associated Press. But he claimedthe army was in ``complete control of the situation in thecountry.''   ``The terrorists are believed to be hiding in the subway and insecret underground passages below the former presidential palace,''Andreescu said. ``It will take days before it is all over.''   The Soviet news agency Tass, reporting from Bucharest, said theresisting Securitate units were retreating to cemeteries wherethere are rumored to be ``hideouts among burial vaults andentrances to a system of secret underground tunnels.''   Ceausescu ruled Romania with an iron fist for 24 years, refusingthe Soviet bloc reforms that this year swept through Hungary,Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and East Germany with relativelylittle violence.   In Switzerland, the Justice Minister said Sunday that a``precautionary'' freeze has been placed on any assets that may beheld in Switzerland by Ceausescu and his family. The action cameafter Romanian exile groups claimed the ousted dictator had stashedmillions of dollars of gold in Zurich banks.   Thousands of people have been killed since Dec. 15, when thedefense by a few hundred people of a defiant pastor threatened witharrest in Timisoara turned into a mass protests that swirled thenation.   Ion Iliescu, a leading figure in the National SalvationCommittee, said in a national broadcast early Saturday evening thatCeausescu would be tried.   A committee communique Sunday said courts would mete outpunishments of the ``greatest severity'' to ``the dictator and hisformer lackeys.''   Several aid shipments sent from abroad were said by Hungarian,Austrian and other media to be tied up at the airport.</TEXT></DOC>