<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890622-0012 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-06-22-89 0038EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i PM-EastBlocQuarrels Bjt   06-22 0890</FIRST><SECOND>PM-East Bloc Quarrels, Bjt,0916</SECOND><HEAD>Historical Rivalries Reappear Among East Bloc Neighbors</HEAD><HEAD>An AP Extra</HEAD><BYLINE>By ALISON SMALE</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>BUDAPEST, Hungary (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Almost every day, Hungary's state-runmedia carry a new report about privation in Romania or a purportedshooting on the heavily guarded border between the two countries.   Hungary and Romania are allies in the Warsaw Pact militaryalliance, but not even a summit of their Communist leaders lastAugust could ease the tensions between them.   Their relations illustrate the depth of many historically rootedquarrels now reappearing in the Soviet bloc that includes EastGermany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria.   For centuries, Eastern Europe has been a volatile region ofshifting political allegiances and changing borders. A violenthistory has made nationalism a powerful force and left many ethnicgroups in the area with a long list of grudges against neighbors.   World War I broke up the once vast Austro-Hungarian Empire andWorld War II left the Kremlin dominant in Eastern Europe.Authoritarian Communist governments took power after the Red Armyswept in and ended Nazi Germany's reign.   The Soviet Union, following the model laid down by Stalin, usedto exert pressure on East European Communist parties to maintainoutwardly friendly relations. With Mikhail S. Gorbachev as Kremlinleader, those pressures eased.   Until recently, traditional conflicts among ethnic groups withdifferent languages and cultures lay mostly dormant under sloganstrumpeting the international solidarity of socialism.   Now, the Soviets are preoccupied with their own economic andsocial woes, and the ethnic tensions are bubbling across theborders. The East European allies, grappling with Kremlin-led callsfor democratic reforms, are reopening old wounds.   Current quarrels vary from ideological differences over the paceof governmental reforms in Poland and Hungary and other countries toterritorial disputes, minority rights and even cross-borderpollution.   East Germany and Poland have argued over their common border andfishing rights in the Baltic Sea; Romania has angered Bulgaria bysending chemical waste wafting across the Danube; and customs warshave flared in a region strapped for consumer goods.   In November, Czechoslovakia annoyed the entire bloc by slappingrestrictions at 48 hours' notice on the export of just about everyconsumer product Soviet bloc visitors might envy in Prague'srelatively well-stocked shops.   Poles were especially outraged by measures that includedconfiscation of purchases intended as Christmas gifts. Polishtravelers felt that the Czechs were deliberately reviving ahistorical enmity between the two populations.   The customs crackdown was designed to protect living standardsthat have helped Prague's hard-line leaders keep outward peace witha population disgruntled ever since the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasioncrushed Alexander Dubcek's reformist government.   But the action immediately touched off retaliations throughoutthe East bloc. Each country, including the Soviet Union, slappedexport bans on any consumer goods popular with tourists fromelsewhere in the region.   That conflict has since died down.   The most serious dispute involves Hungary and Romania. Simmeringthroughout the 1970s, it broke into the open in late 1986 over theseemingly innocuous issue of a Hungarian history book onTransylvania, a mountainous region ruled by Hungary for centuriesbut ceded to Romania after World War I.   Under President Nicolae Ceausescu, Romania is trying to eradicatethe separate identity of ethnic minorities, and it immediatelyaccused Hungary of publishing the history with the aim of revivingclaims to Transylvania.   At first, Hungary played calm on the diplomatic front, whilemedia and intellectuals whipped up emotions at home.   Hungarians have given refuge to tens of thousands of Romanianssince January 1988, when Budapest broke a Hungarian-Romanian treatyobliging it to send back defectors, some of whom braved bordergunfire to escape.   Besides playing to proudly nationalist Hungarians, Budapest'shandling of the dispute served to underline Hungary's reformistpolitics and to ally it with the West at international forums onhuman and minority rights.   Other East bloc neighbors have since begun to take more heed ofthe sizeable Hungarian minorities left in their territories.   The Soviet Union recently improved educational opportunities forits small Hungarian minority and allowed more visits across thecommon frontier.   Czechoslovakia's 900,000 ethnic Hungarians have also receivedbetter treatment. These improvements were overshadowed, however, byPrague's quarrels with Budapest over a Hungarian televisioninterview with Dubcek and Budapest's suspension of work on a jointdam and power project.   Police crackdowns on anti-government protests in Prague inJanuary and the subsequent jailing of leading dissident authorVaclav Havel drew public protests from intellectuals in Hungary, theSoviet Union and Poland, where Prime Minister Mieczyslaw Rakowskipointedly attended two Havel plays banned in Prague.   A Hungarian TV interview with Dubcek, virtually a non-person inCzechoslovakia since he was expelled from the Communist Party in1970, further rankled Czechoslovakia's leaders. Budapest ignoredtheir protests and broadcast a second part of the interview anyway.   Tension increased last month when Budapest called a two-monthhalt to its work on a joint Danube dam project that has been asubject of an environmental controversy since its inception in 1977.   Czechoslovakia again strongly protested the move. This time,however, it seemed as if an East bloc row might lead to domesticprotests.   When prime ministers Miklos Nemeth of Hungary and Ladislav Adamecof Czechoslovakia met to discuss the power project, Adamec took aconciliatory tone in an effort to defuse tensions.</TEXT></DOC>