<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891228-0071 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-28-89 1237EST</FILEID><FIRST>r a AM-Top10Stories 1stAdd   12-28 0949</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Top 10 Stories, 1st Add,0966</SECOND><HEAD>UNDATED: traffic jams.</HEAD><TEXT>   The earthquake, centered 75 miles south of San Francisco,measured 7.1 on the Richter scale, the strongest to hit the UnitedStates since the Alaska quake of 1964. It lasted 15 seconds, killed67 people and injured 3,000 others. Property damage was placed at$7 billion.   A 50-foot section of the Bay Bridge collapsed, as did a fewapartment buildings, and a 1.5-mile stretch of double-deckerInterstate 880 toppled onto the lower roadway, crushing cars andtrapping motorists.   Among the safest places during the quake: San Francisco's highrises, built to strict building codes adopted after the SanFernando quake of 1971.   5. When the Supreme Court opened the door for states to regulatethe standards for abortions within their borders, limiting the 1975Roe vs. Wade decision, it also moved the battleground betweenpro-choice and anti-abortion advocates to state legislatures andstate elections.   The anti-abortion side wanted to require teen-agers to seekpermission from their parents for abortions, or married women toseek their husband's OK. Other questions focused on the use offederal funds for abortions.   Pennsylvania passed the most restrictive abortion statute in thenation. Illinois settled a suit that would have limited abortionsin that state. Virginia and New Jersey elected governors who drewconsiderable support from pro-choice voters. Pro-choice advocatesin Congress were readying a federal statute to broaden abortionrights along the lines of Roe vs. Wade.   The issue was sure to affect state and congressional electionsin 1990.   6. The Colombian government declared war on the druglords inAugust, in response to the assassination of a leading presidentialcandidate.   Within four months, 10 middle-level drug suspects had beenextradited to the United States. Drug traffickers retaliated with acampaign of bombings and shootings that included a Dec. 8 car-bombattack that killed 63 people. The government also blamed thedruglords for the Nov. 27 bombing of an Avianca jetliner nearBogota, which killed 107.   The government claimed a major victory in December with thekilling by security forces of Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, abillionaire leader of Colombia's biggest cocaine gang, the Medellincartel, and the man accused of directing the campaign of terror.But the euphoria over Gacha's death was tempered by fears that hisreputed partner, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, would seek retribution.   In the United States, a record 21.4 tons of cocaine was seizednear Los Angeles and near-record amounts intercepted elsewhere.President Bush unveiled a $7.9 billion drug control strategy, andplanned to meet with South American leaders in Colombia in February1990.   7. For a week in September, Hurricane Hugo cut a wide swath ofdestruction along a 2,300-mile path from the Caribbean to theCarolinas. The storm killed 56 people in the Caribbean and 40 moreon the mainland, despite an exodus of residents along the Southeastcoast.   In hard-hit St. Croix, 90 percent of the houses and buildingswere destroyed by Hugo's 200-mph winds. Hundreds of lootersplundered stores of everything from food and clothing to VCRs andjewelry in the aftermath of the storm, prompting President Bush tosend Army troops, FBI agents and federal marshals to restore orderin the U.S. territory. Officials say it could be spring beforepower is restored. Full recovery could take years.   In South Carolina, the storm did nearly $6 billion in damage.Hugo demolished downtown Charleston, which had not been hit by amajor hurricane in 30 years. It also left homeless an estimated16,000 South Carolinans, many of them beach residents who vowed torebuild.   8. The scandals that rocked Congress, the Defense Department andthe Department of Housing and Urban Development seemed endless. Acongressman admitted to a brief sexual relationship with a man whoclaimed to run a male prostitution ring. The speaker of the Houseresigned after being cited for ethics violations. Five senatorswere to be investigated for intervening with federal regulators onbehalf of a scandal-ridden savings and loan. Pentagon procurementirregularities led to indictments, and HUD influence peddlingbecame a running national story.   In three separate cases, congressmen were convicted ofmoney-laundering, perjury and contributing to the delinquency of aminor.   Finally Congress passed the Ethics Reform Act of 1989 that wouldbar congressmen, but not senators, from accepting fees forspeeches, starting in 1991. In return, congressmen, but notsenators, would receive a $24,000-plus pay raise. The act alsoprovided substantial raises for other top executive and judicialbranch officials.   9. The so-called thrift institutions _ the nation's savings andloans _ turned out not to be thrifty at all. When the failurespiled up, Congress passed a $159 billion bailout bill in August andestablished the Resolution Trust Corp. to oversee the rescue of thepillaged Sandamp;Ls, which had grown to 280 by the end of the year. InDecember the RTC was pressing the Sandamp;Ls under its control to beginselling more than $300 billion in assets.   The RTC had disposed of 33 of the ailing thrifts and had its eyeon 220 more.   10. Hampered by the non-availability of secret documents, theIran-Contra investigation ground on, trying to unravel the schemeby which the United States sold arms to Iran and used the proceedsto finance pro-American guerillas in Nicaragua.   Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, the former National SecurityCouncil aide who won national prominence in dramatic congressionalhearings probing the arms deals, was convicted of three of 12felony counts, including destroying or falsifying governmentdocuments and receipt of an illegal gratuity. Punishment totaledover $500,000 in fines and more than five years in prison.   At year's end there were still cases pending in the Iran-Contrainvestigation.</TEXT></DOC>