<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891220-0157 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-12-20-89 1738EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w AM-USInterventions     12-20 0935</FIRST><SECOND>AM-US Interventions,890</SECOND><HEAD>Panama Invasion Follows Long History of Intervention</HEAD><HEAD>With AM-US-Panama Bjt</HEAD><BYLINE>By JOHN KING</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   The invasion of Panama by American troops isthe latest in nearly 20 episodes over the past 150 years in whichthe United States has used its military might in Latin America andthe Caribbean.   Prior to the action in Panama, the most recent outright use ofU.S. force in the region was six years ago, on Oct. 25, 1983, whenU.S. forces led an invasion of the island of Grenada.Then-President Reagan said his aim was to rescue American studentsand to end Cuban use of the Caribbean nation as a training groundfor terrorists.   In April 1965, President Johnson sent U.S. troops to theDominican Republic after rebels tried to seize power. Johnson saidhe was acting to protect U.S. citizens and to prevent Communistsfrom taking power. Some members of the Organization of AmericanStates also sent troops. A truce was signed a month after the U.S.forces arrived and all were withdrawn by September 1966.   U.S. Marines also had occupied the Dominican Republic from1916-1924 to keep order among rival political factions.   Short of combat, troops in recent years were stationed at thePanama Canal and military advisers were sent to Honduras and ElSalvador to train the military forces of friendly Central Americangovernments. The United States has also supported the Contra rebelsseeking to oust the Sandinista government in Nicaragua.   Support for the Contras is the latest phase in a long saga ofU.S. involvement in Nicaragua. About 2,500 Marines were sent in1912 to protect the government and about 100 of them remained for13 years.   The United States also sent gunboats and troops to Nicaragua in1926 to help the government during a rebellion led by Gen. AugustoCesar Sandino. U.S. planes bombed guerilla strongholds, eventuallyforcing Sandino to flee to Mexico. The U.S. troops withdrew inearly 1933.   Further back in history, two episodes helped make thereputations of future U.S. presidents: Gen. Zachary Taylor'scapture of Buena Vista in the Mexican War and Theodore Roosevelt'scharge up San Juan Hill in the Spanish-American War. In 1961,President John F. Kennedy's administration would be shaken afterU.S. failure to deliver military backing to Cuban exiles seeking tofoster revolution in their homeland.   It was more than 80 years ago when U.S. troops first landed inPanama.   Then, the troops were deployed to support a fledgling Panamaniangovernment that had revolted against Colombian rule in late 1903.The United States had failed to convince Colombia to support thePanama Canal project but the new Panamanian government endorsed it,beginning the U.S. presence in the southernmost country of CentralAmerica.   That first use of American military power in Panama came nearly50 years after U.S. troops ventured onto Latin American soil in awar with Mexico.   A decade after Texans revolted against the Mexican government,U.S. soldiers crossed into Mexico in 1846, beginning a war thatgave the United States land that is now California, Nevada, Utahand parts of Arizona and New Mexico.   Americans ultimately occupied much of Mexico and the war broughtfame to Zachary Taylor, whose forces won the battle of Buena Vistain 1847. That victory catapulted Taylor to the presidency, and thewar ended in 1848.   It would be 67 years before U.S. troops again invaded Mexico,this time to seize the shipping port Veracruz after U.S. sailorswere arrested in Tampico. President Woodrow Wilson ordered the 1914seizure to block arms shipments to Mexican forces.   In 1916, Gen. John J. Pershing was sent into Mexico in anunsuccessful bid to capture revolutionary leader Francisco PanchoVilla, blamed for the deaths of 16 Americans during an incursioninto Columbus, N.M.   Wilson also set U.S. Marines to quell political unrest in Haitiin 1915. They remained until 1934.   It was the Spanish-American War of 1898 that brought U.S. forcesto Cuba and Puerto Rico.   The U.S. battleship Maine was off the coast of Cuba when itmysteriously exploded in February 1898. President William McKinley,who had sent the ship there to protect U.S. interests in Cubaduring an uprising against Spanish rule, blamed Spain for theexplosion and declared war.   Five months later, U.S troops landed in Puerto Rico, thencontrolled by Spain. Theodore Roosevelt's exploits at San Juan Hillhelped set him on the road to the presidency.   Puerto Rico would later become a U.S. commonwealth. Cuba wouldexperience a period of turmoil that intermittently involved U.S.forces.   Most American troops left Cuba in 1902 after elections and anagreement with the Cuban government for a lease for a U.S. navalbase at Guantanamo Bay. The U.S. forces would return four yearslater because opposition to the elected government had turned intoopen rebellion.   American troops left Cuba again in 1909 after a new governmentwas elected, but returned in 1917 to protect American companies andcitizens during yet another uprising.   Cuba's turmoil would continue through dictatorships and the riseto power of Fidel Castro in January 1959.   Two years later, President John F. Kennedy refused to commitU.S. assistance to a group of Cuban exiles seeking to oust Castroby invading at the Bay of Pigs on Cuba's south coast. The exileshad been promised U.S. assistance and the episode proved a majorembarrassment for the Kennedy administration.   Nineteen months later, Kennedy imposed a naval blockade of Cubaduring the 1962 missile crisis, stationing U.S. vessels off Cubauntil the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its missiles from Cuba.</TEXT></DOC>