<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890320-0105 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-03-20-89 1313EST</FILEID><FIRST>u w BC-ScotusAt-a-Glance     03-20 0587</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Scotus At-a-Glance,580</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here, at a glance, are highlights of actionstaken Monday by the Supreme Court.      NEWSPAPER MERGER      The court cleared the way for the partial merger of Detroit's twodaily newspapers.   The court, over two dissenting votes, set aside an earlierpostponement that had been granted by Justice William J. Brennan.   A federal appeals court panel here voted 2-1 last Jan. 27 touphold then-Attorney General Edwin Meese's decision to allow thenewspapers to form a joint operating agreement under the federalNewspaper Preservation Act.   The 1970 law empowers the attorney general to give financiallyfailing newspapers an exemption from antitrust laws.   Under the joint operating agreement, the Detroit Free Press andThe Detroit News would combine their business, advertising andproduction departments but maintain separate news and editorialstaffs.   The case is Michigan Citizens for an Independent Press vs.Thornburgh, A-695.      PEYOTE      The court agreed to decide whether there is a constitutionalright to take the hullocinogenic drug peyote as a religious practice.   The court agreed to review a ruling that Oregon officialsviolated religious freedom by denying unemployment compensation totwo men fired for using peyote at religious ceremonies.   The case is Employment Division vs. Smith, 88-1213.      AGE BIAS      The court agreed to use a New Jersey case to decide whetherfederal courts may make it easier to broaden age discriminationlawsuits against employers.   The court said it will hear an appeal by Hoffmann-La Roche Inc.,which is accused of bias against older workers in laying off some1,200 employees at New Jersey plants.   The case is Hoffmann-LaRoche vs. Sperling, 88-1203.      ABORTION DEMONSTRATION      The court turned away an appeal by 10 people criminally convictedfor their participation in a 1985 protest demonstration at aPhiladelphia abortion clinic.   The justices, refused to hear arguments that the defendantswrongly were barred from asserting medical justification as adefense for their crimes.   The case is Markum vs. Pennsylvania, 88-1218.      HUSTLER      The court let stand rulings that 1985 articles in Hustlermagazine villifying two women active in fighting pornography areconstiutionally protected expressions of opinion.   The two women lost their attempts to revive libel lawsuitsagainst Hustler magazine and its publisher, Larry Flynt.   The cases are Leidholdt vs. L.F.P. Inc., 88-1214, and Ault v.Hustler Magazine Inc., 88-1215.      RELIGIOUS SERVICES      Left intact rulings that the requirement of a Florida-basedcompany that all its employees attend weekly Christian devotionalservices violated the rights of an atheist who worked there.   The Townley Manufacturing Co., based in Chandler, Fla., lost itsappeal, in which its lawyers argued that the owner'sconstitutionally protected religious freedoms were violated.   The case is Townley Manufacturing Co. vs. EEOC, 88-988.      ENVIRONMENTAL SUITS      The court agreed to decide a narrow, but potentially significant,point of environmental law _ one that may affect the effectivenessof private citizen enforcement.   The justices said they will consider reinstating a lawsuitagainst a Tillamook County, Ore., landfill by the couple who own anadjacent dairy farm.   The case is Hallstrom vs. Tillamook County, 88-42.      MILK      The court turned away a still-pending, big-money antitrustdispute over the sale of raw milk.   The justices, without comment, let stand a federal appeals courtruling that could cost millions for two cooperative associations ofdairy farmers and a marketing agent for dairy cooperatives.   The cases are Central Milk Producers Cooperative vs. NationalFarmers Organization, 88-1247, and Associated Milk Producers vs.National Farmers Organization, 88-1248.</TEXT></DOC>