<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP891028-0098 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-10-28-89 1239EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r i BC-Bush-Text     10-28 0771</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Bush-Text,780 up</SECOND><DATELINE>SAN JOSE, Costa Rica (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Bush'snews conference Saturday:   First a statement and then some questions. Be glad to respond.   Together with the other democratic leaders of the hemisphere,I've just met with the leaders of the political opposition inNicaragua and Panama. And here in Costa Rica, saluting 100 years ofdemocracy, these discussions, sponsored by Costa Rica's mainpolitical parties, serve as an especially fitting tribute to thespirit of the occasion and the spirt of the times. And thesecourageous leaders left us with a stronger appreciation of thedaily difficulties of the pro-democracy movements in these twocountries. I conveyed to them the encouragement and the admirationof the American people.   And it's ironic that the shining example of Latin Americandemocracy in which we meet lies between two nations whose rulershave so long and so harshly ignored the will of their own people.From Cape Horn to the Bering Straits, from Chile's promising newplebiscite to the Alaska-Soviet border we opened after 40 years, anew breath of freedom has swept the Americas with hope and freedom,hope and opportunity, and bringing us even closer to the world'sfirst completely democratic hemisphere.   A few nations, however, have been left behind, shackled byfailed ideology and failed leadership. To the north, the Nicaraguanpeople have waited for democracy since they ended the Somoza regime10 years ago, that dictatorship. And elections are planned for nextFebruary, but, to date ... there are some disturbing signs.   The world, I believe, is dismayed at Mr. Ortega's announcementlast night that he had unilaterally ended the cease-fire. Iunderstand there may have been some refinements on that today, butthat was what he said. And it's a shameful blow to democracy, andthe fact that no mention of this came during the course of thehours of dialogue that we all had, the presidents of thesedemocracies, demonstrates just how shameful an act it truly is.   Regarding the forthcoming elections, as was so evident inPanama, the people of this hemisphere know the difference betweenreal elections and sham elections. And the hemisphere will notsettle for anything less than free and fair elections. The peopleof Nicaragua know the kind of steps that the ruling Sandinistas cantake to show a real commitment to fair elections. And the wholeworld will be watching this one. And if the Sandinistas don't allowfair debates and clean elections, they confirm the dictatorshiplong before the elections even take place. The world understandsthat no real democracy is threatened by the voices of its ownpeople.   And it's ironic that here we are, and I'm so glad I came to thismeeting to salute Costa Rica's hundred years of democracy. It wasvery ironic. There was only one man in a military uniform in thismeeting of democracies.   Speaking of military uniforms, speaking of dictatorships, to thesouth, the outlaw Noriega regime simply must be replaced. This isnot the judgment of Uncle Sam. It is the judgment of the Panamanianpeople, and it is the judgment of history, and it is the judgment,I believe, of every single democratically elected president who wasat this meeting.   Today Noriega may think his lead-pipe politics have won. Buthe's won nothing more than a fragile status quo, and democracyreally will triumph in Panama. I'm confident of that. It's aquestion of when, not if, and by putting his own personal interestsabove those of the Panamanian people, Noriega will only continue tolose support internationally, inside the Panamanian defense forces,and among the growing number of courageous Panamanians who dare toresist his oppressive rule.   Let me assure you, the United States will continue to work withthe democracies in this hemisphere and around the world to supportthe struggle of the Panamanian people. Today, every continent isbeing swept by the new breeze of political change. And the worldhas watched in wonder as brave men and women have taken to thestreets to claim their rights, to proclaim a faith in democracy.Some governments respond with reform, some with repression, butthere is no longer any doubt which side history is on. The day ofthe despot, the day of the dictator is over, finished.   The Nicaraguans and Panamanians with whom I've just met arebrave and inspiring people. They stand in the vanguard of history,and they deserve the active support of all who support democracy inthis hemisphere.   I'd be glad to respond to questions.   MORE</TEXT></DOC>