<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890408-0021 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-04-08-89 0149EST</FILEID><FIRST>u w BC-NorthTrial-Testimony 3rdAdd   04-08 1003</FIRST><SECOND>BC-North Trial-Testimony, 3rd Add,950</SECOND><HEAD>WASHN: the resistance.</HEAD><TEXT>   (North resumes his testimony after a lunch break.)   SULLIVAN: Would you read this letter. Is it a letter or the backand front of a postcard of some sort? Do you recall?   NORTH: This appears to be a copy of a card with the front andback written on it, yes, sir.   SULLIVAN: All right. Would you read that to the jury, please.This is from Vice President Bush in November 1985.   NORTH: It says, ``en route to Andrew's 11-29-85. Dear Ollie, asI head off to Maine for Thanksgiving, I just want to wish you ahappy one with the hope that you get some well deserved rest. Onewith the hope that you get some well deserved rest. One of the manythings I have to be thankful for is the way ... in which you haveperformed under fire in tough situations.   ``Your dedication and tireless work with the hostage thing andwith Central America really gives me cause for great pride in you,and thanks. Get some turkey. George Bush.''   SULLIVAN: That was received in November 1985 ... correct?   NORTH: Yes, sir.   SULLIVAN: Now ... would you explain to the jury, please, how itis that you got involved in your office with trying to rescuehostages?   NORTH: The hostage problem was part of the overall program ofcombating terrorism that the administration had, and it was a veryimportant element of it because we had an increasing number ofhostages being held. ... A consultant who was working for the NSC,Mr. Ledeen ... had brought back from Israel information that theythought that they could achieve an opening to Iran, to moderateelements within the Iranian government, that there was greatpolarization, great disarray in Iran, that the Israelis were fairlysure of their information and had an agent working for them thatcould put us in touch with them. And it involved the exchange ofcertain Israeli weapons to Iran which could result in the releaseof both Israeli hostages in Lebanon and the American hostages inLebanon.   SULLIVAN: Colonel, would you explain why you are dealing withthe country of Iran if the hostages were in Lebanon?   NORTH: Within Lebanon, there were several groups of Shiafundamentalists, Moslem fundamentalists who had political loyaltyto the Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran. ... and so the Israelis, and weagreed, though that if you could influence some of the moremoderate elements in Iran to cut them off financially, or toconvince them to turn loose the American hostages and the Jewishhostages that were being held, along with some other europeans likethe French and Italians and British ...   SULLIVAN: Were there missiles sent to Iran and did a hostagecome out as a result?   NORTH: Yes, it did. (The hostage was Rev. Benjamin Weir) ...Itook, at the direction of the president, a letter from thepresident to meet Mr. Weir, Reverend Weir; met with him; had a CIAairplane take me to the meeting, in an effort to assure ReverendWeir that his cooperation was necessary for us to be able to helprescue the other _ or recover the other hostages.   (North describes how he continued meeting with Israeliintermediaries in an attempt to open up discussions with moderatesin Iran in an attempt to gain the release of U.S. hostages beingheld in Lebanon.)   NORTH: I went and talked to Mr. McFarlane about this in terms ofhow far we were going on this initiative and what role we were toplay. And he told me simply that we were going to allow theIsraelis to proceed with this, that it was their initiative andthat we were to simply position the necessary people in the rightplaces to be able to safely recover the hostages and be preparedfor a high level meeting with the Iranians.   SULLIVAN: Colonel, let's focus on the dates ... a little bithere. September, '85, TOW missiles are shipped, is that correct?   NORTH: I believe so, yes, sir. ...   SULLIVAN: You were not involved in the earliest stages of that,correct?   NORTH: No, but at one point I did ask Mr. McFarlane if thepresident approved it and he told me he had.   (North describes a shipment of Hawk missiles to Iran through theIsraelis to get the hostages freed.)   SULLIVAN: Were the transportation and logistical problems (withthe shipment) eventually worked out?   NORTH: Yes, they were from purely the transportation problem.But they weren't worked out as far as the Iranians were concerned.... (the missiles) were eventually shipped and they did arrive in acity in Iran, not Tehran, but another city, and it wasn't the full80 that they had asked for. It was only 18, I believe.   SULLIVAN: And was it anticipated that hostages would be releasedas a result of this November, '85 Hawk shipment?   NORTH: Yes, and we had gone to some lengths to position theappropriate people to receive them. ... we had no operational rolein this other than to recover the hostages when they were released.We weren't planning any of this. We were kind of responding to it.   SULLIVAN: Now, Colonel, focusing your attention after the Hawkshipment could you describe to the jury what problem arose afterthe Hawks arrived in Iran? Did a hostage get out as anticipated?   NORTH: On the November shipment, no. Apparently what theIranians had been told by the Israeli agent was something differentthan what they expected. And they were to put it mildly very angryover what was delivered in that November shipment. The Novembershipment was 18 Hawk missiles and they had apparently expectedsomething entirely different. ... the Iranians ... came back to theIsraelis very, very upset about what had transpired and they saidthat they'd been cheated and that therefore nobody was going to bereleased, no Israelis, no Americans, no Europeans, nobody.</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE><TEXT/></DOC>