<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890107-0098 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-01-07-89 1454EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w AM-Reagan-Text     01-07 0827</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Reagan-Text,840</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Reagan's radioaddress Saturday:   My fellow Americans, on Monday I submit to Congress my finalbudget. It's a responsible plan which cuts the deficit withouttouching Social Security, weakening defense, or reducing benefits tothe needy. And the best news is that this budget proves it can bedone without raising your taxes.   Our growing economy will, in the next fiscal year, produce $84billion in new revenues with no increase in tax rates. Since thewhole economic pie is expanding, the federal government's slicegrows along with the private sector. Raising taxes would be thesurest way to kill the economic goose that lays the golden eggs. So   I leave as I came, dead-set against any new taxes. And even ifthere were a tax increase, history shows that Congress would almostcertainly spend the additional money, it couldn't be used to reducethe deficit. It would just mean that you had to pay for an evenbigger government. And now, with an estimated $84 billion newrevenues coming in, we can both reduce the deficit and increasefederal spending.   By combining new revenues with previously scheduled reductionsand savings in other areas, priority programs will grow by nearly$50 billion. There are more funds for air safety, fighting crime,housing the poor, and the war on drugs. Funds for AIDS research andprevention is increased by 24 percent. And money to clean up toxicwaste goes up by a fifth. We also increase funds for the science andspace program, and for basic biomedical research. And student aidfunds are increased again, bringing it to a level 83 percent higherthan where it stood in 1980.   Real defense spending is increased by 2 percent. This is a smallincrease, but an important one _ the price of peace and security forAmerica. Through strength we achieved greater realism in theU.S.-Soviet relationship and breakthroughs in arms reduction. Ourdefense budget will enable us to continue on this path. Let'sremember that despite the internal reforms in the Soviet Union, theyare modernizing their weapons at a rapid pace, spending a far largershare of Gross National Product on weapons than the United Statesdoes.   Spending on Medicare and Medicaid will increase by $10 billion inthe next fiscal year. But, if the past is any guide, the headlineswill claim we've actually cut funding. Well, ``t'ain't so.'' InWashington, when spending goes up less than had been projected, theycall that a ``cut,'' even though more of your tax dollars are beingspent than ever before. With Medicare, we've simply limited theincrease in payments to providers of services. There is no effect onthe people who receive the benefits.   So, my fiscal year 1990 budget provides for the needy, does notraise taxes; and, by controlling the growth in spending, reduces thedeficit next year by nearly $70 billion. This not only meets theGramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction target, it reduces thedeficit even further and puts us on track to a balanced budget and amodest surplus by fiscal year 1993. This budget is a realisticprogram which protects the working families of America, providesadequate support for those who depend on government, and helpsassure America's prosperity in the years to come.   I've often spoken of the rising income Americans have enjoyed inrecent years, but one group lags behind. According to a new reportby the Bipartisan Commission on Federal Salaries, real pay for toplevel government jobs has fallen by 35 percent since 1969 due toinflation, while private sector pay has outpaced inflation. So, mybudget includes higher pay for vital positions ranging from judgesto scientists to elected officials. This increase is still less thanwhat was lost to inflation. Even after this raise, the real incomeof a Circuit Court judge will be 19 percent less than in 1969.   The cost of these increases will be absorbed in the budgetwithout slowing progress in the deficit, and we'll be gettingsomething important in return. When salaries are too low, it's hardto attract and keep America's best in government. Federal judges areleaving the bench in record numbers, partly because they're paidless than junior members of law firms.   The National Institutes of Health that fight cancer and othergrave diseases have vacancies for senior researchers that have beenempty for 10 years, due to poor pay. Also troubling is that someofficials, particularly in Congress, now supplement their incomewith special interest honoraria payments. My support for the payincrease rests on my firm belief that such payments undermine theintegrity of our government and should be abolished. We must bewilling to pay for excellence in government, or risk a governmentrun only by people of wealth, or by those beholden to specialinterests.   Until next week, thanks for listening, and God bless you.</TEXT></DOC>