<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890808-0004 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-08-08-89 0051EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r a PM-APMEPublicService     08-08 0813</FIRST><SECOND>PM-APME Public Service,0840</SECOND><HEAD>Public Service Finalists Announced</HEAD><DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Twenty newspapers have been selected asfinalists in the Associated Press Managing Editors Association's19th annual Public Service Awards competition.   The finalists were announced Monday by the APME judges, who metin New York City.   The finalists were chosen from 126 entries _ 73 from newspaperswith more than 50,000 circulation and 53 with less than 50,000circulation.   One winner from each category will be announced in October atthe APME convention in Des Moines, Iowa.   ``The high quality of the entries reflects the extraordinarycommitment of talent and resources by newspapers to probingexaminations of the core problems afflicting the communities weserve,'' said Robert H. Giles, immediate past president of APME andchair of the judging committee.   ``The themes of the entries focused on the most troublingproblems we face as a democratic society: drugs, homelessness, careof the aged, toxic chemicals, race relations, the environment,governmental corruption and incompetence,'' said Giles, who iseditor and publisher of The Detroit News.   Giles said the judges were particularly impressed with thestrong entries from the smaller newspapers.   Finalists in the less than 50,000 category, listedalphabetically, are:   The Albuquerque (N.M.) Tribune, for a report on the effects ofalcoholism among the Indian residents of Gallup, N.M.   The State-Times of Baton Rouge, La., for its investigation ofimproprieties by a parish clerk of court that led to a specialgrand jury investigation.   The Beverly (Mass.) Times and The Peabody (Mass.) Times, for anin-depth report on the homeless in the suburbs of Boston.   Gwinnett Daily News, of Lawrenceville, Ga., for its disclosuresthat county officials and their spouses had spent $50,000 in publicmoney on a junket to New York. The stories led to reforms andrepayment of most of the money.   Herald-Dispatch of Huntington, W.Va., for a report through whichWest Virginians set the agenda for the state's gubernatorialcampaign.   The Journal of Commerce (New York City), for its investigationof how the United States handles famine relief shipments to poornations. The stories forced the Department of Agriculture to holdopen bidding for contracts to ship the food.   Naples (Fla.) Daily News, for its special report on destituteHaitian, Mexican and Guatemalan migrant workers who had beenvictimized by slumlords.   Poughkeepsie (N.Y.) Journal, for a series that exposed howbigotry affected the lives of Dutchess County's small blackcommunity.   Scottsdale (Ariz.) Progress, for an investigation of abuses inland deals that allowed developers to pay low taxes and benefitfrom special city projects tailored to their developments. Thestories led to a series of reforms.   The Wilkes-Barre (Pa.) Times Leader, for an investigation intoillegal activities by local sewer department officials. The storieswere followed by a public investigation and reforms.   Finalists from newspapers with more than 50,000 circulation are,alphabetically:   Anchorage (Alaska) Daily News, for its coverage of the ExxonValdez oil spill.   Chicago Tribune, for its investigation into the mismanagement,greed and corruption that created the savings and loan crisis.   Colorado Springs (Colo.) Gazette Telegraph, for an investigationof the U.S. Olympic Committee that revealed widespreadimproprieties and led to corrective measures.   The Detroit News, for its investigation of a $2 million landdeal that became a $42 million taxpayer purchase of used equipment,which the city later resold for a nickel on the dollar. During theinvestigation, the city's chief lawyer was jailed for ignoring ajudge's order to provide public documents to the newspaper.   The Greenville (S.C.) News, for its examination of substandardhousing in South Carolina.   The Hartford (Conn.) Courant, for its series ``TwoConnecticuts,'' which explored inequality and separateness in thestate.   The Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel, for its series that brought topublic view a system of neglect and abuse in homes for the aged inFlorida. The series led to reforms.   Roanoke (Va.) Times andamp; World-News, for an investigation of howVirginia's weak regulation of the pest control industry hadresulted in shocking abuses. The newspaper's efforts spurred thestate Legislature to pass a tough law.   San Francisco Examiner, for its exhaustive portrait ofhomosexuals in America.   USA Today, for its extensive examination of campus security at50 U.S. colleges and universities that resulted in a comprehensivereport card on campus crime.   The judges of the APME Public Service Awards competition arepast presidents of APME. In addition to Giles, they are: LarryAllison, senior vice president-editor of the Long Beach (Calif.)Press-Telegram; Michael J. Davies, editor and publisher of TheHartford Courant; James F. Daubel, editor and publisher of theNews-Messenger, of Fremont, Ohio; Robert J. Haiman, president ofthe Poynter Institute for Media Studies, St. Petersburg, Fla.; TedM. Natt, editor and publisher of The Daily News, of Longview,Wash., and Joseph W. Shoquist, dean of the College of Journalismand Mass Communications at the University of South Carolina.</TEXT></DOC>