<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP890712-0090 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-07-12-89 0955EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i BC-Bush-Text 2ndAdd   07-12 1125</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Bush-Text, 2nd Add,1,120</SECOND><HEAD>BUDAPEST, Hungary: successful economy.</HEAD><TEXT>   Last Thursday at the White House, I invited leaders frombusiness, education and labor and other fields, to come to the WhiteHouse and discuss the new private sector opportunities opening up inHungary. And their response was enthusiastic.   This was especially true of Hungarian Americans, so proud to bebuilding a bridge between their new country and their mother land.As long as our two governments ease the way, the people of Americaand Hungary can do the rest. The people can do the rest.   And it is in this spirit that I want to announce the followingmeasures:   _First, as I said in Warsaw, I will propose at the Paris EconomicSummit concerted Western action for Poland and Hungary, to back yourreforms with economic and technical assistance from the summitpartners. Of course, our efforts for Hungary will be targeted toyour needs.   _And second, I will ask the United States Congress to authorize a$25 million fund as a source of new capital to invigorate theHungarian private sector. I'll also encourage parallel efforts fromthe other nations of the economic summit.   _And third, once your parliament passes the new emigrationlegislation proposed by your council of ministers, I will inform ourCongress that Hungary is in full compliance with the Jackson-VanikAmendments to our 1974 trade law.   No country has yet been released from the restrictions of thisamendment, so I am pleased to tell you that Hungary will be thefirst. And this action will give Hungary the most liberal access tothe American market for the longest terms possible under our laws.   _Fourth, America is prepared to provide your country with accessto our Generalized System of Preferences, which offers selectivetariff relief.   Simply put, these last two measures will allow you to takeadvantage of the largest single market in the entire world.   _And fifth, we've concluded a draft agreement to authorize theOverseas Private Investment Corporation _ OPIC, we call it _ tooperate in Hungary. And once our Senate passes the enablinglegislation, OPIC will be able to provide insurance to encourageAmerican investment in private enterprises in Hungary. Through OPIC,American business executives will see firsthand the greatopportunity of Hungary.   Private investment is critical for Hungary. It means jobs,innovation, progress, but most of all private investment means abrighter future for your children, a brighter future for Hungary.   And yet, economic progress cannot be at the expense of the air webreathe and the water we drink. Six weeks ago in Mainz, I proposedcooperation between East and West on environmental issues.   And that is why I will ask the United States Congress toappropriate $5 million to establish an international environmentalcenter for Central and Eastern Europe to be based right here inBudapest, which will bring together private and government expertsand organizations to address the ecological crisis.   After all, our shared heritage is the earth, and the fate of theearth transcends borders. It isn't just an East-West issue. Hungaryhas led Eastern and Central Europe in addressing the concerns ofyour citizens for cleaner air and water, and now you can do evenmore, working with the West to build a bridge of technical andscientific cooperation.   Along these lines, I'm also pleased to announce that the UnitedStates has proposed an agreement between our two countries toestablish scientific and technical cooperation in the basic sciencesand in specific areas, including the environment, medicine andnuclear safety.   It is my hope that this visit will also lead to a wider exchangebetween East and West, so our scientists, our artists and ourenvironmentalists can learn from one another, so that our soldiersand statesmen can discuss peace, and our students _ God bless them _can discuss the future.   But, to discuss anything requires a common language. The teachingof the English language is one of the most popular American exports.And as students, you know that English is the lingua franca of worldbusiness, the key to clinching deals from Hong Kong to Toronto.   So to open the global market to more Hungarians, I am pleased toannounce that the Peace Corps will, for the first time, operate in aEuropean country. And, our Peace Corps instructors will come toBudapest and all 19 counties to teach English.   And in such exchanges, we want to help you in your quest for anew beginning as a democratic Hungary. So, the United States is alsocommitting more than $6 million to cultural and educationalopportunities in Eastern Europe.   We will make available funds for a series of major, newU.S.-Hungarian exchange programs among congressmen and legislativeexperts; among labor and business leaders; among legal experts;among community leaders; educators; and young people.   We are creating dozens of fellowships to enable Hungarians tostudy at American universities, and we will fund endowed chairs inAmerican studies at your universities, and books, many thousands ofthem, to fill the shelves of your new International ManagementCenter, and the libraries of schools and universities across Hungary.   And the United States will also open, within the next severalyears, an American house in the center of Budapest. Today, thecelebrated American architect, Robert Stern, is releasing his designfor this center, which will be an open house of books, magazines,and videocassettes, an open house of ideas.   And so in conclusion, in economic reform and democratic change,in cultural and environmental cooperation there are greatopportunities and great challenges.   Hungary has a lot of work ahead, and so do the United States andHungary, working together to build this better future, a dynamicfuture.   Your challenge is enormous and historic: to build a structure ofpolitical change and decentralized economic enterprise on the ruinsof a failed Stalinist system. And given the opportunity to show yourcharacteristic initiative, creativity and resourcefulness, I believethat the Hungarian people will meet the challenge.   You stand on the threshold of a new era of economic developmentand yes, political change. And I believe with all my heart that youare ready to meet the future.   I see a country well on the way. I see a country rich in humanresources, rich in the moral courage of its people. I see a nationtranscending its past and reaching out to its destiny.   I congratulate you for having come so far. And let us be equal tothe opportunity that lies before us. Let us have history write of usthat we were the generation that made Europe whole and free.   Thank you all. God bless each and every one of you. Thank youvery much.</TEXT></DOC>