<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP901006-0125 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NY-10-06-90 2113EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r w AM-GovernmentShutdown 1stadd   10-06 1108</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Government Shutdown, 1st add,a0561,1,200</SECOND><NOTE>EDS: This is an optional add for members who may desire more detailon the various national parks^WASHN: to them.</NOTE><TEXT>   -A busload of tourists from Indiana drove six hours to reach theGreat Smoky Mountain National Park, nnly to be turned away byrangers Saturday at Clingman's Dome, the highest point in the park.   ``It's really unfair to rub this in the people's face. This isreally not helping relations with the public. I would suspect ifthey wanted to get in the good graces of the people, they wouldwork for free for one day,'' said Bob Davenport, director for theweekend tour arranged by Wandering Wheels tour company from Upland,Ind. At the park visitors center, Eddie Christensen of Napa,Calif., a retired Corps of Engineers employee said: ``I definitelyfeel like George Bush is doing this to make Congress see his way. Idon't see why they should make the people suffer for it. It'spolitics, no question about it.''   -In Montana, `closed'' signs went up on the gates at the CusterBattlefield National Monument and the National Bison Range, but fewother effects of the national budget impasse were immediatelyvisible. Visitors could still enter both places, as well as Glacierand Yellowstone national parks, but few or no services wereavailable.   -At Yosemite National Park in California, some 7,000 camperswere told they would have to clear out by 1 p.m. Sunday because ofthe budget crisis. ``I think it's horrible,'' said Becky Vaccarezzaof Stockton, who months ago had made reservations for a week-longvacation with five other adults and six children. ``When you're athome you deal with the bills and everything. But when you come uphere, this is everybody's escape. This is how you're supposed toget away from budgets. It's a major disappointment. We had so manyplans for the kids.'' Yosemite superintendent Michael Finley saidhe was told by Interior Department officials in Washington not toclose the park, but to curtail all operations except emergencyservices.   -Elsewhere in California, the budget crisis also caused ashutdown of other popular venues in California, including Alcatraz,Muir Woods and Stinson Beach in the Golden Gate National RecreationArea in Northern California, and the Joshua Tree and Death Valleynational monuments in Southern California. Odette Zwetzig, actingsuperintendent of Death Valley National Monument, said, ``I've beenwith the park service for over 15 years. I have seen shutdowns ...(but) I have not seen quite the hullabaloo that is going on withthis one. ... I've been around long enough to know that eventuallythey'll pass a budget. In the meantime ... the (tourists) are verysad. They've come so far and they've made their plans for avacation and there are no services we can offer.''   -In Michigan, the budget stalemate was having an impact in thedeepest woods, where park rangers and naturalists were amongvictims. Layoffs were reported at the Pictured Rocks NationalLakeshore at Munising and at the Sleeping Bear Dunes on LakeMichigan near Empire. That left some tourists on their own Saturdayin finding the best places to see the fall color display, which isat its peak in the area. At the Picture Rocks on Lake Superior, thevisitor center was open Saturday, but scheduled to close Sunday andMonday said Julie Fosbender, an information assistant for theMunising Ranger District. ``If they want information on the park ora back country camping permit, there won't be anyone around,'' shesaid. ``Then again, there won't be anyone out there anyway to checkand see if they have a permit.''   -In Texas, visitors were turned away from seashores and mountainlodges. At Big Bend National Park in West Texas, spokesman RoyGiven had to notify guests on Saturday they were no longer welcomeat the remote wilderness park. The park hotel, restaurant andstables will remain open, but Big Bend no longer is offering itsguided tours, campground facilities or its back country and riverpermits.   -In Pennsylvania, historic buildings were closed, hikes canceledand guides absent at National Park Service sites across the state.``We stopped here especially to see the treasures of Philadelphia,and they're closed to us,'' said Dee Gilmore, 67, of Riverside,Calif., who was visiting Independence National Historical Park. ``Ithink this is a sad way for President Bush to try to get his ownway.'' Andrea Vogel, 10, of Washington, D.C., who was travelingwith her parents and brother, said, ``We came to see the history ofPhiladelphia and I don't think it's fair that they should closedown the tourist sites. Why would people want to come toPhiladelphia anymore?''   -In Washington state, Olympic National Park was shutting downand Mount Rainier National Park was closing all but one smallcampground.   -In Arkansas, five national parks were closed.   -In northern Minnesota's Voyageur's National Park, onlyessential workers were overseeing the park's operation, said RaoulLufbery, facility manager. One ranger was patrolling the northerndistrict of the park and one in the southern district, Lufberysaid. Usually, there are four to five rangers patrolling the parkon weekends, he said. The park will remain open, with its trails,campsites and boat launches still available, he said.   -In Florida, ticket takers at Everglades National Park were senthome, allowing motorists to drive in free. Inside, most of theprivately-run concessions remained open. At the opposite end of thestate, Jerry Eubanks, supervisor of the Gulf Islands NationalSeashore headquartered in Gulf Breeze, said the park that includesbarrier islands and mainland recreation areas in the FloridaPanhandle and Mississippi will remain open. ``We have looked atalternatives,'' he said. ``We've just refreshed in our own mindswhat are essential health and safety measures, but we have no plansas of now for shutting down.''   -In Connecticut, the shutdown and wrangling in Washington hadlittle effect on services, but forced the state's congressionalleaders to cancel their campaign stops in the state Saturday. Forincumbents trying to get in some campaigning in the final stretchbefore the election in November, losing a chance to campaign attown fairs and parades throughout the state was frustrating. ``Ijust can't tell you what it's like to know your opponent is outthere campaigning and you can't do anything,'' said Republican Rep.Christopher Shays, who faces a challenge from attorney Alfred J.Smith, a Democrat from Darien.   -In Iowa, hundreds of visitors were touring the Herbert HooverPresidential Library and Museum, most buildings on the 186-acregrounds were locked up and National Park Service rangers were offduty, said a clerk at the museum. The library and museum areoperated by the National Archives and Records Administration, whilethe grounds - which include Hoover's grave site, his birthplacecottage and a blacksmith shop - are under the jurisdiction of theNational Park Service. ``As to why we're open today and theNational Park Service is not, I don't know,'' said ChrisChristensen, a sales clerk in the library and museum.   -In Nebraska, many federal employees nervously enjoyed theirthree-day weekend. ``I probably should be worried, but I'm not,''said Doug Druliner, a hydrologist with the U.S. Geological Survey.``We've gone through this thing in the past, but there was not asmuch hype about it. We've had furloughs in the past and been paidlater.'' Jim Kula, a service representative with the SocialSecurity Department, agreed. ``But this is the first time they wererequired to give us a formal 30-day warning that there might befurloughs,'' he added.   -In Wyoming, Yellowstone National Park officials began a phasedclosure of the park. Spokeswoman Joan Anzelmo said that while thepark was open on Saturday and would remain open through the longColumbus Day weekend, it was staffed only by emergency and utilitypersonnel. The Old Faithful Inn and four campgrounds were expectedto remain open through the weekend, Anzelmo said. ``There is asnowstorm here and we don't want to strand visitors,'' she said.``Later in the weekend, we may have to start further closures. Wehope we don't have to close down ... completely. ... BecauseYellowstone is so large and has a large visitor population, we justcan't simply shut a gate and walk away.''</TEXT></DOC>