<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP900124-0083 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-01-24-90 1043EST</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-Bush-Text     01-24 0758</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Bush-Text,750-up</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here is the text of President Bush's commentsWednesday at a news conference:   Good morning, good morning. Well, as you know, I'll soon presentmy budget to the Congress, and as I prepare to do so, it strikes methat our nation faces challenges on many fronts. So let's give eachthe attention it deserves tomorrow.   I'm going to announce the second phase of our strategy to fightdrugs in the schools and the streets of America. The future of thiscountry depends on whether we can give our children a chance togrow up drug-free.   And secondly, I will soon present our plan to restructureAmerica's defenses in the wake of the dramatic changes that aretaking place abroad, and I'm proposing a defense budget that beginsthe transition to a restructured military, a new strategy that ismore flexible, more geared to contingencies outside of Europe whilecontinuing to meet our inescapable responsibility to NATO and tomaintaining the global balance.   And finally, Secretary Brady and Director Darman and ChairmanBoskin will put the details of our budget before the Americanpeople.   And as that occurs, other members of the administration, theCabinet, key agencies will provide an in-depth outline of theirefforts to address the many challenges of caring for the afflictedand uplifting the poor, cleaning the environment, educating ourkids, as well as other important issues.   All of this is preparatory to the State of the Union, one weekfrom today, in which I will speak to the broader issues that weface as a nation.   There are two items that I want to mention here today and thentake some questions. First, I've decided that the environmentalchallenges that face America and the world are so important thatthey must be addressed from the highest level of our government.   And at the beginning of this century, President Roosevelt,Theodore Roosevelt, helped pave the way for the establishment ofthe national park system. Twenty years ago, President Nixonestablished the EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, by executiveorder. That is now one of the largest and most important regulatoryagencies in the government.   And today, I'd like to announce another step forward in thisimportant tradition of support for conservation and environmentalprotection.   Many countries have environmental ministers, and now _ and withcabinet status. And I am convinced that that cabinet status willhelp influence the world's environmental policy. So, with so manydifficult decisions ahead, I'll need Bill Reilly's counsel, I'llneed him sitting at my side in the cabinet, and I'm pleased toendorse the elevation of the EPA to cabinet status by creating aDepartment of the Environment.   Senators Glenn and Bill Roth, chairman and ranking members ofthe Government _ Senate Government Affairs Committee _ haveintroduced legislation that would create this department.Congressman Conyers and Horton are working on similar legislation.   And I look forward to working with them and other interestedmembers of the House and Senate to enact legislation that wouldbring EPA to the cabinet table, where it now belongs.   And now, I'd like to address one other issue that I know isforemost on your minds. Every American should know _ I want to takethis opportunity to state this as strongly as I can _ that I willnot break faith with the Chinese students here. I have made thatvery clear from the very beginning.   And right after Tiananmen, I moved to protect the Chinesestudents in this country. Not one was sent back. They were safethen, and they are safe now, and they will be safe in the future.   And when Congress passed the Pelosi bill last fall, I was facedwith a choice. If I signed the bill, the students would still besafe, but China would retaliate and cut off future studentexchanges.   You see, I think the exchanges have brought forward the reformsthat have taken place in China. If you look back over yourshoulders for a starting point and compare it to the CulturalRevolution days, some of the reforms have taken place, steps havebeen taken forward, and regrettably, Tiananmen was a step _ agigantic step back. But I want to keep contact. I do not wantisolation.   If I vetoed the bill, I could take action to provide thestudents with even greater protection while keeping the door openfor more Chinese scholars to study here. And the price of thePelosi bill is lost opportunity.</TEXT></DOC>