<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP901030-0176 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NY-10-30-90 0015EST</FILEID><FIRST>r f PM-BusinessHighlights     10-30 0742</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Business Highlights,0890</SECOND><DATELINE>HIGHLAND PARK, Mich. (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Chrysler Corp. reported a $214million third-quarter loss, a performance that would have beenworse without record earnings at the company's financialsubsidiary.   The earnings report on Monday, which showed Chrysler did betterby loaning money than by building and selling cars, underscored itsdifficulties as the No. 3 Detroit automaker negotiates with theUnited Auto Workers to reach a new contract. The UAW instructedmembers to report to work even though the contract expired atmidnight.   ---   BOSTON (AP) - Tax initiatives in six states could result inreduced bond ratings at state and local levels if passed by votersin the Nov. 6 election, a major bond rating agency warned.   Moody's Investors Service said tax initiatives in Colorado,Massachusetts, Montana, Nebraska, Oregon and Utah could, ifapproved, lower the confidence financial advisers have in thosestates. The report was released last week.   ---   TEMPLE, Texas (AP) - Texas Instruments Inc. has joinedcompetitors who have unveiled lightweight laptop computersfeaturing an increasingly popular microprocessor.   The new notebook-size computer announced Monday, calledTravelmate 3000, costs less than one with a similar chip announcedtwo weeks ago by Compaq Computer Corp.   ---   NEW YORK (AP) - Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. announced a sweepingmanagement overhaul that could lead to several hundred job cuts atthe nation's biggest securities firm.   The reorganization, announced Monday, replaces Merrill'sseparate consumer and capital markets groups with six businessdivisions, eliminating a structure in place since 1984. It alsocreates a mechanism for Merrill to replace company chairman andchief executive William A. Schreyer, who is to retire in 1993 atage 65.   ---   NEW YORK (AP) - Leaders of striking Daily News unions planned anadvertiser boycott and management blamed its distribution problmson vandalism and theft.   The News said it distributed 906,000 copies of Monday's paper.The paper's normal weekday circulation is 1.18 million. VicePresident John T. Sloan accused strikers of threatening vendors andvandalizing newsstands.   ---   DALLAS (AP) - Deteriorating industry conditions, including adrop in housing starts, prompted Aancor Holdings Inc. andsubsidiary National Gypsum Co., to seek protection from creditors,officials say.   The privately held Aancor filed the voluntary petitions in U.S.Bankruptcy Court on Friday, officials said Monday. National Gypsumwas acquired by Aancor Holdings through a leveraged buyoutcompleted in April 1986.   ---   NEW YORK (AP) - American Express Co. has taken a swipe at ATandamp;T'spopular Universal credit card with a broad marketing strategy thatenables customers to easily charge calls using the MCI and Sprintlong-distance companies.   The ``Connect Plus'' package of services, announced Monday, letscardholders make long-distance calls by punching in their accountnumber, and offers 10 percent discounts on most MCI and Sprintcalls made using the American Express card.   It's the latest response by a financial services firm toAmerican Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.'s unexpectedly successful entryinto the credit card business last March.   ---   WASHINGTON (AP) - Congress' refusal to provide more money forsavings and loan bailouts will delay the closing of failedinstitutions for months and add millions, or even billions, ofdollars to taxpayers' costs, analysts say.   Legislators' election-year squeeze left the Resolution TrustCorp., the bailout agency created last year, without the fundsneeded to close more than 300 insolvent or near-insolvent thriftassociations.   ---   GENEVA (AP) - The world's major airlines meet this week todiscuss a likely round of international fare increases provoked bythe Persian Gulf crisis.   The International Air Transport Association's announcementMonday marked the second time since the Iraqi invasion Aug. 2 thatairlines will talk about fare hikes, which must be approved bygovernments. The last meeting in late August set fare increases ofup to 8 percent.   ---   NEW YORK (AP) - Oil prices moved above $34 per barrel in lighttrading on the futures market, amid concerns that a Soviet peaceeffort in the Persian Gulf had failed.   Light sweet crude oil on Monday rose $1.67 to $34.68 per barrelfor December delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange.Contracts for later months also settled higher.   ---   LONDON (AP) - Barclays Bank PLC, one of Britain's largest banks,plans to streamline domestic retail branch operations over the nextfive years by closing 110 offices and trimming 1,800 staff throughattrition.   The office cuts, mostly in urban centers, amount to slightlymore than 4 percent of Barclays' network of 2,600 retail bankbranches in Britain, while the staff cuts represent 1.5 percent ofits total domestic workforce of 87,000, the bank announced Monday.   ---</TEXT><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Stock prices fell Monday as traders found little inspiration inCongress's passage of a federal budget plan. The Dow Jones averageof 30 industrials tell 5.94 to 2,430.20.   Bond prices also fell for the same reason. The price of theTreasury's bellwether 30-year bond fell about $6.25 per $1,000 inface amount and its yield rose to 8.83 percent from 8.77 percentlate Friday.   Elsewhere, the dollar rose against most key currencies, goldrose after falling overseas, and other commodities were mixed.</TEXT></DOC>