<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP900827-0075 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-08-27-90 1440EST</FILEID><FIRST>u i PM-GulfRdp 6thLd-Writethru a0516 08-27 1216</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Gulf Rdp, 6th Ld-Writethru, a0516,1248</SECOND><HEAD>Iraq Frees American Dependents; U.N. Chief and Iraqi to Talk</HEAD><HEAD>LaserColor DOD500</HEAD><NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 6 grafs to UPDATE with State Department expellingsome Iraqi diplomats. Pick up 6th graf pvs, `In the...'</NOTE><BYLINE>By LISA GENASCI</BYLINE><BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE><TEXT>   Iraq allowed 52 American detainees to cross into Turkey todayand the U.N. secretary-general announced he would meet a top Iraqidiplomat to seek a peaceful resolution of the Middle East crisis.   In Washington, the State Department ordered a two-thirdsreduction in the Iraqi Embassy staff in retaliation for Baghdad'scrackdown on embassies in Kuwait.   State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said 36 Iraqidiplomats were being expelled, reducing the embassy's staff from 55to 19. Those expelled include seven diplomats and 29 members of thenon-diplomatic staff. The remaining Iraqi diplomats are beingrestricted to a 25-mile radius of Washington, she said.   The 52 Americans, dependents of diplomats from the U.S. Embassyin Kuwait who the Iraqis have refused to release, crossed intoTurkey at the Habur border post early today and later flew to aNATO base at Incirlik, 320 miles to the west.   Three members of the group, sons of diplomats, were turned backat the border by Iraqi officials, the State Department said inWashington. The three, all over age 18, were sent back to Baghdadunder escort.   The group's other members were to leave Turkey for the UnitedStates on Tuesday, said Sgt. Marty Davis, spokeswoman at Incirlik.   In the Persian Gulf, U.S. warships shadowed Iraqi vessels butdid not invoke a resolution passed by the U.N. Security Council onSaturday that sanctions the use of military might to enforce aU.N.-ordered trade embargo.   CBS News reported that Iraqi captains have received new ordersnot to defy the embargo but to allow U.S. warships to stop andsearch their vessels. CBS did not cite a source for the report byits Pentagon correspondent.   The multinational force got a boost today when the small gulfstate of Qatar agreed to allow use of its military facilities bythe forces confronting Iraq. Qatar has traditionally cooperatedmilitarily with Britain and France.   In Paris, the military chiefs of nine Western European nationsgathered to work out plans to enforce the United Nations embargo.   The United Nations said Secretary-General Javier Perez deCuellar will meet Thursday in Jordan with Iraqi Foreign MinisterTariq Aziz ``to engage in a full exchange of views on the crisis.''   It would be the first formal U.N. attempt to mediate the crisis,which Iraqi President Saddam Hussein precipitated by invadingKuwait on Aug. 2 and annexing the oil-rich emirate.   In Washington, national security adviser Brent Scowcroft saidSunday that the Bush administration ``would have no problem'' witha mediation effort by Perez de Cuellar.   For a third day, skeleton staffs at embassies in Kuwait Citydefied an Iraqi order to close their missions. Iraqi troopssurrounded the U.S. and other compounds and cut utilities but didnot use force against the diplomats.   The U.S., British, French, Hungarian and Danish embassies wereamong those surrounded Sunday. Varying services such as water,power and communications were cut to the U.S., West German, French,Canadian, Japanese, Danish missions.   Iraq last week ordered embassies in Kuwait closed, but mostnations said they did not recognize Iraq's takeover of its neighborand refused to heed the order. There have been no reports of Iraqismoving on the embassy holdouts.   However, Lebanese officials in Beirut said today that Lebanon'sambassador to Kuwait and his nine-member staff were missing afterleaving their mission. Salah Staitieh, director-general of theLebanese Foreign Ministry, said group was due in Beirut two daysago.   Local radio stations in Lebanon said the embassy group wasseized by Iraqi troops as it set out for the Saudi border and wastaken to Baghdad.   The United States sent about 100 diplomats and dependents fromKuwait to Baghdad last week for transit home but the Iraqis renegedon a promise to let them out, saying male embassy workers would beheld until the U.S. Embassy in Kuwait was closed.   Early today, 52 wives and children of the captive U.S. diplomatswere permitted to cross into Turkey. The 429-mile journey fromBaghdad to Diyarbakir in southern Turkey took 27 hours, a U.S.Embassy spokesman said condition of anonymity.   ``The trip was very tiring, very long and very distressing. Nowthey are washing up and resting,'' he said before they flew to theIncirlik base.   An official at the base, speaking on condition of anonymity,later confirmed the group's arrival and declined to let any of thearrivals talk with an AP reporter by phone.   In all, about 21,000 Westerners are stranded in Iraq and Kuwait,including 3,000 Americans. Iraq says some have been distributedamong Iraqi strategic sites for use as human shields to deter aU.S. attack.   The United States, Britain and France all reported Sunday thatmore of their citizens in Kuwait had been rounded up.   The State Department said in Washington Sunday that Iraqi troopsdetained two more Americans, who were being held at a Kuwaitihotel. Dozens have been rounded up in the past weeks.   Britain's Foreign Office said today that more British nationalswere rounded up Sunday in Kuwait, bringing the total held to 157.In France, the Foreign Ministry said Iraqi troops took eight moreFrench from their homes in Kuwait to a hotel. In all, 60 Frenchnationals are detained.   Pope John Paul II, in his first public condemnation of Iraqiactions, criticized human rights violations and prayed for theforeign hostages.   Iraq's invasion of Kuwait prompted several nations to sendwarships to the region, and the United States has moved dozens ofwarplanes and about 60,000 troops in Saudi Arabia to preventfurther Iraqi aggression.   It is the biggest American deployment since the Vietnam war.   On Sunday, the Army ordered 50 more reserve and National Guardunits in 25 states to report for active duty by Aug. 31. AirNational Guard Reserve units from six states were called up onFriday.   In Paris today, the top military leaders of the nine-memberWestern European Union opened a one-day meeting behind closeddoors. A military source said before the meeting opened that thechief topic would be dividing the tasks of European naval forcesand coordinating them with the huge U.S. fleet in the region.   But attention also turned to diplomacy.   A day after the U.N. Security Council authorized the use ofmilitary force to back the trade embargo it ordered against Iraq onAug. 6, Perez de Cuellar offered to meet with Iraq's top diplomat.   In Baghdad, Aziz said he planned to meet with the U.N. chief butdeclined to say whether Iraq was prepared to compromise on Kuwait'sstatus. He did say, however, that his country would listen to anyproposal.   Scowcroft said the United States will not back down from itsinsistence that Iraq withdraw from Kuwait, but beyond that ``We'reprepared to talk about anything.''   Also in Baghdad, Palestine Liberation Organization chief YasserArafat proposed today that an Arab peacekeeping force be deployedin Kuwait for six months to replace Iraqi troops while electionsare held.   The Bush administration has insisted that the deposed al-Sabahfamily be restored as Kuwait's rulers.</TEXT></DOC>