<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP901204-0192 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NY-12-04-90 0021EST</FILEID><FIRST>r f PM-BusinessHighlights     12-04 0766</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Business Highlights,0946</SECOND><DATELINE>HOUSTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Continental Airlines Holdings Inc., the remnantsof Frank Lorenzo's Texas Air Corp. empire, filed for bankruptcycourt protection from creditors, saying it was overwhelmed by aheavy debt load and surging fuel prices.   The company, parent of Continental Airlines Inc., filed itsChapter 11 petition Monday in Wilmington, Del., where it isincorporated. The filing is the second time in seven yearsContinental has sought to reorganize.   The filing didn't affect any operations or schedules among the88 U.S. cities and 55 international destinations Continental serveswith a fleet of more than 300 planes.   ---   NEW YORK (AP) - ATandamp;T said its proposed $6 billion buyout of NCRCorp. would create a worldwide computing powerhouse, but thechairman of the nation's fifth-largest computer maker said he's notinterested.   American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. said Monday that it firstapproached NCR about a buyout Nov. 15, and that the two companiesheld talks on the offer since.   Though ATandamp;T described its stock-swap bid announced Sunday asfriendly, NCR Chairman Charles E. Exley Jr. said ATandamp;T's decision todisclose the talks made the $90-a-share proposal hostile.   ---   NEW YORK (AP) - Business continued to slow at the nation'sindustrial companies in November, extending a decline that islikely to continue for some time, the National Association ofPurchasing Management said.   The purchasing managers said Monday that production and neworders both dropped, pushing the group's index of economic activitydown to 41.3 percent from 43.4 percent in October.   Private economists predicted the downturn will continue untilinterest rates fall and the Middle East crisis is resolved.   ---   WASHINGTON (AP) - Consumers continued to pay their bills in theJuly-September quarter but were scaling back borrowing as theeconomy headed into what many analysts say is a recession, abanking group said.   The percentage of consumer loans 30 or more days delinquent wasa seasonally adjusted 2.56 percent at the end of the third quarter,virtually unchanged from the 2.55 percent rate at the end of theApril-June period, the American Bankers Association said Monday.   The rate was 2.46 percent at the end of the first quarter and2.64 percent at the end of the fourth quarter of 1989.   ---   BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - Negotiations to complete anunprecedented global free trade pact opened in turmoil as delegatesinside the hall clashed on farm issues while police outside battledangry demonstrators.   Almost 30,000 farmers marched Monday to protest a U.S.-backedproposal aimed at trimming billions of dollars in trade-distortingagricultural subsidies. Police at one point used tear gas and watercannons.   The talks involve 107 member nations in an effort to rewrite theconstitution of world trade, a document known as the GeneralAgreement on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT.   ---   WASHINGTON (AP) - Businesses facing lawsuits over pensionsreceived some protection from the Supreme Court as the justicesruled workers cannot sue in state courts on grounds they were firedso their employers would not have to pay pension benefits.   The court ruled unanimously Monday that state suits arepre-empted by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974,which is aimed at assuring that workers get their retirement pay.   ---   WASHINGTON (AP) - A smell can be registered as a trademark justas a word, name, symbol, color or sound can be, the Patent andTrademark Office said in a ground-breaking decision.   The office Monday approved registration of the scent of a typeof embroidery yarn and sewing thread produced by Clarke's OSEWEZ(pronounced ``Oh Sew Easy'') of Goleta, Calif.   ---   PITTSBURGH (AP) - Westinghouse Electric Corp. said 600 employeesin its energy systems business unit will lose their jobs at the endof the year.   The company said Monday the reduction, which involves 300layoffs and 300 voluntary retirements, is necessary to strengthenWestinghouse's competitive position in the commercial nuclear powermarket in the United States and abroad.   ---   WASHINGTON (AP) - The Bush administration predicted in a reportto Congress that the U.S. trade deficit would remain steady eventhough Americans are paying sharply more for imported oil.   Prepared by the Treasury Department as a requirement of the 1988trade law, the report Monday also indicated that a further declinein the value of the dollar was not needed to improve the nation'strade balance.   The deficit has dropped from a peak of $162 billion in 1987 to$129 billion in 1988 and $110 billion in 1989. During the first sixmonths of 1990, it ran at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $87billion.   ---   CINCINNATI (AP) - Texas oilman T. Boone Pickens and buildingtrade unions from Ohio and Kentucky said they are starting aresearch organization to investigate foreign investment in asix-state region.   Jerry Hammond, executive secretary-treasurer of the KentuckyState Building andamp; Construction Trades Council, said Monday the studywill focus first on Japanese investment in the region's autoindustry because of the investments by Toyota, Nissan, Mazda,Mitsubishi, Honda and Subaru-Isuzu.   ---</TEXT><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Stock prices posted modest gains Monday, as oil prices appearedto stabilize at lower levels and interest rates slipped. The DowJones industrial average gained 5.94 points to close at 2,565.59.   Bonds rose moderately.   The dollar closed sharply higher. Gold skidded.   Oil prices were slightly higher, soybean futures prices soared,cattle futures were mixed and pork futures were lower.</TEXT></DOC>