<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP901017-0156 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NY-10-17-90 1454EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r f BC-Nicaragua-BankStrike     10-17 0183</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Nicaragua-Bank Strike,0188</SECOND><HEAD>Nicaraguan Bank Workers Strike</HEAD><DATELINE>MANAGUA, Nicaragua (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Thousands of bank workers struckWednesday to demand pay raises, another sign of continuing unrestover government austerity policies.   The strike by the 12,000-member Association of Bank Employeesaffected all of the country's 197 bank branches, including theCentral Bank.   The walkout capmaller job actions by bankworkers, who are demanding job security, rule changes and increasedbank capitalization in additions two weeks of s to higher pay.   The bank union is part of the leftist Sandinista Front, whichruled Nicaragua for a decade until losing power in an election thisyear. The unions led massive nationwide strikes in May and Julyagainst government economic plans.   Last week, it withdrew from talks with the government andbusinessmen aimed at reaching agreement on how to tackle thecountry's economic crisis, in which inflation has risen 4,000percent this year.   Sandinista work agreed to all the proposals I made and we agreed totheproposals that he has made,'' Vessey said with Thach standing athis side.   Vessey said technical cooperation for joint investigations wasagreed to, as well as ways to seek information and to return theremains of U.S. servicemen.   He said the two sides ``agreed to new levels of cooperation toresolve the fates of the missing in action in Southeast Asia.''   A joint team will be formed to examine the specifics of the newforms of cooperation, Vessey said. Also participating in thediscussions was Anne Mills Griffiths, head of a group of familiesof missing Americans.   Thach is the first Hanoi official of his rank to visitWashington since Vietnam's independence 36 years ago.   A State Department announcement had said the subject matter tobe discussed was to be limited to the POW-MIA issue. In response toa question, Thach said there were no American war prisoners ingovernment custody.   Thach's ground-breaking visit is consistent with a pattern ofimproving relations that dates back to July when the Bushadministration agreed to open discussions with Vietnam for thefirst time on resolving the conflict in neighboring Cambodia.   Earlier, U.S.-Vietnamese contacts had been limited tohumanitarian issues.   The visit comes at a time of fading American bitterness towardHanoi about the loss of more than 55,000 U.S. servicemen in theVietnam conflict. A Time-CNN poll this past spring showed Americanssupport diplomatic relations by a 48-32 margin.   Thach, 66, is a leading proponent of normal ties with the UnitedStates and has been promoting that goal recently in interviews withAmerican reporters.   As the participants in the discussion posed for photographers atthe Army-Navy Club, about 20 Vietnamese demonstrators stood outsidechanting slogans in support of democracy and a market economy forVietnam.   Thach also planned separate meetings this afternoon with membersof the foreign relations committees of the Senate and the House.   Secretary of State James A. Baker III met with Thach three weeksago in New York and then agreed to facilitate Thach's visit toWashington by waiving the rule that limits Vietnamese diplomats toa 25-mile radius of New York City.   The Baker-Thach meeting was the first high-level contact betweenthe two countries in 17 years.   The Bush administration has linked a normalization of relationswith Vietnam to Hanoi's cooperation in obtaining an accounting ofthe missing Americans and in achieving a settlement of theCambodian conflict.   Ms. Griffiths said she believes Vietnam could do far more inhelping account for American servicemen than it has.   ``There's no question but that greater responsiveness wouldresolve hundreds of cases of Americans who are missing,'' she says.   The United States has never recognized the communist governmentthat assumed power in Hanoi in 1954 after the end of Frenchcolonial rule. Thach is well-known to U.S. diplomats as one of theprincipal negotiators of the agreement that led to the withdrawalof American forces from Vietnam in 1973.   Any possibility of a U.S.-Vietnamese rapprochement in theaftermath were dashed when Hanoi's army conquered the U.S.-backedgovernment in South Vietnam two years after the 1973 agreement.Subsequently, Vietnam was reunified under Hanoi's rule.   Relations with Vietnam were further soured when Hanoi invadedCambodia in late 1978. Successive U.S. administrations campaignedfor years for a Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia.   Vietnam said all of its forces were withdrawn a year ago butU.S. officials said some have since returned to Cambodia.   Despite U.S. objections to Vietnam's role in Cambodia, bothsides agree the Khmer Rouge, responsible for the deaths of over 1million Cambodians in the 1970s, should not return to power.</TEXT></DOC>