<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP900923-0050 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NY-09-23-90 1812EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r i AM-Gulf-Iraq-Excerpts 1stLd-Writethru a0644 09-23 0743</FIRST><SECOND>AM-Gulf-Iraq-Excerpts, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0644,0958</SECOND><HEAD>Excerpts of Iraqi Communique</HEAD><HEAD>With AM-Gulf Rdp, Bjt</HEAD><NOTE>Eds: Removes ellipses where text should be continuous.</NOTE><DATELINE>NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here are excerpts from the communiqueissued Sunday after a joint meeting of Iraq's ruling RevolutionCommand Council and Baath Party. The statement in Arabic wastranslated into English by The Associated Press:   ---   America is commiting deep criminal acts against Iraq and theArab nation especially in occupying the Arab and Moslem holy placesin Najd and Hejaz (the former name for the territory that becameSaudi Arabia), and in its sanctions imposed against the Iraqipeople in a way that exceeds all humanitarian limits.   The United States, thus, has gone far below the minimum level ofhuman standards toward which even those who believe in the law ofthe jungle would not stop.   America did all this to satisfy its arrogance and enforce itshegemony on the entire world...   America must not go too far and must get out of its mind theidea of pushing events into a military collision, and it mustrealize the dangers of what it calls a lightning strike.   It should also abandon all this and remedy it as soon aspossible, by returning to the innermost parts of itself so as tosearch for remnants of wisdom to aid it so as to turn away fromthis dangerous approach, as soon as possible. Primarily, it shouldwithdraw from the holy lands of the Arabs and Moslems.   America must realize clearly that it is pushing the entireregion, and not only Iraq - in fact, even the whole world, foremostof which its sons whom (President) Bush brought to the region - tothe brink of a bottomless abyss, from which the region will neversee light for dozens of years...   The oil, the areas it is in and Israel will be transformed intosomething different from what they are now.   We will never allow anybody, whomever he may be, to strangle thepeople of Iraq without having himself strangled. If we feel thatthe Iraqi people are being strangled, that there are some who willdeal a sanguinary blow to it, we will strangle all those who arethe cause of this.   The oil areas in Saudi Arabia and in other states of the region,all the oil installations, will be rendered incapable of respondingto the needs of those who came to us as occupiers in order to usurpour sovereignty, dignity and wealth.   Israel will be included in all actions that affect the owners ofthe homeland in which the forces of evil and occupation havesettled, and in which nothing has maintained its purity except forthe holy places and the generous people who reject this injusticeand aggression...   Those who wish the flood to overtake the Iraqi people and thenation, and are planning for this, should remember well that thewaves of the flood will overwhelm them before they overwhelm theIraqi people...   America, and those who instigated it or collaborated with it,should realize this well so as to reassess matters and to thinkagain in the correct and precise manner upon which they shouldbuild. The reckless, odious, and foolish behavior that has occurredso far should be enough for them...   Everybody should also realize that what we have warned againstmight happen when the sparks come out of the barrels of confrontingguns, and out of the friction of the fleets of aggression with ourmeans and forces.   The sparks might fly by mistake or deliberately to afterwardcause a huge conflagration. When this happens, a flood will ensue.To prevent the feared eventuality from taking place, thoseconcerned should pull back armies as well as navy and air fleets assoon as possible.   Dire consequences will befall those who love to create wars,problems, and crises. They will also befall evildoers and backstabbers...   As for the Arabs who are launching good offices, they are urgednot to replace the solution that we offered on 12th August with apartial solution, as turning the conflict from one concerning majorissues into one regarding minor issues benefits the tactics of theenemies and their supporters...   The major issue concerns the struggle of the Arabs and Moslemsin their righteous jihad (holy war) against falsehood. The primeobjective is the liberation of Palestine from the usurpation of theZionist usurpers...   Iraq's adherence to this position through an unequivocaldeclared policy has caused the evil arrows to be directed againstit and caused the poisonous wasps to leave their holes to sting itssides and cause them to bleed in the most dangerous conspiracy thatseeks to inflict political and economic harm on iraq to prepare forthe military weakening of Iraq and also for the weakening of itsnationalist, pan-Arab, and humanitarian role.   The conspiracy and those behind it have been exposed. At theforefront of those charged with staging the conspiracy were theformer rulers of Kuwait who used Kuwait, which was separated fromIraq, as a base for a counterconspiracy. They have massed itsstolen resources to serve everything that would bring evil anddisgrace to the national and Islamic struggle...   The blow dealt to that evil ruling clique, the agent of theforeigner, was an indispensable defensive move to maintain Iraq'sfeatures and resources and improve them in order to achieve thewell-known noble objectives...   Thus, usurped Kuwait was restored to its people to be part ofits original nation by an eternal decision from which there can beno retreat under any circumstances or conditions.</TEXT></DOC>