<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP901008-0196 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NY-10-08-90 0729EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r f PM-BusinessHighlights     10-08 0746</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Business Highlights,0918</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   America's unemployment rate worsened for thethird straight month in September, the government said.   The Labor Department reported Friday that the civilian joblessrate rose to 5.7 percent last month.   Coupled with unemployment rises in July and August, marked thefirst time since the 1981-82 recession that the jobless rate hasincreased three months in a row, the government said.   ---   WASHINGTON (AP) - Democratic leaders predicted that a new budgetagreement easing Medicare cuts and tempering excise tax increaseswill be reached before the government shutdown takes full effectTuesday.   Democrats told their leaders Sunday to go ahead with a plandesigned to let Democratic-controlled committees draft later thespecifics for reaching $500 billion in deficit reduction over thenext five years.   ---   NEW YORK (AP) - The failed federal budget accord slammed stockand bond prices but the markets recovered nearly all the lostground, partly on President Bush's tough stance against Congress.   In a lengthy night session, a rebellious House early Fridayoverwhelmingly defeated the $500-billion compromise package of taxincreases and spending cuts sought by Bush and congressionalleaders.   Wall Street professionals had hoped for a budget accord to helpreduce the amount of borrowing needed to pay the federal deficitand spur the Federal Reserve to reduce interest rates.   ---   CHICAGO (AP) - The employee group trying to buy UAL Corp., theparent company of United Airlines, said that $2 billion in bankfinancing for its bid on Tuesday has fallen through.   But the group will make a bid anyway, using a combination ofcash and equity from other sources, Gerald Greenwald, chiefexecutive officer of the United Employee Acquisition Corp. saidSunday   He said substitute financing would come from company suppliers;sale-leaseback arrangements, in which the company sells equipmentsuch as airplanes and leases them back; employee investments; andcash on hand.   ---   DEARBORN, Mich. (AP) - The United Auto Workers union and FordMotor Co. reached a tentative national labor contract that closelyfollows a pattern agreement reached three weeks ago with GeneralMotors Corp.   Officials from the UAW and Ford said Sunday the tentativethree-year agreement mirrored the contract reached Sept. 17 with GMand ratified a week ago by GM workers. But there were a fewexceptions, including the maintenance of a two-week shutdown atFord in July.   ---   LOS ANGELES (AP) - Charles Keating said he is innocent of a42-count criminal indictment alleging fraud in junk bond salesthrough his failed Lincoln Savings andamp; Loan.   Keating and three co-defendants entered innocent pleas Friday toan array of charges accusing them of bilking investors in AmericanContinental Corp. junk bonds sold through Lincoln branches.   Keating, who has been unable to post $5 million bail, was thenreturned to jail.   ---   HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) - The Travelers Corp. said it is adding$650 million to its reserves to cover expected real estate losses,a move that will result in a third-quarter net loss of $500million.   The insurance company also said Friday it will reduce itsquarterly dividend to 40 cents a share from 60 cents.   The company said it was the first major addition to reservessince June 1988, when Travelers added $415 million to coveranticipated real estate losses. The latest increase boosts reservesto $1.15 billion at quarter's end.   ---   ST. LOUIS (AP) - Trans World Airlines Inc. sent layoff noticesto 430 employees to cut its losses further in an industry hit hardby rising fuel prices and the slumping economy.   A TWA spokesman said Frida that more layoffs, and possiblyflight reductions, could come later. TWA, which has its hub in St.Louis, has about 33,000 employees worldwide.   The spokesman said the layoffs were related to higher jet fuelprices since Iraq invaded Kuwait in August. USAir Group Inc., PanAm Corp. and Midway Airlines Inc. also have announced layoffs.   ---   WASHINGTON (AP) - Federal Reserve policy-makers decided twoweeks after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait to keep interest ratesunchanged but to permit lower rates if economic conditionswarranted, newly released records show.   Short-term interest rates, which the Fed has used for two yearsin combatting inflation, did not change after the Aug. 21 meetingof the Federal Open Market Committee. They have remained at 8percent since mid-summer. The Fed records were released Friday.   ---   LONDON (AP) - Dropping long-standing resistance, the governmentsaid it will link the pound to Europe's exchange rate mechanism, amove expected to help Britain's fight against inflation.   The move Friday symbolized British willingness to participate inEuropean integration, but Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher stressedher continued opposition to creating a single European bank and asingle currency.   ---</TEXT><BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE><TEXT>   Stock prices fell Friday, but the market managed to minimize thedamage from an early sell-off that followed the rejection of agovernment budget plan. The Dow Jones industrial average dropped6.19 to 2,510.64, reducing its gain for the week to 58.16 points.   The dollar rose against most major currencies. Gold gainedmodestly.   Bonds were little changed.   Pork belly futures prices aimed for near-record prices;livestock futures and soybeans were mixed; wheat gained and cornwas lower; and energy futures rose.</TEXT></DOC>