<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP901001-0121 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NY-10-01-90 1414EDT</FILEID><FIRST>r w BC-Scotus-Glance     10-01 1125</FIRST><SECOND>BC-Scotus-Glance,1200</SECOND><DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here, at a glance, are highlights of actionstaken Monday by the Supreme Court.      VICTIM IMPACT      The court agreed to review its recent decisions barringsentencing juries from considering the character of the defendant'svictim or the grief of the victim's family.   The court agreed to consider reinstating an Ohio man's deathpenalty for a love-triangle murder.   The Supreme Court in 1987 ruled that ``victim-impat'' evidenceshould not be considered by sentencing juries. Last year, thejustices voted 5-4 that a jury generally may not be told about thevictim's character.   That ruling was written by Justice William J. Brennan, who hassince retired. The four justices who dissented from last year'sdecision said then they were ready to overturn the 1987 ruling andpermit victim-impact testimony in criminal sentencing.   The case is Ohio vs. Huertas, 89-1944.      OREGON DEATH ROW      The court let stand rulings Oregon officials say will requirenew sentencing trials for up to 22 of the state's death rowinmates.   The justices, without comment, refused to review Oregon SupremeCourt rulings that last Jan. 11 overturned the death sentences ofthree convicted murderers.   The case is Oregon vs. Wagner, 89-1867.      JURORS RACE      The court agreed to decide whether lawyers in non-criminal casesmay bar potential jurors because of their race.   The justices said they will use the case of an injured blackconstruction worker in Louisiana to decide whether such raciallymotivated exclusions are prohibited in civil as well as criminaltrials.   The case is Edmonson vs. Leesville Concrete Co., 89-7743.      UNSUCCESSFUL ABORTION      The court rejected an appeal by an Ohio woman who gave birth toa healthy boy after she underwent an unsuccessful abortion.   The court, without comment, let stand a ruling that barred thewoman from suing a doctor and hospital for the costs of rearing herchild.   The case is Harmath vs. Goler, 89-1824.      RESERVES      The court asked the Bush administration whether employers evermay bar their workers from joining or serving in the militaryreserves.   The court wants to hear Justice Department lawyers' views on aruling that struck down the Baltimore Police Department's policy oflimiting the number of employees allowed to be in active reserveunits.   The case is Tilghman vs. Kolkhorst, 89-1949.      SEIZURE      The court said it will try to clarify what authority police haveto pursue and detain people who run away after seeing police.   The justices agreed to consider reinstating the cocaineconviction and 68-month sentence of an Oakland, Calif., youth who astate court said was chased and caught unlawfully by police.   The case is California vs. Hodari D., 89-1632.      BIAS ABROAD      The court agreed to decide whether U.S. businesses arelawbreakers if they discriminate against Americans they employoutside the country.   The justices, setting the case for an important ruling, saidthey will decide whether Congress intended a major anti-bias law toreach beyond the nation's borders.   The cases are EEOC vs. Arabian American Oil Co., 89-1838, andBoureslana vs. Arabian American Oil Co., 89-1845.      PILOTS      The court agreed to use a dispute over the settlement of astrike by Continental Air Lines pilots to set new guidelines on theduties of unions to represent their members.   The court said it will consider killing a lawsuit against theAir Line Pilots Association by striking pilots who said the uniondenied them fair representation.   The case is Air Line Pilots Association vs. O'Neill, 89-1493.      DRUG TESTING      The court permitted the random drug testing of New York City's10,000 jail guards.   The court, without comment, rejected an appeal by the guards'labor union, which said the tests violate the corrections officers'privacy rights.   The case is Seelig vs. Koehler, 90-48.      CHURCH SCHOOLS      The court let stand a ruling that church-run schools must payemployees the federa minimum wage and may not pay women teachersless than men.   The court, without comment, rejected an appeal by officials of aBaptist church in Virginia who said forcing the church to abide byfederal labor law violates its religious freedom and otherconstitutional rights.   The case is Shenandoah Baptist Church vs. Dole, 90-16.      HOWARD BEACH      The court rejected the appeal of three white men from New YorkCity convicted in the ``Howard Beach incident'' of 1986, a raciallymotivated attack in which a black man died.   The justices, without comment, let stand the manslaughter andassault convictions of Jon Lester, Scott Kern and Jason Ladone.Lawyers for the three men had argued they wrongly were limited inexcluding blacks as trial jurors.   The case is Kern vs. New York, 89-2032.      NUDE DANCING      The court agreed to consider letting states outlaw allbarroom-style nude dancing as it voted to hear an effort toreinstate such an Indiana law.   The court said it will review a ruling that ``non-obscene nudedancing performed as entertainment is expression and as such isentitled to limited protection under the (Constitution's) FirstAmendment.''   The case is Barnes vs. Glen Theatre Inc., 90-26.      PRISONS      The court agreed to decide whether unfit living conditions mayamount to cruel and unusual punishment when there is no evidenceofficials acted maliciously.   The justices said they will hear an appeal by an Ohio inmate whoaccused officials of being indifferent to overcrowding,rat-infested kitchens, freezing cold in winter, scalding heat insummer and other miserable conditions.   The case is Wilson vs. Seiter, 89-7376.      HONDURAN      The court permitted the prosecution of an alleged drug dealerwho said U.S. officials kidnapped and tortured him.   The court, over one dissenting vote, rejected arguments that thedefendant should be freed because U.S. officials violatedinternational law and the U.S. and Honduran constitutions.   The case is Matta-Ballesteros vs. Henman, 89-1797.      HILARY FORETICH      The court refused to block any future broadcast of part of atelevision documentary about the internationally publicized custodybattle over Hilary Foretich.   The court, without comment, let stand a ruling that it would beunlawful censorship to keep off the air a four-minute portion ofthe telecast dealing with alleged sex abuse.   The case is Foretich vs. Lifetime Cable, 90-35.      LIBEL      The court agreed to consider reinstating a libel lawsuit againstJanet Malcolm, a staff writer for The New Yorker magazine, by apsychologist who says she made up quotes attributed to him.   The justices said they will review a federal appeals courtruling that last year threw out Jeffrey Masson's suit.   The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that public figureswho sue for libel over allegedly altered quotes must show that thequotes are not even ``rational interpretations'' of what was said.   The case is Masson vs. The New Yorker, 89-1799.      ATHEISTS      The court turned down an appeal by a group of atheistschallenging an oath for potential trial jurors that includes thephrase ``so help me God.''   The court, without comment, let stand rulings in a Texas casethat excluding atheists from jury service for refusing to take suchan oath does not violate their rights.   The case is Murray vs. Travis County District Court, 89-2018.      ENVIRONMENTAL FINE      The court turned down the appeal of a Pennsylvania man given thelongest prison sentence and biggest fine in U.S. history for anyperson convicted of an environmental crime.   The court, without comment, let stand the three-year prison termand $200,000 fine John Pozsgai of Morrisville, Pa., received forviolating the Clean Water Act.   The case is Pozsgai vs. U.S., 89-1735.      CABLE TV      The court agreed to resolve a dispute from Arkansas over thepower of states to tax cable television companies and subscribers.   The court said it will review a ruling that Arkansas may taxcable TV as long as it also imposes the levy on similarcommunication services, such as the unscrambling of satellitesignals.   The cases are Pledger vs. Medlock, 90-29, and Medlock vs.Pledger, 90-38.</TEXT></DOC>