<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> AP900910-0015 </DOCNO><FILEID>AP-NR-09-10-90 0116EST</FILEID><FIRST>r i PM-Summit-Transcript 5thAdd   09-10 0894</FIRST><SECOND>PM-Summit-Transcript, 5th Add,0906</SECOND><HEAD>HELSINKI: its decisions.</HEAD><TEXT>   Bush: I'm not disappointed in that answer. (Laughter.)   Q: You said you're determined to see this aggression end, andcurrent steps are being considered. What does this mean? What comesnext?   Bush: It's too hypothetical. We want to see the message getthrough to Saddam Hussein. We want to see him do what the UnitedNations calls on him to do. And that statement can be interpretedany way you want to interpret it, but it's out there and I wouldsimply not go into any hypothetical questions that would lead mebeyond what that statement says.   Gorbachev: Please, if you would excuse me, I'll add a couple ofwords _ just to what Mr. Bush has already said.   You know, in my view, I have the impression that both the pressand public opinion in some countries is in some ways saying thatthere's a lack of decision on somebody's part, that we'rewithdrawing in the face of those who are trampling on internationallaw. I cannot agree with that view. In fact, it's a view whichcauses a certain amount of embarrassment to the leadership ofnations which are acting through the Security Council in thisrespect.   What has been done up till now in answer to Iraqi aggression isvery important because action has been taken not only within theframework of the Security Council, but there has been unanimousworld opinion _ a kind of solidarity which has never been expressedbefore in the history of the world. And we have prevented theaggression going any further. We have preserved the functioning ofthe structures which are of economic importance, which would affectso many other countries as well. And finally, the resolution hasbeen taken on an embargo, which is a very stiff measure, inreaction to the aggression.   In my view, this is a strategic way of tackling the question,which has been tackled successfully at the first stages. And we areconvinced that the next stage of a political solution, achievedpolitically, to put an end to this acute international crisis andmake sure that a political settlement should be possible, that inthis situation decisiveness, willpower and responsibility andpolitical faith in the possibility of a political solution to thisvery difficult issue shows that the political leaders of the worldare being responsible to their own nations and to the world. And wedo not want to get caught up in arguments about prestige and so on.   Q: From the Finnish Television. Concerning the humanitarian aid,does your joint statement mean in practice that you consider thatfood should be now allowed to Iraq?   Gorbachev: The presidents feel it necessary to reflect in ourjoint declaration that we see the need to uphold what was decidedby the Security Council on this subject and the Security Councilwas prepared to admit for humanitarian purposes the supply ofmedicines and of foodstuffs required first and foremost forchildren. We've actually stated this quite plainly in ourstatement. And so we've taken a very clear-cut position on that.But we've also made it clear this must take place within theframework of certain international organizations and beingmonitored by them at stages in the operation. So I think that thishas been stated in the correct terms.   Bush: (Off mike) ... President Gorbachev on that point, and thatthe language is very good because it does express the concern thatboth countries feel in the event there actually are children andothers who are suffering because of lack of food.   I hope that nobody around the world interprets this as our viewthat now there should be wholesale food shipments to Iraq because Ican speak only here for the United States when I would callattention to the fact that we need some kind of internationalagencies to see that there is this humanitarian concern asexpressed, this exception in the United Nations embargo forhumanitarian purposes, and not only is it required for thishumanitarian circumstance, but that the food gets where it issupposed to go.   So this should not be from the U.S. standpoint interpreted as awholesale big hole in this embargo. It was not our intention and Ithink the language is very clear on that point.   Q: A few things if you could clear up for us. First of all, youseem to disagree on the military option. And when you talk aboutfurther steps being taken to implement the U.N. sanctions,President Bush, you seem to be saying the military option is stillout there. President Gorbachev seems to disagree. Do you disagreeon that? Did you ask President Gorbachev to pull his experts out ofIraq and did you ask him to send troops into the Gulf region?   Bush: I did not ask him to send troops in. If the Sovietsdecided to do that at the invitation of the Saudis, that would befine with us. But I did not ask him to do that. I believe there _with the 23 countries that are participating on the ground or _ 23countries that are participating on the ground and at sea that thesecurity of Saudi Arabia is close to safeguarded. What were theother two points?</TEXT><NOTE>MORE</NOTE></DOC>