<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE1-92-0880 </DOCNO><TEXT>A fraction of the tritium gas which is released to atmosphere can be rapidlyoxidized at the surface of soil, and then resuspended to atmosphere asHTO. The resuspension rate has been determined hereafter by mathematicalmodeling and experimental simulation. In the model, the soil-plant systemis assumed to consist of N soil layers and one plant compartment. Thetritiated water content of the soil and the plants is described by asystem of simultaneous, first-order, linear, differential equations withdiscontinuous, variable coefficients. The coefficients are derived fromthe phenomenological equations of transfer processes at plant and soilsurfaces and through the soil profile. The parameters needed as entryto the model are water vapor concentrations at soil-atmosphere interface,soil moistures and water fluxes at different depths in the soil. Theresuspension rate, defined as the fraction of the deposited HTO whichis resuspended per unit time, is computed from the evolution of HTO contentin the totality of soil profile. In parallel to the development of themodel, an experimental simulation was done to determine the resuspensionrate and its evolution during a period of 10 days. This was carried outby covering a small area of undisturbed soil by a field chamber, exposingthe enclosed soil to tritium gas, then flushing the chamber at a highflow rate and collecting periodically the resuspended tritiated water.Both model and experimentation show that the evolution of the resuspensionrate can be represented approximatively by a single exponential functionfor plant-covered soil, and by a sum of exponentials for a bare soil.The model and experimental values of the initial resuspension rates weresimilar and comprised between 1 and 5%. This study is an introductorywork to a large-scale release experiment which had been carried out veryrecently, and will permit to make other estimations of deposition andresuspension rates. 15 refs, 6 figs, 1 tab.</TEXT></DOC>