<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE1-89-0410 </DOCNO><TEXT>The objective of the study was to create a maintenance cost estimationto support decision-making in the planning stage of a renovation project.The study comprises the development of the procedure for school buildingsto be renovated. The study also presents the special characteristicsfor office buildings and for establishments of social welfare and healthcare. The testing of the estimation procedure was limited to school buildingsonly. The maintenance cost estimation procedure was created on the basisof literature and by examining two schools renovated in the early 1980's.The calculatory estimation procedure is based on the determining andpricing of essential maintenance inputs. As a result of repairs, thetotal maintenance costs of a school building usually rise. Accordingto the study, the heat energy consumption of a school building increasesafter renovation if the repairs do not involve energy saving measures.Likewise, the power consumption of a school building tends to rise duringthe repairs. The administrative costs are usually not affected by renovation.As a rule, renovation decreases the amount of manual work for the maintenancepersonnel and respectively increases the amount of work needed in operatingvarious control devices. Energy tariffs for heating and electric poweras well as water and wastewater duties show great regional differences.In estimating the maintenance costs at the planning stage, the pricingshould be based on local unit prices. The maintenance cost estimationprocedure now developed is suitable primarily for school buildings tobe renovated, providing at the planning stage a tool for estimating theirmaintenance costs. The procedure gives results at a correct level forvarious maintenance tasks even for a renovation object involving changeof use as has been established by testing. In principle, the maintenancecost estimation procedure developed is also applicable to new constructin.</TEXT></DOC>