<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE1-74-0865 </DOCNO><TEXT>The Colorado Plateau uranium province (CPUP) occupies a large part ofthe Colorado Plateau physiographic province, from which it derived itsname. It is defined by the distribution of major uranium deposits withinPennsylvanian through Upper Jurassic sedimentary rocks. In contrast,the edges of the CPUP and adjacent areas are either devoid of depositsor contain only smaller deposits in either Tertiary volcanic and sedimentaryrocks or Precambrian basement rocks. Orthogonal sets of lineaments trendingnortheast and northwest across the region reflect structures that wereperiodically active in the late Paleozoic through the Mesozoic and whichexerted significant control on the positions of contemporaneous intracratonicbasins and related sedimentary facies. Fluvial sandstone facies, in particular,contain most of the uranium deposits, and fine-grained volcaniclasticrocks overlying the sandstones are presumed to be the source of muchof the uranium. Both structural features and sedimentary facies controlledthe flow of ore-forming groundwater. The major uranium deposits in theCPUP consist of seven types distinguished by host rock, form, and mineralassemblage. Each type of deposit is here named after the principal hostunit in which it occurs. Isotopic age determinations suggest that themajor deposits resulted from three separate mineralizing episodes: (1)the first was a major, widespread episode at about the end of Triassictime, (2) the second was a minor, more localized episode in mid-Jurassictime and (3) the dominant third episode occurred at about the beginningof Cretaceous time. Each of the two major episodes followed the onlytwo massive accumulations of volcaniclastic strata in the region. Thisvolcanic debris was derived from contemporaneous volcanic arcs far tothe south and west and, as noted above, is believed to be the sourceof much of the uranium in the deposits. 65 refs, 11 figs, 4 tabs.</TEXT></DOC>