<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE1-37-0635 </DOCNO><TEXT>Myocardial scanning (MS) and radionuclide ventriculography (RNV) aim intwo completely different directions: RNV tries to image heart motion,that is, mechanical (pump) function, and therefore belongs to the groupof first-order functional imaging (FI, imaging mechanical function),whereas MS is based on myocardial metabolism, and therefore can be attributedto third-order functional imaging (metabolism). This statement is relevantfor the assessment of the clinical position of RNV: Third-order (metabolism)functional imaging is the domain of nuclear medicine (NM), whereas first-orderFI has to face the competition of alternative noninvasive proceduressuch as ultrasound (US), digital subtraction angiography (DSA), computertomography (CT), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The domain ofRNV includes stages two (acute infarction) and three (postinfarctionperiod) of coronary arterial disease (CAD). The advantageous combinationof quantitative data on global, left ventricular (LV) function and imagingof regional motion ensures the superiority of RNV over US. However, RNVis inferior to MS in physical examinations in the preinfarction stageof CAD, whereas US is clearly inferior to both NM procedures. Recentprogress could be attained by gated SPECT (GASPECT). A proposal is presentedfor simplification of this time-consuming procedure. Technetium-labeledisonitriles offer the chance for the combination of 'perfusion-motion'imaging of the myocardium. However, even standard RNV offers new possibilities.The multitude of parameters produced by quantitation has not yet beenexploited completely. This can be done by discriminant analysis. Thecomputer finds out an optimal subset from the whole set of parametersfor the solution of a significant clinical problem. The software 'learns'to find the 'label' of a special pathognomonic entity. This computerwork is supported by a relational data bank (Oracle) and an optical disk.</TEXT></DOC>