<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE2-07-0418 </DOCNO><TEXT>Southern California Edison and other investor-owned American electricutility companies historically have actively marketed electricity, althoughalways encouraging its efficient use. But, changing external conditions,have caused marketing programs to evolve from aggressive selling to vigorousconservation and, currently, to a prudent balance of sales and conservation.A time-of-day tariff based on electronic meters and 2-way radiocommunicationwill be demonstrated this year. After the first oil crisis in 1973 SouthernCalifornia Edison initiated a variety of conservation programs. In addition,load management programs were developed. In this way the constructionof new, costly power stations could be deferred. In 1980, Edison announceda program to accelerate the development of renewable and alternativeresources, such as solar, wind, geothermal and biomass resources. But,today, the energy outlook has changed considerably. Oil prices are under20 dollar per barrel and a return to former levels is not anticipatedsoon. Because of the greater contribution of nuclear power, increasedeconomy power purchases from other utilities, and capacity and energyprovided by autoproducers, Edison does not need additional generatingcapacity until at least the mid-1990s. For political reasons the stateregulatory agency has set rates for industrial customers disproportionatelyhigh. Therefore a number of large industrial customers have chosen tobypass the system in favor of self-generation or cogneration. Bypasspromises to be the greatest concern for the Company into the 1990s. Existingregulations in California force utilities to buy the output even if capacityis not needed. Because energy savings policy is evolutionary, flexibilityis imperative. In light of today's dynamic energy conditions, SouthernCalifornia Edison will encourage the efficient use of electricity whenit is in the best long-term interest of the customer and the Company.(EG).</TEXT></DOC>