<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE2-76-0910 </DOCNO><TEXT>Tl-201 suffers from several drawbacks as a cardiac agent, i.e. unsatisfactorynuclidic properties, limited availability, biological redistributionand high cost. Several promising Tc-99m cationic isonitrile compoundshave recently been develped to address these problems, viz. TBI, CPIand MIBI. Although showing clear myocardial uptake, Tc-99m-TBI exhibitsredistribution as well as high lung and liver uptake with retention.Tc-99m-CPI shows lower lung uptake but relatively high liver uptake andalso myocardial washout. Tc-99m-MIBI shows relatively low lung and liveractivity and significant myocardial retention to give a good target-to-backgroundratio. A programme was recently started to make some of these agentsavailable locally. The isonitrile MIBI and its ethyl analogue were synthesizedas follows: 2-methylallylamine. HCl was formylated to give N-2-methyl-2-propenylformamide.Selective reduction and hydrolysis in methanol (ethanol) gave N-2-methoxy(ethoxy)-methylpropylformamide. Finally dehydration gave 2-methoxy(ethoxy)-2-methylpropylisonitrile: MIBI (EMI). Excellent cooperation with the Dept of Biophysis,UOFS, and the Dept of Life Science, UP, was obtained to study these agentsboth in baboons and patients. After synthesis, labelling procedures wereworked out for the tc-99m isonitriles, involving reduction in an autoclaveprocess for 15 - 20 min, followed by dichloromethane extraction, dissolutionin 1% Tween 80-saline solution and Millipore filtration to give finalyields of 50 - 60%. Radiochemical purity was verified by various chromatographicprocedures. Both MIBI and EMI showed rapid biliary clearance in primates,ensuring adequate visualization of the myocardium due to lower liverand lung background after 60 min. In patients studies with MIBI favourableheart-to-lung (liver) ratios were also found. The results indicate thatTc-99m-MIBI compares favourably with Tl-201 and is a promising agentto evaluate myocardial ischemia and infarction.</TEXT></DOC>