<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE2-05-0948 </DOCNO><TEXT>The thesis is concerned with investigating the technical and economicpossibilities as well as the planning prospects for local combined heatand power (CHP) plants and wind power integrated into a large electricalgrid. Eastern Denmark, supplied by the Elkraft Power Company, and representingroughly half of the Danish energy consumption, was chosen. The technicaldescription divides the CHP-plants into two main catagories. The firstis called peak-power CHP plants. These plants are characterized by lowpower production in a number of night hours - even during the winter,when the local heat demand is high. The plants simply consist of a gasengine or steam turbine driven CHP unit combined with a short-term heatstorage. the second catagory is the so-called LOCUS systems consistingof a gas engine or steam turbine unit combined with a heat pump, a windgenerator and two short-term heat storages. The heat pump makes it pussiblefor a LOCUS system to have low or negative power production during thenights. All types of local CHP plants are computer simulated over a periodof one year in order to determine an energy balance. These energy balancesare combined with the above-mentioned heat market into two scenariosfor the future power system with a total CHP power production of 17-27%of present electricity demand - excluding wind power. The thesis concludeswith an economic analysis. The different types of CHP plants are comparedto local district heating and centralized coal-based power productionwith respect to economic impact on the whole energy system. The analysisshows, that whether or not the CHP plants are competitive, is largelya question of fuel prices, the relevant fuels being coal, natural gasand the fuel of the local CHP plant, which may be natural gas, strawor city refuse. With current low fuel prices, only a few CHP plants arecompetitive. Similar conclusions are reached for wind power plants. (SM).</TEXT></DOC>