<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE2-47-0093 </DOCNO><TEXT>When the first nuclear power programme is decided upon, automaticallythe country has to initiate in parallel a programme to modify or addto its current industrial structure and resources. The extent of thisnew industrialisation depends upon many factors which both, the Governmentand the Industries have to consider. The Government has a vital rolewhich includes the setting up of the background against which the industrialpromotion should take place and in many cases may have also to play anactive role all along this programme. Equally, the existing industrieshave an important role so as to achieve the most efficient participationin the nuclear programme. Invariably the industrial promotional programmewill incur a certain degree of transfer of technology, the extent dependingon the policies adopted. For this technology transfer to take place efficiently,both the donor and the receiver have to recognise each other's legitimateambitions and fears. The transfer of technology is a process having ahigh human content and both donor and receiver have to take this intoaccount. This can be further complicated when there is a difference inculture between them. Technology transfer is carried out within a contractualand organisational framework which will identify the donor (licensor)and the receiver (licensee). This framework may take various forms froma simple cooperative agreement, through a joint-venture organisationright to a standard contract between two separate entities. Each arrangementhas its advantages and drawbacks and requires investment of differentdegrees. One of the keys to a successful industrial promotion is havingit carried out in a timely fashion which will be parallel with the nuclearpower programme. Experience in some countries has shown the problemswhen the industrialisation is out of phase with the programme whilstin other cases this industrialisation was at a level and scale unjustified.</TEXT></DOC>