<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE2-75-0867 </DOCNO><TEXT>This book is organized into nine chapters. Chapter 1 presents generalrobot characteristics concerning the classification of robot systems,the general specification of robot mechanisms and the specification ofmanipulation robots. Chapter 2 is devoted to manipulation robot kinematics.It treats the kinematic structure of manipulation robots, the types ofkinematic configurations, the kinematic model of manipulation robots,based on the Denavit-Hartenberg (homogeneous) coordinates. The inverseproblem of kinematics is formulated and the basic principles of robottrajectory synthesis are given. Chapter 3 contains the fundamentals ofstudying robot dynamics. It presents the automated construction of thedynamic equations of motion, the modelling of actuator dynamics and theeffect of fundamental vibration on the robot dynamics. The class of tasksinvolving constrained gripper motion is also presented. The problemsof manipulation robot control are discussed in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 isdevoted to the microcomputer implementation of control algorithms. Itpresents the basic elements of today's robot control systems as wellas software modules among which communication-command module, kinematicmodule and dynamic (servosystem) module deserve to be especially mentioned.Manipulation robot programming is treated in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 dealswith the sensors used in robotics: position sensors (potentiometers,encoders, resolvers), environment sensors (force sensors, tactile sensors,proximity sensors) and vision sensors (scene illumination, special visionsensors, lasers). The elements of industrial robot design and applicationare discussed in Chapter 8. In Chapter 9 the authors try to unify ina systematic way major problems (and possible solutions) encounteredwith factory automation by integrating one or more robots and severalmachine tools into work cell, flexible manufacturing line and assemblysystems. (orig./HP) With 228 figs.</TEXT></DOC>