<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE2-47-0092 </DOCNO><TEXT>This work describes and analyses the Argentinian system of purchasing,the laws and decrees which must be observed by the State enterprisesand dependent bodies such as the National Atomic Energy Commission (C.N.E.A.).Within the system there are regulations which must be observed by theState suppliers, and to which the purchasing bodies must conform. Furthermore,there is a thorough analysis of the methods implemented before beginningthe construction of the third nuclear plant in Argentina, the AtuchaII Nuclear Plant. For this, all the existing antecedents were taken intoaccount, insofar as they were related to the prior projects, and an exhaustivequestionnaire was elaborated, in which the examined enterprises describedin detail their installed capacity, their antecedents, their human resources,etc. The data thus obtained were evaluated and the task was concludedby drawing up lists of the possible enterprises to supply the most diversecomponents, services or equipment required both by the electrical plantand for any other large scale work. The evaluation obtained would allowan analysis of the foreign offers concerning the entire project and ofthe possible participation with each bidder of Argentinian industry andengineering. A description is given of the advanced method used to assessbidders with respect to such participation, to assess the replies tothe questionnaire, which were analysed in detail, and the weighting factorsapplied to each item. Also described are some major contracts concludedwith enterprises in the country. These contracts relate to the externalacquisition of technology for nuclear plants and the essential pointsare outlined. Also analysed are the results obtained during the executionof the programmes of technology transfer and training, both for partsof different enterprises selected to produce the components, and forthe State, through C.N.E.A. and ENACE S.A. 6 refs, 5 tabs.</TEXT></DOC>