<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> DOE2-59-0792 </DOCNO><TEXT>The earliest research efforts on using genetic methods for the controlof mosquitoes and biting flies concentrated on the evaluation of thesterile insect technique (SIT). Several successful, but generally smallscale, research efforts with mosquitoes clearly documented that eitherchemosterilized or radiation sterilized males were effective in causinga level of genetic load that would be sufficient for the reduction oreradication of natural populations of several species. Genetic sexingstrains of several species of mosquitoes have been assembled, and thisaspect of breeding specialty strains is not a limiting factor in theimplementation of SIT. In the largest field experiment, conducted withAnopheles albimanus in El Salvador during the 1970s, a genetic sexingstrain was used operationally in a factory that produced one millionsterile males per day over a one year period. Technical problems thatwould require extensive research of a practical nature before the implementationof SIT for mosquito control involve primarily better means for the rearing,sterilization and distribution of the insects. A successful experimentwas conducted to eliminate the stable fly on the island of St. Croix,the United States Virgin Islands, and since this work in the 1970s, geneticsexing strains have been developed. A considerable amount of effort wasexpended on the synthesis of chromosome aberrations for the control ofmosquitoes. Although the results of experimental trials indicated thataberration bearing insects could effectively inject a genetic load intothe natural population, no large scale tests have ever been conductedto evaluate fully the real effectiveness of induced chromosomal aberrations.More recently, most of the research work in genetic control has beenaimed at the use of recombinant DNA techniques for the development ofnew technology. All of these topics and an assessment of their valueare discussed. (author). 30 refs.</TEXT></DOC>