<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88106-0024 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-06-88.f2.A1023</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Parts 563 and 571</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 87-1295] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Appraisal Policies and Practices of Insured Institutions and ServiceCorporations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: December 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (``Board''), as theoperating head of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (``FSLIC''),is adopting a final rule and a statement of policy pertaining to appraisalpolicies and practices of institutions insured by the FSLIC (``insuredinstitutions'') and their service corporations consistent with the requirementsof the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987 (``CEBA''), Pub. L. No.100-86, 101 Stat. 552. This rule requires the management of insured institutionsand service corporations to develop and implement prudent appraisal policiesand procedures. The Board is also adopting a statement of policy to accompany the rule.The statement of policy sets forth certain appraisal standards that theBoard recommends to management for consideration in the development ofthe appraisal policies and procedures required by the rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>January 7, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Joan S. van Berg, Attorney, (202)377-7023, Thomas J. Delaney, Attorney, (202) 377-6417, or Karen O'KonskiSolomon, Director, (202) 377-7240, Regulations and Legislation Division,Office of General Counsel; Patricia Rudolph, Visiting Scholar, (202) 377-6766,Office of Policy and Economic Research, Federal Home Loan Bank Board, 1700G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552; or Diana Garmus, Policy Analyst, (202)778-2515, Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision, FederalHome Loan Bank System, 900 Nineteenth Street NW., Washington, DC 20006.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The soundness of mortgage loans andreal estate investments made by insured institutions and their servicecorporations depends upon the adequacy of the loan underwriting used tosupport these transactions. An appraisal report is one of several essentialcomponents of the loan underwriting process. Accordingly, section 563.17-1of the Board's regulations requires that the records of a loan securedby real estate include ``[o]ne or more written appraisal reports, preparedat the request of the lender or its agent * * * by a person or personsduly appointed and qualified as appraisers by the board of directors ofsuch lender, disclosing the market value of the security offered by theborrower and containing sufficient information and data concerning theappraised property to substantiate the market value of the security describedin such report * * *.'' 12 CFR 563.17-1(c)(1)(iv). To date, standards forcompliance with 12 CFR 563.17-1 have been issued in the form of ``R'' Memorandaby the Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision (``ORPOS'')of the Federal Home Loan Bank System. <T3>See e.g., </T3>ORPOS Memorandum No. R41c (Sept. 11, 1986). In the preambleto its October 2, 1987 proposal on appraisal policies, the Board discussedthe history of these appraisal standards. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1040, 52 FR 39070 (Oct. 20, 1987). On May 5, 1987, the Board proposed to adopt a rule and a statement of policyto incorporate in its regulations appraisal standards to be used by insuredinstitutions and service corporations in complying with regulatory requirements.52 FR 18386 (May 15, 1987) (the ``May proposal''). The May proposal waspublished with a 60-day comment period that was scheduled to expire onJuly 14, 1987. On July 14, 1987, however, the Board extended the commentperiod to September 1, 1987, in order to ascertain the effect of finalrecapitalization legislation on the proposed rule and policy statement.52 FR 27219 (July 20, 1987). The Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987,Pub. L. No. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552, was signed into law on August 10, 1987.Pursuant to section 402(a) of CEBA, the Board is required to establish,by regulation, an appraisal standard for Federal associations ``which isconsistent with the appraisal standard established by the Federal bankingagencies.'' \1\<NOTE/> CEBA, tit. iv, sec. 402(a). Section 402(b) requires thatthe Board promulgate a regulation establishing an identical appraisal standardfor state-chartered, FSLIC-insured institutions.\2\<NOTE/> CEBA, tit. iv, sec. 402(b). <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Section 402 of CEBA defines ``Federal banking agencies''to include the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of theFederal Reserve System, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Pursuant to 12 CFR 561.1, the term ``insured institution''is defined as a Federal association or a state-chartered, FSLIC-insuredsavings and loan association. Therefore, an amendment to the Board's regulationsgoverning all insured institutions will implement the statutory amendmentsto the HOLA and the NHA made by CEBA. CEBA's specific directive that the Board establish appraisal standardsby regulation is consistent with the Board's existing statutory mandateto promote home financing according to principles of safety and soundness.Among the paramount purposes of Title IV of the National Housing Act (``NHA'')(12 U.S.C. 1724-30) and the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (``Bank Act'') (12U.S.C. 1421-29) is the development and maintenance of a system of soundand economical home financing. An additional, closely related purpose ofthe NHA is protection of the FSLIC insurance fund from exposure to unduerisk.\3\<NOTE/> The appraisal standards rule and policy statement are designedto enable the Board to carry out both statutory objectives. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The concern of risk to the FSLIC was also echoed in theConference Report to CEBA. <T3>See </T3>Joint Explanatory Statement of the Conference Committee, H.Rep. No. 261, 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 164 (1987). Moreover, the Board is authorized by sections 403(b) and 407(m) of theNHA to conduct examinations of insured institutions and their service corporations.12 U.S.C. 1726(b), 1730(m). The Board believes that carefully documentedappraisals are essential to an accurate evaluation of the asset portfolioof an insured institution or service corporation. The rule pertaining toappraisal policies and practices of insured institutions and their servicecorporations therefore comports with the Board's statutory authority toexamine and evaluate the asset portfolios of insured institutions and theirservice corporations.In light of CEBA's mandate, the Board reviewed its May proposal and concludedthat significant modifications to both its structure and content were necessaryin order to comply with CEBA's directive in the most effective way. Therefore,on October 2, 1987, the Board withdrew its May proposal. Board Res. No.87-1039, 52 FR 39070 (Oct. 20, 1987). <ITAG tagnum="84">A. Description of the Proposal </ITAG>On October 2, 1987, the Board proposed to adopt a rule and statement ofpolicy pertaining to appraisal policies and practices of insured institutionsand their service corporations consistent with the requirements of CEBA.<T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1040, 52 FR 39070 (Oct. 20, 1987). WhenCEBA was enacted, the Federal banking agencies had not adopted any regulationsor written standards on appraisals. At that time, the Board's staff learned,through discussions with representatives of those agencies, that the hallmarkof the Federal banking agencies' appraisal practices is the placement ofresponsibility for developing and maintaining adequate appraisals withthe management of the regulated institutions.\4\<NOTE/> Therefore, in order to comply with the mandate of CEBA, theBoard proposed a rule that instructs management to develop, implement,and maintain appraisal policies and practices that are best suited to theneeds of the particular institution. With the exception of certain provisionsthat, at a minimum, must be included in all appraisals, the proposed ruledid not set forth the specific indicia of an acceptable appraisal. Theseprovisions required every appraisal to: (1) Be based upon the definitionof market value as set forth in the rule; (2) be presented in a narrativeformat; and (3) contain a prior sales history of the property appraised.With respect to all other aspects of an appraisal, the proposal simplyrequired management to develop and adopt guidelines and to institute procedurespertaining to the hiring and review of appraisers.  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ In December, 1987, after the Board issued its proposedrule and policy statement on appraisals, the Federal banking agencies issuedguidelines pertaining to real estate appraisal policies and review procedures.Moreover, the proposal provided for certain exemptions to the rule's requirements.It exempted appraisals of existing and proposed one-to-four family propertiesand existing multi-family properties prepared on forms approved by theFederal National Mortgage Association (``Fannie Mae'') and the FederalHome Loan Mortgage Corporation (``Freddie Mac''), in compliance with theirrespective appraisal standards. The proposal also exempted appraisals oncommercial and industrial loans that are prepared on the form report approvedby the Board. The proposed statement of policy offered guidance to management concerningrelevant and accepted appraisal standards to be considered in developingan institution's appraisal policies and practices. On October 5, 1987, the Board also voted to hold a public hearing; thehearing was held on November 3 and November 4, 1987. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1048, 52 FR 39154 (Oct. 20, 1987). At thehearing, the Board received oral comments and written submissions on allregulations required under CEBA, including the proposed appraisal rule.With regard to the appraisal rule, ten written submissions were receivedfrom participants at the hearing. The written submissions and oral testimonyhave been considered with the other written comments the Board has receivedand are summarized below. <ITAG tagnum="84">B. Discussion of Comments </ITAG>The Board received a total of 89 comments in response to the proposal,including written statements submitted at the public hearing. The majorityof comments (47) were submitted by insured institutions. Of the remainder,23 were submitted by industry trade associations, 11 by appraisers, 2 bylaw firms representing insured institutions, 1 by a bank holding company,1 by an investment banking firm, 1 by a real estate company, 1 by a government-charteredcorporation, and 2 by private individuals. Seven commenters expressed unqualified support for the October proposal.The vast majority of commenters, 49, generally expressed support for theproposal, but suggested various substantive and technical modifications.Only five commenters opposed the proposal, two of whom disagreed that therewas any necessity to issue the rule and policy statement. The 26 remainingcommenters expressed neither support nor opposition for the proposal, butsuggested modifications or clarifications. Although the comment periodended on November 19, 1987, the Board has considered late-filed lettersin its efforts to maximize public participation in the rulemaking. Aftercarefully considering the issues raised by the commenters, which are discussedmore fully below, the Board has determined to adopt the proposal with certainmodifications and clarifications. 1. The Appraisal Rule <ITAG tagnum="81">Compliance With the Mandate of CEBA </ITAG>Most of the commenters generally supported the proposed rule's shift ofresponsibility to management to develop and implement prudent appraisalpolicies and practices. Several commenters noted that the new rule providesmanagement with the necessary discretion and flexibility to enable thriftinstitutions to be in competitive equality with banks. Three commenters urged, however, that in order to be consistent with thebanks, the Board should not impose any standards on institutions. Two ofthose commenters argued that to require all appraisals to conform withthe standards enunciated in the proposed rule would put thrifts at a competitivedisadvantage, which they contended would be inconsistent with CEBA. Threecommenters urged the Board to join with the banking agencies to developcommon appraisal standards to achieve competitive equality. Several commenters were pleased that the Board deviated from the R-41cstandards that were applicable to all appraisals irrespective of the propertytype or loan amount. One commenter noted that the R-41c standards are cripplingto thrifts and that in fact under such guidelines many institutions delegatethe underwriting decision to appraisers. A few commenters were concernedthat the new rule is a retreat from the Board's current appraisal standards,the guidelines issued by ORPOS as R-41c. One commenter argued that if asingle standard, such as R-41c, does not prevail throughout the thriftindustry, institutions will be on an unequal footing with each other. Anothercommenter argued that in order to take enforcement or supervisory actionagainst an institution, the Board must promulgate specific appraisal guidelinesand/or standards. In light of CEBA's mandate to adopt appraisal standards that are consistentwith those of the Federal banking agencies, the Board has determined thatit is necessary to revise and restructure its appraisal standards. It isthe Board's opinion that the delegation to management of the responsibilityto adopt appraisal policies for insured institutions affords flexibilityin achieving compliance with this rule. The Board is also of the opinionthat its new approach, consistent with the appraisal principles endorsedby the Federal banking agencies, will foster both cost efficiency in theappraisal process and competitive equality with the banking industry.The shift to management of the burden to develop, implement, and maintainadequate appraisal standards does not signal a retreat from the Board'sstrong policy in favor of encouraging sound underwriting practices, includingappraisal standards. Consistent with this policy and the Board's statutoryenforcement authority,\5\<NOTE/> an institution may be subject to enforcement action if itviolates any final appraisal regulation or if its appraisal standards donot comport with principles of safety and soundness.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ The NHA provides that the FSLIC may take enforcement actionif an institution violates a regulation or if it commits an unsafe or unsoundpractice. 12 U.S.C. 1730(e). The statute provides a more specific listof items that may justify enforcement action. <T3>Id. </T3>The Board believes that those commenters who argued that the standardsenunciated in the proposed rule would be inconsistent with CEBA take anunduly restrictive view of the statute. Although the Federal banking agencieshave no regulation on appraisals, in December, 1987, these agencies issuedguidelines pertaining to real estate appraisal policies and review procedures.After carefully reviewing these guidelines, the Board is of the opinionthat its rule and policy statement  adopted today are not inconsistentwith the appraisal policies of the banking agencies. In fact, the bankingagencies' guidelines contain many of the same components that are includedin the Board's rule and/or policy statement. Similar to the practices ofbanks, in its rule, the Board places the responsibility on management todevelop and implement appraisal policies and practices. The Board's ruleprescribes specific requirements for appraisals which are clearly permissibleunder the banking agencies' guidelines. Therefore, the Board's rule isfully consistent with the guidelines issued by the Federal banking agencies.As opposed to banks, the Board is requiring a specific definition of marketvalue and that unless exempted, appraisals be contained in a narrativeformat. In their guidelines, the banking agencies recommend that banksalso utilize a definition of market value. However, while the Board requiresa specific definition, the banking agencies allow a market value definitionas defined by the major appraisal associations, a definition which maynot be uniform. Moreover, the banking agencies do not necessarily requirethat appraisals be contained within a narrative format. Similar to thestandard recommended by the banking agencies that appraisals contain asales history, the Board's rule includes this requirement. Adoption of certain specific minimal standards for appraisals will contributeto sound loan underwriting practices and will protect the FSLIC from unduerisk. Further, the Board notes that historically, unlike banks, thriftinstitutions have primarily been involved in real estate lending. On theother hand, banks have traditionally been involved in commercial lendingactivities, generally with less emphasis on home mortgages, which requiredifferent underwriting standards. Therefore, the need for minimal standardsfor real estate valuations are more critical for thrift institutions thanfor banks. While the Board leaves to each institution the responsibilityto develop its own appraisal policies, for the above-mentioned reasons,the rule sets forth the minimal elements of what in the Board's view wouldconstitute an adequate and fair appraisal. <ITAG tagnum="81">Responsibilities of an Institution's Directors </ITAG>The rule specifically solicited comment on whether the board of directorsof an institution must formally adopt the appraisal standards and policiesdeveloped and implemented by the institution's management. Several commenterssupported the directors' involvement in this process, and particularlysupported the directors' adoption of the institution's appraisal standards.A few commenters noted that inasmuch as the board has fiduciary responsibilitiesfor the establishment of an institution's policies and overall responsibilityfor supervising the management of the thrift institution, the board hasthe obligation to review and approve such policies and procedures of theinstitution. Three commenters opposed such a requirement; two of thesecommenters argued that internal auditing by the institution should be sufficient.A few commenters expressed concern as to whether the directors would beinvolved in the selection, approval, and review of each appraiser hiredby the institution. They argued that such a requirement would be burdensome.Moreover, two commenters questioned whether the rule permits the boardto delegate to management or a committee of the board the selection, approval,and review of appraisers. Although the rule explicitly directs the management of an institution todevelop appraisal policies, the rule also specifically includes directorsand officers within the definition of management. It is the Board's beliefthat it is incumbent upon an institution's board of directors to ensurethat the institution has proper policies and procedures in place, whichmust include the maintenance of prudent loan underwriting policies. Moreover,the directors have fiduciary responsibilities and are responsible for supervisingthe overall management of the institution. It is the Board's view, therefore,that in order to fulfill the responsibilities attendant to the positionof a director of an institution, the board of directors should considerthe appraisal policies developed by management and formally adopt an appraisalpolicy for the institution. In this regard, the Board has modified therule and included a provision requiring the board of directors to adoptan institution's appraisal policies. Further, it is not the Board's intention that the board of directors individuallyapprove each appraiser recommended by management. Rather, the board maydelegate such functions to management and remain in compliance with therequirements of the rule. Alternatively, a blanket approval, indicatingthat the board of directors has approved the hiring of one or more appraiserswould also satisfy the requirements of the rule. <ITAG tagnum="81">Definition of Market Value </ITAG>The rule includes a definition of market value as adopted by Fannie Maeand Freddie Mac. Six commenters, including two trade associations, arguedin support of the definition of market value as set forth in the regulation.They argued that the definition is widely accepted. One commenter contendedthat the definitions utilized by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac or by majorappraisal organizations would be appropriate.One commenter, however, questioned whether one market value definitionis appropriate for appraisals on all loans and investments. This commentercontended that the definition does not contemplate the variety of propertytypes. In addition, this commenter argued that appraisers should have theflexibility to use other standards so that borrowers are not ultimatelydenied access to mortgage loans. Moreover, one commenter argued that theBoard should permit the use of other opinions of value or sources of informationrelating to the value of collateral. Specifically, this commenter urgedthe Board to utilize tax values instead of market value. Further, two commentersrecommended that the Board delete the term ``probable'' from the definitionbecause it makes the definition ambiguous. As it stated in the proposal, the Board believes that the definition ofmarket value, as adopted by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, is an accurateand reliable measure of the economic potential of security property. Moreover,the definition is widely accepted and utilized, and the Board stronglybelieves that a uniform standard of market value will provide consistencyto appraisal reports in the loan underwriting process. The Board also specifically solicited comment on whether to continue touse the term ``market value'' in the rule. Two commenters urged the Boardto adopt one term for market value to be applicable to all regulations.A few commenters supported the term ``market value,'' inasmuch as thisis an appraisal concept; the other suggested term, ``fair value,'' it wasargued, is an accounting concept. With regard to the continuation of the use of market value in this rule,the Board prescribes within this rule the use of the term ``market value''as opposed to ``fair value.'' \6\<NOTE/> Although  the terms ``market value'' and ``fair value'' aresomewhat similar, the term ``market value'' is a term that is generallyaccepted and utilized by the professional appraiser community. On the otherhand, ``fair value'' is a term that is more widely accepted by the accountingprofession. To resolve the question of terminology, the Board, therefore,has determined to continue the use of the term ``market value'' in therule and policy statement. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ The Board does not mean to imply that an institution shouldbase its allowances for loan losses on fair value if the appropriate basisfor loan loss allowances is net realizable value in accordance with StatementNo. 5 of the Financial Accounting Standards Board. Market value as estimatedin an appraisal may differ from net realizable value under generally acceptedaccounting principles. When net realizable value is required, as for examplein loan loss allowances on existing credits, certain elements underlyingmarket value must be adjusted, <T3>e.g., </T3>the discount rate used. <ITAG tagnum="81">Narrative Format </ITAG>A few commenters supported the concept of the new rule providing for shorter,less detailed appraisal reports for uncomplicated properties. Several commenterssuggested that the extent of the appraisal should bear some relationshipto the size of the loan. For smaller loans where the lending decision isbased on the creditworthiness of the borrower, it was argued that lessdetail should be required than that which is required when the loan islarger and the real estate is the primary source of repayment. Anothersuggested that leeway should be provided in the appraisal requirementswhere the value of the property clearly exceeds the loan amount. One commentersuggested that the Board apply different requirements for institutionswith proven experience in land development than those that have experiencedproblems. A few commenters, however, contended that it should be left tomanagement to ensure that quality appraisal reports, which include complete,well-documented materials, have been performed by the appraiser withoutalso requiring that the report be in a narrative format as set out in therule. At the outset, the Board notes that its purpose in requiring the narrativeformat for appraisals is to ensure that appraisals be sufficiently descriptiveto enable a reviewer to ascertain the estimated value reported and therationale for that estimate. Moreover, to require the appraiser to presentthe opinions, analyses, and conclusions pertaining to the appraisal ofthe subject property in such a format should not require the reviewer togo beyond the report or supporting documentation. This format also willenable the reviewer to determine whether the appraisal conforms with theinstitution's appraisal guidelines and practices and should make any suchdeficiencies in the report readily apparent to the reader. Further, consistentwith the Board's objective to ensure that an institution's lending policiescomport with safety and soundness principles, the narrative format willrequire an institution to be circumspect in its review of appraisals andwill provide the institution with documentary evidence as to whether theappraisal conforms with the rule's requirements and the institution's policiesand procedures. The Board also notes that the extent of detail and analysis of the appraisalshould be commensurate with the complexity of the real estate appraised.The Board believes that this requirement affords management the discretionto determine the adequacy of an appraisal based upon the characteristicsof the collateral appraised. This requirement promotes cost efficiencyin the preparation of appraisal reports by permitting management to acceptshorter, less detailed, and less costly reports on uncomplicated properties.Many commenters expressed support for the use of certain form reports inlieu of the provision requiring that all appraisal reports be presentedin a narrative format. Under the rule, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac formsare permitted for existing or proposed one-to-four family and existingmulti-family properties, in compliance with the appraisal standards establishedby those agencies; Board-approved forms are permitted for appraisals oncertain non-residential properties. Two commenters noted that the use ofFannie Mae or Freddie Mac reports and Board-approved reports for smallcommercial and less complicated properties will reduce costs and be morecompetitive with banks.Several commenters advocated the use of the Uniform Residential AppraisalReport (``URAR''), a form report prepared by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,if completed in compliance with the Uniform Standards of Professional AppraisalPractice (``USPAP'') either as an alternative to the underwriting standardsutilized by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, or as a replacement. They contendthat the URAR, if completed in comp1iance with USPAP standards, satisfiesprofessional appraisal standards and is flexible for various uses. Onetrade association suggested that, for routine properties, if the USPAPstandards are incorporated on the URAR form, such an appraisal should beadequate and reliable. Moreover, this commenter noted that Fannie Mae orFreddie Mac appraisal standards are not static and, therefore, additionalrequirements may be imposed that would be time-consuming and costly. Onecommenter argued that institutions should not have to conform with therequirements of those organizations that are involved in the secondarymortgage market. Three commenters argued that the Fannie Mae or FreddieMac standards are far more comprehensive than those required under USPAP.Further, with regard to proposed multi-family properties, one commenterurged that Federal Housing Authority appraisal forms and documentationbe included within the scope of the exemption. For small commercial loans, of approximately $500,000 or less, one commentercontended that the provisions of the rule pertaining to the narrative formatrequired on appraisals are too stringent. This commenter argued that appraisersmay require an institution to prepare a ``full-blown'' report irrespectiveof the loan amount or use of the property. Such a report, it was argued,is costly and time-consuming for thrifts. Moreover, one commenter contendedthat for non-residential loans, the regulation should allow appraisersmore latitude to follow accepted professional standards if the particularform is not adaptable to the given assignment. The Board is of the opinion that narrative appraisal reports are unnecessaryfor certain types of properties. The Board, therefore, continues to encouragethe development and use of form reports under certain circumstances. Itis the Board's view that this exemption to the narrative format requirementpermits the appraiser to exercise discretion in providing reasonable supportingdocumentation for all value estimates and conclusions. For one-to-fourfamily and existing multi-family properties, with regard to the forms preparedand approved by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in compliance with their appraisalstandards, the Board has determined that either the Fannie Mae or FreddieMac appraisal and loan underwriting standards are sufficient, will producean acceptable and reasonable appraisal, albeit on a form report, and willsatisfy concerns of safety and soundness. Although the form report doesnot include the type of detail and reasoning required in the narrativeformat, the Board believes that the appraisal standards of either FannieMae or Freddie Mac will satisfy the Board's concern that an appraisal containa reasonable estimate of the value reported and the rationale supportingsuch estimate. Similarly, for commercial and industrial loans, the use of a Board-approvedform should prove less costly and enable institutions to be more competitivewith banks. This is consistent with the Board's intent to promote the useof less detailed reports that are commensurate with the complexity of theproperty appraised. Moreover, although not subject to a formal rule-makingprocedure, a Board-approved form will be open to comment by the industry.With regard to the use of Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac forms for one-to-fourfamily residential properties, the rule states that such forms are notto be used for ``proposed tract developments.'' Two commenters, includinga trade association, were unclear as to what constituted a tract developmentand suggested that the Board clarify or define the term. The Board hascarefully reviewed these comments and has agreed, for the purposes of clarification,to include such a definition within the rule and modified the rule accordingly.<ITAG tagnum="81">Prior Sales History </ITAG>One commenter strongly endorsed the rule's requirement that an appraisalcontain a prior sales history of the property appraised. This commenterargued that this provision will prevent abuse by developers and speculators,and also will provide institutions with the necessary information to beon guard against rapidly escalating values of properties through the useof land flips. One commenter noted that a three-year sales history maybe unavailable on the property, and if so, it was urged that a signed statementof the appraiser attesting that such a sales history could not be obtainedwould be sufficient. A few commenters expressed concern about whether theprior sales history requirement would need to be satisfied if the appraisalwas completed on a Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac form report. Moreover, althoughone commenter questioned whether the prior sales history requirement isconsistent with CEBA, in that banks do not have such a requirement, heacknowledged that the requirement is warranted due to the Board's experiencewith land flip situations and the attendant risk to the FSLIC. For purposes of clarification, the section of the rule pertaining to exemptionsapplies to the three components of the rule. Therefore, if a Freddie Macor Fannie Mae form report is used, the rule's three requirements need notbe satisfied. However, the Board recognizes that if such a report is used,the Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac definition of market value would, of course,be required inasmuch as their appraisal guidelines use this definition.\7\<NOTE/> The Board notes, however, that neither the Fannie Mae norFreddie Mac guidelines require a prior sales history. The Board is convincedthat the failure to include this one requirement in the Fannie Mae or FreddieMac guidelines should not make the report less acceptable. It is the Board'sview that their guidelines are comprehensive and result in adequate andquality appraisal reports. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ The Board also notes that for the Board-approved formreport, the definition of market value as set out in the rule will be required.The Board notes that in the recently issued guidelines by the Federal bankingagencies, banks are recommended to include a sales history within an appraisal.Therefore, consistent with the banking agencies' guidelines and the commentsreceived on this provision, the Board has determined to retain this requirement.Moreover, if a prior sales history is unavailable, and the appraiser hasmade reasonable attempts to procure it, the Board is of the opinion thata statement in the appraisal report attesting to that would be sufficient.<ITAG tagnum="81">Selection of Appraisers </ITAG>On the hiring of appraisers, one commenter strongly endorsed the proposedrule's advocacy of the use of appraisal companies for one-to-four familyresidential properties. One commenter, however, contended that it wouldbe a poor industry practice for institutions to hire appraisal companies,in that such companies would likely use students or ``legmen,'' as opposedto professional appraisers, for conducting appraisals. The Board continues to believe that for one-to-four family residentialproperties, management may approve an appraisal company in lieu of individualappraisers. It is, however, incumbent upon management to determine thatthe appraisal company's standards for hiring appraisers are fully satisfactoryto the institution. On the approval of appraisal companies, the board ofdirectors or management, if such functions are so delegated, should procurea listing of the hiring qualifications required by the appraisal companyand a representative sampling of appraisers' resumes. This sampling shouldbe obtained periodically. Moreover, for clarification, the term appraisalcompany is only intended to include companies engaged in the business ofappraising, with appraisers or staff whose resumes show the company astheir primary employer. The rule would not include, however, an occasionalsource for free lance work or a company that does not use staff appraisers.Further, the Board recognizes that mortgage bankers often provide thriftswith substantial loan business. The Board also notes that mortgage bankersemploy appraisers. For one-to-four family residential properties, the Boarddoes not object to the use of appraisals performed by appraisers employedby mortgage bankers provided that the brokerage firm's standards for hiringappraisers are satisfactory to the institution and that the institutionis fully satisfied that the brokerage firm's appraisal standards will bein conformance with the institution's appraisal standards. A few commenters asserted that the rule fails to state that an appraiserbe independent from and not have any allegiance to the institution. Theyargued that such a clarification is necessary inasmuch as it would ensurefair and accurate appraisals. Certainly for those institutions that utilizestaff appraisers, this requirement would be onerous and costly. Moreover,the Board would encourage institutions to include in the appraisal a certificationthat the appraiser has no interest in the property and that compensationfor the services performed is not based upon a percentage of the valuationof the property. Similarly, for these same reasons, staff appraisers shouldbe independent from the underwriting staff. These would, in the Board'sview, be prudent appraisal practices. With regard to an appraiser's membership in a professional organization,one commenter contended that such a requirement would be unreasonable forappraisers located in a rural area. Another commenter, however, indicatedthat the regulation only requires institutions to consider whether an appraiseris a member of a professional organization. The Board also wishes to reiteratethat the rule does not require that management only approve appraisersholding any specific appraisal designation or membership in any specificappraisal organization. Instead, management may consider these factorsin assessing whether to hire appraisers. The rule provides management with the responsibility for the selectionand approval of appraisers. The responsibility is, therefore, placed onmanagement to hire competent appraisers who will be capable of performingthe appraisals for the institution. The appraiser, of course, should bequalified to perform the particular appraisal assignments for which heor she has been engaged. Moreover, an appraiser's experience should becommensurate with the complexity of the assignment. <ITAG tagnum="81">Institution's Review of Appraiser's Performance </ITAG>Many commenters expressed concern with the rule's requirement that institutionsperiodically review all approved appraisers at least semi-annually. Ratherthan requiring a separate semi-annual review, a few commenters suggestedthat an institution's review of appraisers should be conducted in conjunctionwith each appraisal at the time it is submitted. Four commenters, however,noted that banks do not impose such appraisal review requirements. Thesecommenters generally argued that such a requirement is burdensome on management,costly, and duplicative. Moreover, a few commenters noted that an institutionmay not use all approved appraisers within a six month period, particularlyif an institution is involved in nationwide lending. One commenter notedthat Fannie Mae only reviews appraisers on a random basis. Another commenterwas concerned with the impact of this requirement on small institutions.This commenter asserted that it would be a particular hardship for smallinstitutions.Several commenters offered alternatives to the six-month review period.One trade association recommended that the six-month requirement be limitedto those actively working for an institution. One commenter suggested thatonly for new appraisers should such a requirement be mandatory. Severalcommenters suggested that an annual review would be adequate; two commentersrecommended that an annual certification that an appraiser complied withthe institution's requirements would be satisfactory. Another commenterrecommended a two year review for accredited appraisers who are membersof a professional association and a six-month or annual review for nonaccreditedappraisers. Two commenters expressed concern as to whether the rule's requirementsfor appraiser review would be retroactive. These commenters urged thatthe requirement not be retroactive so that an institution would not besubject to sanctions for unsafe and unsound practices with respect to actionstaken before the effective date of the rule. One commenter contended thatan adequate appraisal review system will contribute to the soundness ofloans and investments.The Board believes that management is responsible not only for establishingan institution's appraisal policies and hiring appraisers but also forcontinual oversight of the provision of appraisal services to the institutionby fee or staff appraisers. In this regard, it is incumbent upon managementto ensure that appraisals consistently report estimates of market valueof collateral that adequately support an institution's lending decisions.After carefully reviewing the comments received and after thorough considerationof the effect a semi-annual review of approved appraisers would have onindividual institutions, the Board has decided to continue the requirementof a periodic review, but will require that such review be performed onan annual basis for those appraisers used within the preceding twelve-monthperiod, and has modified the rule accordingly. Of overriding concern tothe Board is the fact that such reviews be performed in order to ensurethat the institution employs qualified and competent appraisers. The Boardleaves to the discretion of management, however, the frequency and typeof review to be performed. Further, with regard to the commenters' concernregarding the retroactive effect of the review requirement, the Board emphasizesthat all aspects of the rule are effective as of the rule's effective date.An institution, therefore, is not bound by the review requirement untilsuch date. 2. The Appraisal Policy Statement <ITAG tagnum="81">Impact of Policy Statement on Institutions' Appraisal Policies </ITAG>The largest number of comments received on any aspect of the proposed ruleand policy statement were those that addressed the intended purpose ofthe policy statement. Twenty-four commenters expressed concern about therole the policy statement would play in future examinations. Many notedthat the rule places responsibility on management for the development,implementation, and maintenance of appraisal standards and questioned whetherthe effect of the policy statement would nullify the intent of the rule.Moreover, although many of these commenters recognized that the policystatement is only intended as guidance, is not prescriptive, and does notcarry the force and effect of law, many were concerned that it would beviewed as the standard against which an institution's appraisal policywould be measured. In particular, commenters were concerned that examinerswould use the standards contained in the policy statement when reviewingthe adequacy of an institution's appraisal policies and practices inasmuchas those standards include many components of R-41c, a standard with whichexaminers are very familiar. Since examiners tended to support the specificrequirements of the R-41c memorandum, a few commenters argued that theexaminers would be less receptive to other policies that did not mirrorthe R-41c approach. Two commenters objected to the inclusion of R-41 standardsin the policy statement arguing such standards are not competitive withbanks. Many commenters who questioned the intended purpose of the policy statementrecommended the adoption of USPAP. Of the twenty-four commenters that expressedconcern about the intent of the policy statement, twenty suggested theadoption of USPAP. A few commenters asserted that USPAP is relied on andin general use in the appraisal industry and that to adopt those standardswould promote consistency in the profession. One commenter noted that USPAPpromotes clarity and standardization in appraisals, facilitates sound underwritingstandards, and comports with principles of safety and soundness. One commenterargued, however, against the adoption of USPAP stating that those standardsare too vague, too broadly based, and do not deal with specifics on appraisals.Other commenters, while not specifically calling for inclusion of USPAPin the policy statement, did suggest changes to insure that the criteriacontained in the policy statement would not be considered the only acceptableappraisal policy that an institution could adopt. Two commenters suggestedthat the Board designate alternative appraisal policies, in addition tothose standards included in the policy statement, that would be appropriate.Another commenter suggested that the Board list appraisal policies or practicesthat were not acceptable to the Board. This commenter also recommendedthat in order to avoid confusion over the impact of a Board-adopted policystatement, the Board merely should issue guidance on appraisal policies,as for example, in the form of R memoranda. Alternatively, in order toeliminate concern about examiners, two commenters suggested that the Board,the Principal Supervisory Agents, or ORPOS approve or disapprove alternativepolicies that are adopted by institutions. Several commenters contendedthat the policy statement should explicitly state that its requirementsare not mandatory and adherence is not necessary if an institution's appraisalpolicies produce accurate appraisals. Moreover, one commenter suggestedthat the Board include language that the absence of certain elements ofthe policy statement in an institution's appraisal policy will not be sufficientto sustain an enforcement action. Further, another commenter proposed thatwhen an institution adopts what it believes are reasonable appraisal guidelinesand appraisals are performed in conformance with those guidelines, theBoard shou1d indicate to that institution that supervisory actions willnot be initiated because of its appraisal policy.To those commenters who expressed concern over the intent of the policystatement, the Board reiterates that the rule sets forth the minimal elementsnecessary for sound appraisal practices. The responsibility for developing,implementing, and maintaining appraisal policies and practices that areconsistent with prudent loan underwriting and that comport with the principlesof safety and soundness is expressly left to the management of each insuredinstitution. Moreover, the policy statement is intended merely as guidanceto assist institutions in developing their appraisal policies and practicesin accordance with the requirements of 12 CFR 563.17-1. The Board recognizesthat factors such as the number and types of loans that an institutionmakes will dictate the complexity of the appraisal policies and practicesthat an institution adopts. The policy statement is not intended to bethe only approach viewed by the Board as consistent with sound underwritingprinciples. Insured institutions may also consider the appraisal guidelinesrecently issued by the Federal banking agencies in developing appraisalpolicies. Each institution must consider its individual lending activities,and within that context, adopt the components of an appraisal policy thatare best suited to the needs of that institution and that also comportwith principles of safety and soundness. The Board does not anticipatethat every institution's appraisal policy must incorporate every aspectof the policy statement. Some institutions may determine that alternativeapproaches to appraisal policies and practices are better suited to theirlending practices, contribute to sound loan underwriting, and comport withprinciples of safety and soundness. On the other hand, as the commentsindicated, others will find the elements of the policy statement well-suitedto their needs. Adherence to the policy statement is not intended by theBoard to be the measuring rod against which an institution's appraisalpolicies and practices are evaluated. The touchstone for evaluating aninstitution's appraisal policies and practices will be the extent to whichthose policies and practices comport with principles of safety and soundness.The Board recognizes the concern expressed by various commenters that examinerswill utilize the standards contained in the policy statement when reviewingthe adequacy of an institution's appraisal policies and practices. Examinerswill be trained to evaluate each institution's appraisal practices andpolicies in the context of safe and sound loan underwriting. ORPOS is currentlydeveloping a training program to educate examiners on all regulatory changesnecessitated by CEBA. This process should be in place soon after the promulgationof the regulations required by CEBA. With regard to the final appraisal rule, examiners will be trained to understandthat the requirements regarding appraisals are those contained in the ruleitself and that appraisal standards previously issued by the Board or ORPOSare no longer applicable. Because the proposed rule does not contain thespecific indicia of an acceptable appraisal, with the exception of certainrequirements, examiners will be advised that there is no specific standardto be used in evaluating an institution's appraisal policies and practices.As opposed to applying the elements of the policy statement, examinerswill be trained to analyze management's performance in developing, implementing,and maintaining appraisal policies and practices in accordance with principlesof safe and sound loan underwriting. The Board does not believe it is necessary or appropriate to incorporatewithin the policy statement additional standards that would constituteacceptable appraisal practices. To the extent that the rule sets forthminimal appraisal requirements, leaving responsibility for the development,implementation, and maintenance of appraisal policies and practices toan institution's management, in adopting an appraisal policy, managementshould not be constrained by any particular approach to appraisal practice.The policy that an institution adopts should be tailored to the particularlending practices of that institution. Furthermore, the Board stronglybelieves that in developing and implementing an appraisal policy, the underlyinggoal of management should be the production of appraisals that will supportprudent loan underwriting. Unlike the accounting profession, the practices of which are governed bythe standards of one nationally recognized organization, the appraisalprofession lacks a similar governing body. As a result, there are no nationalstandards of appraisal practice that are recognized by the entire professionalappraiser community. Lacking the ability to make reference to governingstandards, the Board is not disposed at this time to include in the policystatement a set of standards of appraisal practice that are not adheredto by the entire appraiser profession. After carefully considering theconcerns raised by commenters, the Board has determined that the policystatement will provide the management of insured institutions with sufficientguidance as to the type of considerations that should be addressed whendeveloping and implementing an appraisal policy. The standards followedby any of the representative appraisal organizations can be similarly consideredby an institution's management, and if management determines that thosestandards would ensure safe and sound loan underwriting practices, theycan be incorporated as part of an institution's appraisal policy.\8\<NOTE/> The Board is also compelled to point out that CEBA requiresthe adoption of appraisal standards that are consistent with those of theFederal banking agencies, and such agencies have not to date formally approvedany standards of the appraiser profession. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ During the public hearing on November 4, 1987, the paneltestifying on the proposed appraisal rule was asked by Board Member Whitehow many professional appraisal organizations exist nationally. In responseto that question, William J. Schilling of the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavisandamp; Pogue, responded by citing to an article in <T3>National Thrift News </T3>that there are 73 appraisal organizationsin the country. These figures were not disputed by other members of thepanel.Finally, the Board notes that, in discussing below the comments receivedon the policy statement, the Board has attempted to clarify what the languagemeans so that the statement will be as useful as possible. These clarificationsshould be interpreted in light of the policy statement's purpose of providingguidance rather than prescribing specific standards. <ITAG tagnum="81">Various Definitions of Market Value </ITAG>Commenters also made recommendations for changes to specific aspects ofthe policy statement. Eleven commenters noted concerns with the variousdefinitions of ``market value'' in the policy statement. Despite the generalsupport expressed for ``market value'' as defined in the rule, many commenterswere troubled by the hypothetical valuations required by several of themarket value definitions included in the policy statement. In particular,concerns were expressed over the definitions of ``market value upon completionof construction'' and ``market value upon reaching stabilized occupancy.''According to these commenters, such definitions would require an appraiserto fix a current value estimate to property, the ultimate value of whichwill be determined by future occurrences or trends. Such values, it wasargued, are speculative, hypothetical, unsupported by the market place,and misleading to the reader of an appraisal report. As one commenter explained,market value is an objective value that cannot be supported until marketsupport has been demonstrated at the future date. One commenter statedthat in his opinion, the misuse of ``market value'' data has been one ofthe basic causes for faulty appraisals. Another commenter pointed out thatan appraiser's errors-and-omissions insurance does not provide coveragefor future valuations, making appraisers hesitant to perform such estimates.One commenter noted that certain professional organizations prohibit membersfrom estimating hypothetical values. To correct the problems identifiedwith the proposed definitions of market value, a few commenters suggesteduse of the term ``prospective future value;'' others suggested deletingthose definitions other than ``market value as is on appraisal date.''The Board appreciates and agrees with the concerns raised by commentersregarding the various definitions of market value included in the policystatement. To avoid difficulty differentiating between value estimatesthat require hypothetical valuations and those that reflect value at acertain point in time, the Board has determined that the use of terms otherthan ``market value'' would be appropriate to reflect the value of propertyupon completion of construction and value upon reaching stabilized occupancy.As a result, the definitional section of the policy statement (andSection;571.lb(b)) has been modified to include terms that call for appraisalsto contain estimates of ``prospective future value upon completion of construction''and ``prospective future value upon reaching stabilized occupancy.'' Inaddition, conforming changes have been made to andSection; 571.lb(c) of thepolicy statement. <ITAG tagnum="81">Appraisal Management </ITAG>A few commenters took issue with the provision calling for a letter ofengagement. Two commenters interpreted the policy statement as encouraginga separate engagement letter for each appraisal assignment. They pointedout that such a requirement would be too costly, time-consuming, and cumbersome.One of these commenters suggested that appraisers used frequently couldbe accommodated via a master engagement letter with separate notificationof individual subject property assignments. Additionally, two commentersstated that it should not be necessary to include FSLIC requirements inan institution's engagement letter because under the regulation those requirementsshould be incorporated within an institution's appraisal policy. For thisreason, they recommended the deletion of this provision from the policystatement. Finally, one commenter pointed out that the legal descriptionof property might not be available for a letter of engagement. It is the Board's opinion that the use of master engagement letters isnot inconsistent with the intent of the policy statement. The Board recognizesthat master engagement letters may be more efficient for some insured institutionsand is, therefore, not opposed to their use so long as institutions takesteps to ensure that the engagement letters contribute to sound underwritingpractices. Additionally, the Board agrees with those commenters who suggestedthat it is not necessary to include copies of the rule with the letterof engagement when an institution incorporates the requirements of therule within their appraisal policy. To the extent that insured institutionsare obligated to adopt appraisal policies and practices that are consistentwith the requirements of the rule, the Board believes that it is only necessarythat appraisers be informed of the requirements of the rule when an insuredinstitution does not reiterate those requirements within their appraisalpolicy. The policy statement has been amended accordingly. With regard to the requirement that appraisals be sufficiently current,one commenter questioned whether letter reports could be used to updaterecent appraisals. The policy statement recommends that appraisals be sufficientlycurrent to reduce the likelihood that material changes in actual marketconditions may have occurred by the time the loan or investment decisionis made. Addressing this point, one commenter suggested that appraisalreports that are one to two years old may be updated by a letter reportas long as conditions affecting the property have not significantly changed.That individual stated that this was a fairly common practice in the appraisalindustry. The Board notes that the policy statement indicates that appraisals shouldbe sufficiently current. In the Board's judgment, it would not be inconsistentwith the policy statement for institutions to use letter certificationsof value to update appraisals when there have been no material changesin actual market conditions from the time the original appraisal was performed.It is the Board's view that the appropriateness of certifications of valueis a matter to be determined by the management of an insured institutionin accordance with the circumstances of each loan. One commenter suggested that appraisals reflect the market value of therights in ``real property'' offered as security rather than ``realty''as stated in the policy statement. The Board believes the suggested terminologywould be more consistent with that employed in the rule and has incorporatedthis amendment into the policy statement.A trade association contended that the requirement that appraisals containa reasonably detailed history of comparable sales used for properties inmarkets where the sale prices of comparable properties have been increasingor decreasing at a rate faster than that of the local economy was unnecessary.Although this commenter recognized that this portion of the policy statementwas intended to address problems that arise due to non-arms-length transactions,such as land flips, it was pointed out that the definition of market valuein the rule should encompass such artificial incentives. The Board appreciatesthe concerns expressed by this commenter but does not believe that it isnecessary to amend this portion of the policy statement. While the definitionof market value in the rule is intended to address situations where theprice of property has been inflated by artificial incentives, the Boardfeels strongly that the rule also obligates the management of insured institutionsto determine the extent to which a history of comparable sales would enhancetheir institution's loan underwriting procedures by providing a more accurateindication of the value of the subject property. One commenter believed that the requirement for reasonable documentationof ``highest and best use'' was appropriate. Another commenter, however,indicated that such a requirement could prove burdensome because highestand best use studies are not always available on properties. After consideringthese comments, the Board does not believe that a modification of the policystatement is necessary. The policy statement is merely intended as guidanceand the rule leaves to management the responsibility of determining whetherfor a particular property type, a properly supported estimate of the highestand best use of the property would provide a more accurate estimate ofits market value. <ITAG tagnum="81">Appraisal Content </ITAG>The policy statement provides that the content of each appraisal acceptedby an institution should follow generally accepted and established appraisalpractices as reflected in the appraisal standards of the nationally recognizedprofessional appraisal organizations. There was some question, however,on the part of one commenter, as to which organizations would qualify asnationally recognized professional appraisal organizations. That individualsuggesed that the Board list the nationally recognized appraisal organizationsthat would be acceptable. As mentioned earlier, the Board has been advisedthat there are approximately seventy known appraisal organizations andno nationally recognized, uniform standards to which the entire industryadheres. Reflecting the nature of the appraisal profession, and in accordancewith the comments received by the Board, the reference to appraisal standardsof nationally recognized professional appraisal organizations have beendeleted from the policy statement. Three commenters took exception to the standard in the policy statementthat appraisals be self-contained. Two commenters stated that this standardwas inappropriate for income-producing properties. Another was concernedthat it would be interpreted differently in the various Federal Home LoanBank districts. A few commenters suggested that the term ``totally self-contained''be replaced by a provision requiring that the appraisal ``contain reasonablesupporting documentation.'' After considering the views of commenters on this point, the Board appreciatesthe concerns expressed by those who fear that this standard may be interpretedin such a manner as to make the production of the appraisal report unnecessarilyburdensome. The Board believes it is consistent with the overall thrustof the rule that the policy statement be modified to recommend that appraisalscontain ``reasonable supporting documentation.'' What constitutes reasonablesupporting documentation is to be determined by management in the contextof the property and loan under consideration. The Board would suggest,however, that in order for an appraisal report to be properly reviewed,supporting documentation should be readily available to the reviewer. Another aspect of the policy statement that was the subject of some commentwas the section that a market comparable data analysis of an appraisalinclude a presentation and explanation of adjustments used in the analysis``together with appropriate market support.'' Three commenters indicatedthat this provision would be interpreted in some Federal Home Loan Bankdistricts as requiring the inclusion of ``paired sales,'' whereby comparablesales having identical factors, with the exception of the one item in question,are compared to show the basis for the market adjustment of that specificitem. The commenters asserted that if a paired sales approach is requiredin order to make a market basis justification for all adjustments fromthe comparable to the subject property, the demands on submission of supportingdata would be impossible. They maintain that an appraiser would be requiredto document comparable market data to support each adjustment in the salescomparison approach. Furthermore, one commenter concluded that a full historyof comparable sales is not always appropriate. Rather than requiring marketsupport for each comparable data adjustment used in the market analysis,the commenters suggested that an explanation in the appraisal report ofthe adjustments made should be sufficient.The Board wishes to allay the concerns of those who fear that the suggestionin the policy statement that explanations of adjustments include appropriatemarket support is intended to encourage the use of ``matched pair'' analyses.This portion of the policy statement should not be construed as a referenceto the use of ``matched pair'' analyses. Rather, an explanation of theadjustment in conjunction with reasonably available market support is allthat would be called for by this provision. Under the policy statement, appraisals are to contain a summary of actualannual operating statements for existing income-producing properties. Ifthe appraiser is apprised that such information is unavailable, the appraisershould identify this source of information. Two commenters advocated theelimination of this requirement. After further consideration, the Boardhas determined that as opposed to identifying the source of such informationregarding the unavailability of operating statements, appraisers merelyshould indicate in the report that this information is unavailable. Thepolicy statement has been so amended. 3. Procedural and Technical Comments Two commenters expressed concern as to the impact of the new rule on thesecondary market. These commenters questioned whether the rule might beinterpreted to require an institution to obtain new appraisals for eachof the properties underlying loan pools in which a purchased mortgage-backedsecurity represents a beneficial interest. The Board wishes to reiterate that the rule was not intended to apply toparticipation interests in a mortgage pool. With regard to such interests,the Board notes that 12 CFR 571.13 (1987) specifically exempts institutionspurchasing mortgage-backed securities from the record-keeping requirementsof the Board's appraisal requirements. Although the Board acknowledgesthat each purchaser or participant must make its own underwriting decision,reviewing a copy of the originator's underwriting standards should be anecessary part of that decision in order to determine whether the originator'sstandards are acceptable to the purchaser or participant. Furthermore,an institution also may wish to obtain copies of the underlying appraisals.One commenter suggested including service corporations within the rule'sdefinition of management. After carefully reviewing this comment, the Boardhas made a technical revision to the rule to include service corporationswithin the definition of management. <ITAG tagnum="84">C. Description of the Final Rule </ITAG>The final rule begins with the Board's statement of the purpose of therule. In the interest of safety and soundness, it is incumbent upon managementto maintain prudent loan underwriting policies. Appraisals are an essentialcomponent of the loan underwriting process because appraisal reports containthe estimates of the value of collateral held or assets owned that lendingdecisions are based upon. Therefore, under the rule, management would beresponsible for the development, implementation, and maintenance of appraisalpractices and procedures in accordance with the Board's regulation. 1. Definitions The definitional section of the rule includes definitions of the few termsthat are crucial to the comprehension and application of the appraisalregulation. ``Management'' is defined as the directors and officers ofan institution, or service corporation, as those terms are defined in existingBoard regulations. <T3>See </T3>12 CFR 561.31 and 561.32. This section also includes the definitionof ``market value,'' upon which the Board proposes to base estimates ofvalue in an appraisal report. This definition is identical to the definitionof market value adopted by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 2. Responsibilities of Management The rule contains a section entitled Responsibilities of Management thataddresses the obligations of management to develop, adopt, and implementappraisal policies. Moreover, the rule has been modified to require theboard of directors formally to adopt the institution's appraisal standards.This section emphasizes the Board's view that management should have discretionin establishing appraisal policies; these policies must be designed, however,to ensure that appraisals accepted by the institution reflect professionalcompetence and report estimates of market value upon which the institution'slending decisions can be based. To achieve these results, the rule setsforth three appraisal standards that, at a minimum, must be included inthe appraisal policies of every insured institution and service corporation.The accompanying statement of policy also recommends one set of appraisalstandards acceptable to the Board that management may consider in fulfillingthis responsibility. Institutions are not required, however, to adopt anyor all of these standards in developing their appraisal policies. First, the rule provides that management must require every appraisal tobe based upon the definition of market value as set forth in the regulation.As noted above, this market value definition is identical to the definitionof market value adopted by both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. It contemplatesthe consummation of a sale as of a specified date and the passing of titlefrom buyer and seller under open and competitive market conditions requisiteto a fair sale. Second, the rule provides that management must require an appraisal tobe presented in a narrative format. In this regard, the rule requires anappraisal report to be sufficiently descriptive to enable a reviewer readilyto ascertain the estimated value reported and the rationale for that estimate.The analysis of the value estimate reported must be commensurate in itsdetail and depth with the complexity of the real estate appraised. Third, the Board believes that the reasonableness of an estimate of themarket value of collateral in an appraisal report must be considered inthe context of prior sales of the property that occurred in a recent timeframe. Therefore, the rule provides that management must require that anappraisal contain a sales history of the real estate appraised. Specifically,an appraisal on a one-to-four family residential property that is not preparedon a form approved by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac must disclose and analyzeprior sales that occurred within one year of the date that the appraisalreport was prepared. With respect to all other types of property, the appraisalmust disclose and analyze any prior sales of the property that occurredwithin three years of the date the appraisal was prepared. The rule also requires management to develop and adopt guidelines and toinstitute procedures pertaining to the hiring of appraisers. In this regard,it instructs management to consider factors including, but not limitedto, an appraiser's professional education, type of experience, and membershipin professional appraisal organizations in formulating hiring guidelinesand determining whether to employ an appraiser. Moreover, the rule provides that management must annually review the performancesof all appraisers used within the preceding 12-month period for accuracyand compliance with the institution's appraisal policies. Additionally,the Board is aware that an institution's underwriting policies and procedureswlll invariably change over time. Therefore, the Board strongly recommendsthat management periodically review an institution's appraisal practicesto ensure consistency with current underwriting standards. 3. Exemptions The rule exempts from the appraisal requirements, to be established bymanagement, appraisals on existing or proposed one-to-four family and existingmulti-family properties, prepared on the forms approved by Fannie Mae andFreddie Mac, in compliance with their appraisal standards. Although theFannie Mae appraisal standards are more comprehensive than those of FreddieMac, the Board has determined that compliance with either set of appraisalstandards, in conjunction with the use of approved forms, will satisfythe requirements of the rule. This section of the rule also exempts from the appraisal requirements tobe established by management any appraisals on commercial and industrialloans tbat are prepared on a form report approved by the Board and completedin accordance with accompanying instructions. <ITAG tagnum="84">D. Description of the Statement of Policy </ITAG>The Board believes that the management of insured institutions and servicecorporations is best qualified to develop appraisal policies that meetthe needs of their institutions. Management's policies will be measuredaccording to whether they comport with principles of safety and soundness.The policy statement is intended to serve as guidance as to what constitutesadequate appraisal standards. The Board is not suggesting, however, thatonly these standards would be acceptable. An institution could adopt appraisalpolicies different from those set forth in the policy statement and stillbe consistent with principles of safety and soundness, so long as suchpolicies are designed consistently to produce fair and accurate appraisals.It is the Board's opinion that compliance with the appraisal standardscontained in the policy statement will result in appraisals that reportreliable estimates of collateral value upon which institutions can baselending decisions. The Board may periodically update or modify the appraisalstandards contained in the policy statement to ensure that such standardsremain current.\9\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\9\ The Board notes that section 407 of CEBA requires it toissue supervisory guidelines ``establishing an appraisal review systemto avoid overly optimistic or conservative appraisals with the goal ofachieving appraisals that are more consistent with reflecting underlyingvalues.'' Section 407 also requires the Board to create an informal procedurefor review of certain appraisal decisions. The Board is studying how bestto implement these requirements, and expects to issue the necessary guidelinesand establish appropriate procedures shortly. It plans, however, to accomplishthese objectives through action separate from this rulemaking.<ITAG tagnum="84">E. Effective Date </ITAG>The Board is adopting this regulation and policy statement effective January7, 1988. The Administrative Procedure Act (``APA'') prescribes publicationof a substantive regulation not less than 30 days before its effectivedate. This delayed effective date does not apply when an agency otherwiseprescribes ``for good cause found and published with the rule.'' 5 U.S.C.553(d)(3) (1987). CEBA requires implementation of this regulation no laterthan January 7, 1988. CEBA, tit. iv, sec. 402(d). Moreover, the provisionsof the APA pertaining to notice and comment do not apply to statementsof policy. 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(A). Therefore, the Board finds that ``good cause''exists to dispense with a delayed effective date for both this regulationand the accompanying policy statement. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 604,the Board is providing the following regulatory flexibility analysis: 1. <T3>Need for and objectives of the rule. </T3>These elements have beenincorporated above in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>. 2. <T3>Issues raised by comments and agency assessment and response. </T3>Theseelements are incorporated above in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>. 3. <T3>Significant alternatives minimizing small-entity impact and agencyresponse. </T3>The Small Business Administration defines a small financialinstitution as ``a commercial bank or savings and loan association, theassets of which, for the preceding fiscal year, do not exceed $100 million.''13 CFR 121.13(a). Therefore, small entities to which the final rule appliesinclude insured institutions which had assets totaling $100 million orless as of December 31, 1986, or 1,651 institutions. The final rule treatsall institutions identically regardless of their size for the reasons discussedfully in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>. To do otherwise would be fundamentallyinconsistent with the objectives of the rule. Moreover, all institutions,including small ones, should benefit from the safety and soundness resultingfrom investments in loans secured by property that has been valued in compliancewith the revised appraisal standards set forth in the final rule. Further,inasmuch as the intent of the final rule is to require all institutionsto adopt and maintain sound underwriting standards, including adequateappraisal standards, there is no disproportionate or adverse impact onsmall institutions. Small institutions are expected to benefit from thisrule, due to the latitude provided to the management of insured institutionsto develop standards consistent with their institution's actual lendingoperations. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Parts 563 and 571 </ITAG>Accounting, Bank deposit insurance, Investments, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Savings and loan associations.Accordingly, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board hereby amends Parts 563 and571, Subchapter D, Chapter V, Title 12, Code of Federal Regulations, asset forth below. <ITAG tagnum="76">SUBCHAPTER D_FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 563_OPERATIONS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 563 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 1, 47 Stat. 725, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1421 <T3>et seq.</T3>); sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5B, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec.4, 80 Stat. 824, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425b); sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, asamended (12 U.S.C. 1437); sec. 2, 48 Stat. 128, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1462);sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs. 401-407, 48 Stat.1255-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1730); sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1730a); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>2. Amend Part 563 by adding a new andSection; 563.17-1a to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.17-1a</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Appraisal policies and practices of insured institutions and servicecorporations. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Introduction. </T3>The soundness of an insured institution's mortgageloans and real estate investments, and those of its service corporation(s),depends to a great extent upon the adequacy of the loan underwriting usedto support these transactions. An appraisal standard is one of severalcritical components of a sound underwriting policy because appraisal reportscontain estimates of the value of collateral held or assets owned. Thissection sets forth the responsibilities of management to develop, implement,and maintain appraisal standards in determining compliance with the appraisalrequirements of andSection;andSection; 563.17-1 and 563.17-2 of this subchapter.(b) <T3>Definitions. </T3>For purposes of this section: (1) ``Management'' means: The directors and officers of an insured institution,or service corporation of such institution, as those terms are definedin andSection;andSection; 561.31 and 561.32 of this chapter, respectively;(2) ``Market value'' means: (i) The most probable price which a propertyshould bring in a competitive and open market under all conditions requisiteto a fair sale, the buyer and seller, each acting prudently, knowledgeablyand assuming the price is not affected by undue stimulus. Implicit in thisdefinition is the consummation of a sale as of a specified date and thepassing of title from seller to buyer under conditions whereby: (A) Buyerand seller are typically motivated; (B) both parties are well informedor well advised, and each acting in what he considers his own best interest;(C) a reasonable time is allowed for exposure in the open market; (D) paymentis made in terms of cash in U.S. dollars or in terms of financial arrangementscomparable thereto; and (E) the price represents the normal considerationfor the property sold unaffected by special or creative financing or salesconcessions granted by anyone associated with the sale. (ii) Adjustments to the comparables must be made for special or creativefinancing or sales concessions. No adjustments are necessary for thosecosts that are normally paid by sellers as a result of tradition or lawin a market area; these costs are readily identifiable since the sellerpays these costs in virtually all sales transactions. Special or creativefinancing adjustments can be made to the comparable property by comparisonsto financing terms offered by a third party institution lender that isnot already involved in the property or transaction. Any adjustment shouldnot be calculated on a mechanical dollar for dollar cost of the financingor concession, but the dollar amount of any adjustment should approximatethe market's reaction to the financing or concessions based on the appraiser'sjudgment. (3) ``Proposed tract development'' means a project of five units or morethat is planned and constructed as a single development. (c) <T3>Responsibilities of management. </T3>An appraisal is a critical componentof the loan underwriting or real estate investment decision. Therefore,management shall develop, implement, and maintain appraisal policies toensure that appraisals reflect professional competence and to facilitatethe reporting of estimates of market value upon which institutions mayrely to make lending decisions. To achieve these results: (1) Management shall develop written appraisal policies, subject to formaladoption by the institution's board of directors, that it shall implementin consultation with other appropriate personnel. These policies shallinclude, but are not limited to, all of the following requirements. (i) Appraisals shall be based upon the definition of market value as setforth in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. (ii) Appraisals shall be presented in a narrative format. An appraisalshall be sufficiently descriptive to enable a reviewer readily to ascertainthe estimated value and the rationale for that estimate. The analysis ofthe market value estimate reported shall be commensurate in its detailand complexity with the complexity of the real estate appraised. (iii) Appraisals shall disclose, analyze, and report in reasonable detailany prior sales of the property being appraised that occurred within thefollowing time periods: (A) For one-to-four family residential property, one year preceding thedate when the appraisal was prepared; (B) For all other property, three years preceding the date when the appraisalwas prepared.(2) Management shall develop and adopt guidelines and institute procedurespertaining to the hiring of appraisers to perform appraisal services forthe insured institution. These guidelines shall set forth specific factorsto be considered by management including, but not limited to, an appraiser'sprofessional education, type of experience, and membership in professionalappraisal organizations in determining whether to employ an appraiser.(3) Management shall review on an annual basis the performance of all approvedappraisers used within the preceding 12-month period for compliance with(i) the institution's appraisal policies and procedures; and (ii) the reasonablenessof the value estimates reported. (d) <T3>Exemptions. </T3>The requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this sectionshall not apply with respect to: (1) Appraisals on existing or proposed one-to-four family and existingmulti-family properties prepared on forms approved by the Federal NationalMortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation incompliance with the appraisal standards approved by those agencies. Thisexemption does not apply to proposed tract developments; or (2) Appraisals on nonresidential properties prepared on form reports approvedby the Board and completed in accordance with the applicable instructionalbooklet. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 571_STATEMENTS OF POLICY </ITAG>3. The authority citation for Part 571 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1. 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, as amended (12U.S.C. 1437); sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs.402-403, 407, 48 Stat. 1256-1257, 1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1725-1726,1730); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-48 Comp., p.1071.</ITAG>4. Amend Part 571 by adding a new andSection; 571.1b to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 571.1b</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Appraisal policies and practices of insured institutions and servicecorporations. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Purpose. </T3>The purpose of this section is to offer to the managementof insured institutions and service corporations the Board's views on appraisalpolicies and practices that comport with principles of safety and soundness.This section is intended as guidance. It is not prescriptive, nor doesit have the force and effect of law. Therefore, insured institutions andservice corporations may adopt appraisal standards different from thoseset forth in this section and still be consistent with the principles ofsafety and soundness required by andSection; 563.17-1. (b) <T3>Definitions. </T3>For purposes of this section: (1) ``Management'' shall have the meaning given in andSection; 563.17-1a(b)(1)of this subchapter. (2) ``Market value'' shall have the meaning given in andSection; 563.17-1a(b)(2)of this subchapter. (3) ``Market value as is on appraisal date'' means an estimate of the marketvalue of a property in the condition observed upon inspection and as itphysically and legally exists without hypothetical conditions, assumptions,or qualifications as of the date the appraisal is prepared; (4) ``Market value as if complete on appraisal date'' means the marketvalue of a property with all proposed construction, conversion, or rehabilitationhypothetically completed, or under other specified hypothetical conditionsas of the date of the appraisal. With regard to properties wherein anticipatedmarket conditions indicate that stabilized occupancy is not likely as ofthe date of completion, this estimate of value shall reflect the marketvalue of the property as if complete and prepared for occupancy by tenants;(5) ``Prospective future value upon completion of construction'' meansthe prospective future value of a property on the date that constructionis completed, based upon market conditions forecast to exist as of thatcompletion date; (6) ``Prospective future value upon reaching stabilized occupancy'' meansthe prospective future value of a property at a point in time when allimprovements have been physically constructed and the property has beenleased to its optimum level of long term occupancy. (c) <T3>Appraisal management.</T3> Management is obligated by regulation totake reasonable steps to ensure that all appraisals used to support creditand investment decisions report accurate values upon which to base lendingdecisions. Acceptable appraisals may include the following features: (1) Management should provide appraisers with a letter of engagement thatcontains a legal description of the property, the interest to be appraised,the different value estimates requested, copies of the institution's writtenguidelines, and a copy of the Corporation's rule, if the rule's requirementsare not specifically included within the institution's appraisal policies.Management should attach to the letter of engagement information pertinentto the property that is necessary to comply with these requirements tothe extent that this information is available. Such information shouldinclude, but is not limited to, financing data, leases, purchase agreements,and profit and loss statements of the security property; (2) Appraisals should be sufficiently current to reduce the likelihoodthat material changes in actual market conditions may have occurred bythe time the loan or investment decision is made; (3) Appraisals should reflect the market value of the rights in real propertyoffered as security or as part of the transaction. All other values orinterests appraised should be clearly labeled and segregated, <T3>e.g., </T3>value of chattels, value of financing terms, business value,furnishings, fixtures, and equipment value;(4) Appraisals should report the cost, income, and sales comparison approachesto market value unless the appraiser fully explains and supports the rationalefor eliminating one or more approaches to such value; (5) Appraisers should analyze and report in reasonable detail: (i) Any current agreement of sale, option, or listing of the property beingappraised if such information is available to the appraiser in the normalcourse of business; (ii) A history of comparable sales used when the comparable sales propertieshave been sold several times during a brief period of time or when pricesof comparable properties have been increasing or decreasing at a rate thatis not typical for the local real estate market.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Such sales analysis should cover the time period of the multiple transactionsand address artificially altered sales prices; (6) An appraisal of a proposed project, improvement, or change in use shouldbe based upon the most recent plans and specifications. If material changesin the plans and specifications could significantly reduce the estimatedcollateral value after a loan or investment decision has been made, managementshould take steps to ensure that a current estimate of value is establishedbased on the final plans and specifications for the project. This may besatisfied by having the original appraiser recertify his value or by obtaininga new appraisal based on the final plans and specifications; (7) Appraisal reports should contain a properly supported estimate of thehighest and best use of the property appraised that is consistent withthe definition of market value set forth in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.Such estimate should be prepared whether or not the proposed use of theproperty is in fact the highest and best use. This highest and best useestimate should consider the effect on use and value of such factors asexisting land use regulations, reasonably probable modifications of landuse regulations, economic demand and supply, physical adaptability of theproperty, documentable property value trends, and optimal usage of theproperty. In addition, the appraisal should consider the effect on theproperty being appraised of anticipated public or private improvements,located on or off the site, to the extent that market actions reflect suchanticipated improvements as of the appraisal date. Where appropriate, andin all cases involving proposed construction, development, or changes inuse, the appraiser should specifically address, consider, and support theanticipated economic feasibility and cite all significant market data usedin developing his conclusions. Such analyses should be presented in sufficientdetail to support the appraiser's forecast of the probable success of theproposed use and should indicate whether this is in fact the highest andbest use of the project. Moreover, if a market or economic feasibilitystudy is prepared by someone other than the appraiser, the appraiser shouldset forth the reasoning and rationale for accepting or rejecting that study,or any portion thereof; (8) Appraisals on all properties should report an estimate of ``marketvalue as is on appraisal date'' as that term is defined in paragraph (b)(3)of this section. (9) Appraisals on all properties wherein a portion of the overall realproperty rights or physical assets would typically be sold to their ultimateusers over a future time period should report the following estimates ofvalue: (i) ``market value as is on appraisal date'' as defined in paragraph(b)(3) of this section; (ii) ``market value as if complete on appraisaldate'' as defined in paragraph (b)(4) of this section; and (iii) ``prospectivefuture value upon completion of construction'' as defined in paragraph(b)(5) of this section. Valuations involving such properties must fullyreflect all appropriate deductions and discounts as well as the anticipatedcash flows to be derived from the disposition of the asset over time. Appropriatedeductions and discounts are considered to be those that reflect all expensesassociated with the disposition of the real property as well as the costof capital and entrepreneurial profit; (10) Appraisals on all properties for which anticipated market conditionsindicate stabilized occupancy is not likely as of the date of completionshould report the following estimates of value: (i) ``Market value as ison appraisal date'' as defined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section; (ii)``market value as if complete on appraisal date'' as defined in paragraph(b)(4) of this section; (iii) ``prospective future value upon completionof construction'' as defined in paragraph (b)(5) of this section; and (iv)``prospective future value upon reaching stabilized occupancy on the dateof stabilization'' as defined in paragraph (b)(6) of this section. Suchvaluations should fully reflect the anticipated pattern of income and pertinentoperating expenses during the absorption period as well as the impact uponthe value estimates of rental and other concessions; (11) Appraisals should reflect, in the valuation of fractional interestsin the real estate, the accepted premise that it is inappropriate to arriveat the value of the whole by simply summing the fractional interests. Similarly,it is also inappropriate to arrive, without market support, at the valueof a fractional interest in the real estate by merely subdividing the valueof the whole into proportional parts. All analyses involving fractionalinterests in the real estate, where the combined value of all interestson estates is not reported, should establish with market evidence whetherthe terms and conditions of the agreement creating the estate or fractionalinterest reflect market rates and terms. (d) <T3>Appraisal content. </T3>The content of each appraisal accepted by aninstitution should follow generally accepted and established appraisalpractices. Specifically, each appraisal should: (1) Contain reasonable supporting documentation, with no pertinent informationwithheld, and not misleading so that when read by any third party, theappraiser's logic, reasoning, judgment, and analysis in arriving at a finalconclusion indicate to the reader the reasonableness of the market valuereported; (2) Unequivocally identify, by legal description or otherwise, the realestate being appraised as this information is provided to the appraiserby management (management is obliged to ensure, prior to funding, thatthe appraised real estate is described in a manner consistent with thedescription found in the institution's evidence of debt or encumbrance);(3) Identify the property rights being appraised; (4) Describe all salient features of the property being appraised; (5) State that the purpose of the appraisal is to estimate market valueas defined in paragraph (b)(2) of this section; (6) Set forth the effective date(s) of the value conclusion(s) and thedate of the report; (7) Set forth the appraisal procedures followed and the data consideredthat support the reasoning, analyses, adjustments, opinions, and conclusions(including highest and best use) arrived at by the appraiser; (8) As it relates to sales comparable data analysis, be presented so that:(i) It contains descriptive information presented with sufficient detailto demonstrate that the transactions were conducted under the terms andconditions of the definition of value being estimated, or have been adjustedto meet such conditions; have a highest and best use equivalent to thebest use of the subject property; and that the selected properties arephysically and economically comparable to the subject property; and (ii) It includes a presentation and explanation of adjustments used inthe analysis together with appropriate market support. (9) Contain a summary of actual annual operating statements for existingincome-producing properties made available to the appraiser by the lenderand/or borrower, together with a supported forecast of the most likelyfuture financial performance. If the appraiser is told that actual operatingstatements are unavailable, the appraiser should so indicate. The appraisershould report current rents and current vacancies; (10) Set forth all material assumptions and limiting conditions that affectthe analyses, opinions, and conclusions in the report. Such assumptionsand limiting conditions may not result in either a non-market value estimateor one so limited in scope that the final product will not represent acomplete appraisal. A summary of all such assumptions and limiting conditionsshall be presented in one separate section within the appraisal; (11) Include in the appraiser's certification (i) a statement that theappraiser has no present or prospective interest in either the propertybeing appraised or with the parties involved; (ii) a statement indicatingwhether or not the appraiser made a personal inspection of the subjectproperty; and (iii) a statement indicating that to the best of the appraiser'sability, the analyses, opinions, and conclusions were developed and thereport was prepared in accordance with the appraisal standards of the institution.<ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John F. Ghizzoni, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 87-29932 Filed 12-31-87; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>