<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88804-0025 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-04-88.f2.A1024</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Bureau of Export Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 4654-01, 4654-02, 4654-03, 4654-04, 4654-05, 4654-06,4654-07, and 4654-08]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Actions Affecting Export Privileges; Chipex, Inc. et al.</ITAG>In the Matter Of: Chipex, Inc, Docket No. 4654-01; Hua Ko Electronics,Co., Docket No. 4654-02; Yu Chueng Lee, Docket No. 4654-03; Ying Min Li,Docket No. 4654-04; Yi Chung Nung, Docket No. 4654-05; Ji Wai Sun, DocketNo. 4654-06; Elmer Yuen, Docket No. 4654-07; and Robert Yuen, Docket No.4654-08; Respondents.Pursuant to the June 30, 1988 Decision and Order of the AdministrativeLaw Judge (ALJ), which Decision and Order is attached hereto and affirmedin principal part by me, the following Respondents:<ITAG tagnum="15">Chipex, Inc., 2144 Bering Drive, San Jose, CA 94131;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Hua Ko Electronic, Co., Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street, Tai Po IndustrialEstate, N.T., Hong Kong;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Yu Chueng Lee, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street,Tai Po Industrial Estate, N.T.;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Ying Min Li, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street, TaiPo Industrial Estate, N.T., Hong Kong;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Yi Chung Nung, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street,Tai Po Industrial Estate, N.T., Hong Kong;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Ji Wai Sun, a/k/a Ji Wei Sun, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 DaiShun Street, Tai Po Industrial Estate, N.T., Hong Kong;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Elmer Yuen, c/o Tele-Art, Ltd. with locations at both, Central IndustrialBuilding, 6th Floor, Block B, 57-61 Ta Chen Ping Street, Kwai Chung, N.T.,Hong Kong;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Robert Yuen, c/o Tele-Art, Ltd. with locations at both, Central IndustrialBuilding, 6th Floor, Block B, 57-61 Ta Chen Ping Street, Kwai Chung, N.T.,Hong Kong.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">are denied for a period of ten (10) years, from the date hereof, allprivileges of participating, directly or indirectly, in any manner or capacity,in any transaction involving commodities or technical data exported fromthe United States in whole or in part, or to be exported, or that are otherwisesubject to the Regulations (15 CFR Parts 368-369).Commencing five years from the date that this Order becomes effective,the denial of export privileges set forth above shall be suspended, inaccordance with andSection; 388.16 of the Regulations, for the remainderof the ten-year period set forth in Paragraph I above, and shall be terminatedat the end of such ten-year period, provided that the individual Respondenthas committed no further violations of the Act, the Regulations, or thefinal Order entered in this proceeding.<ITAG tagnum="84">Comment</ITAG>From the record it is clear that the Respondents had set out upon a clearcourse to transfer both controlled commodities and technical data associatedwith semiconductor manufacturing without having first obtained the requisiteexport license to do so. Semiconductor manufacturing technology is wellrecognized in the world as especially strategic technology, and is, therefore,closely controlled. It is inappropriate and cavalier action on the partof the ALJ (Dolan) to characterize a case involving such sensitive technology,applicable to any number of strategic products, as ``the `great Chinesedigital watch movement caper'.'' Such a characterization shows a lack ofappreciation on the part of the ALJ of the thrust of the controls involved.In addition to the above, the ALJ's <T3>obiter dictum</T3> that Agency Counsel had failed to set forth allegationsin the charging letters in an appropriate and legally sufficient manneris both gratuitous and directly contrary to the record. The charging letterswere subject to Motions to Dismiss for, <T3>inter alia,</T3> failure to state claims of action upon which reliefcould be granted and for more definite statements of charges. After consideration,the ALJ (Hoya), by Order dated April 23, 1986, denied both motions, findingthat ``the Department's charging letter does * * * comply with the Regulations* * *.'' In the face of such finding, the ALJ's ``Comment'' in the pendingrecommended Decision and Order is completely inappropriate.<ITAG tagnum="84">Order</ITAG>On June 30, 1988, the Administrative Law Judge entered his recommendedDecision and Order in the above-referenced matter, that Decision and Order,a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part thereof, has been referredto me for final action. Having examined the record, and based on the factsof this case, I affirm the Decision and Order of the Administrative LawJudge subject only to the comments set out above.This constitutes the final administrative action in this case.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: July 29, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Paul Freedenberg,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Under Secretary for Export Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Decision and Order </ITAG>Appearance for Respondents: On behalf of Chipex, Inc., Hua Ko Electronics,Co., Yu Chueng Lee, Ying Min Li, Yi Chung Nung, Ji Wai Sun; Eric L. Hirschhorn, Esq., Bishop, Liberman, Cook, Purcell andamp; Reynolds,1200 Seventeenth St., NW., Washington, DC 20036 On behalf of Elmer and Robert Yuen: Nicholas F. Coward, Esq., Baker andamp;McKenzie, 815 Connecticut Ave., NW., Washington, DC 20006-4078. Appearance for Agency: Daniel C. Hurley, Jr., Esq., Attorney-Advisor, U.S.Department of Commerce, Room H3845, Washington, DC 20230. Preliminary Statement By separate Charging Letters, the then Office of Export Enforcement (OEE),International Trade Administration, United States Department of Commerce\1\<NOTE/> (Agency), initiated administrative proceedings against ChipexInc., Hua Ko Electronic Company Inc., Ying Min Li, Yi Chung Nung, and YoChueng Lee. Three other Respondents were subsequently named, Ji Wai Sunon July 31, 1984, and Robert and Elmer Yuen, on February 8, 1985, (hereinafterthey are collectively referred to as Respondents). These charges were madepursuant to the authority of the Export Administration Act, (50 U.S.C.App. 2402 <T3>et sec., </T3>(1982)), and the Export Adminstration Regulations (15CFR Parts 368 <T3>et seq., </T3>(1982)). A hearing was afforded to the parties, however,Counsel for Chipex, Inc., <T3>et al. </T3>chose not to appear and participate, though a representativedid observe the proceedings. Counsel for the Yuens offered twelve exhibitswhich were admitted. Agency Counsel submitted a ``paper'' chase consistingof 101 exhibits, as is usually done in cases of default and adjudicationupon written submissions, which was the appropriate course after Respondentswithdrew their requests for a hearing on the record. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Pursuant to the provisions of section 15 of the ExportAdministration Amendments Act of 1985 as amended (15 U.S.C. App. 2414),the position of Under Secretary for Export Administration was establishedeffective October 1, 1987. Proceedings are now initiated on behalf of theBureau of Export Administration within the Department of Commerce. Theone year period for the processing of these cases fixed by those amendmentsappears to apply to these pre-1985 cases as well. The complexity of thisrecord and the volume of other cases in combination constitutes good causefor the delay involved here. The charging letters allege that the Respondents conspired and acted inconcert to export to the People's Republic of China (PRC) U.S.-origin commoditiesand technology, relating to semiconductor manufacturing, without the requiredexport licenses. Further, it was alleged that all Respondents acted withknowledge that export control violations had occurred, or were intendedto occur, and with misrepresenting or concealing material facts from Commerceand other agencies of the United States government. Respondents were alsocharged with exporting and attempting to export U.S.-origin commoditiesand technical data to the PRC without the required export licenses. Itis appropriate to note that the technology involved is that relating tothe manufacture of electronic watches. Background While the origins of the associations and agreements which lead to thecharges here are somewhat obscure, the representations indicate that asearly as 1979, Tele-Art Ltd., a Hong Kong manufacturer of electronic watches,had acquired a production site in the Taipo industrial estate in Hong Kongto manufacture integrated electronic micro circuits on silicon wafer chipsfor use in the production of electronic watches. In a distribution agreementexecuted in August 1979 between a major American manufacturer of semi-conductormanufacturing equipment and technology and an international distributor,the company, Tele-Art Ltd., was listed as a customer. In 1980, apparentlybefore production commenced, in what is described as a joint venture withHua Ko Electronic Company Ltd., purchase orders for various pieces of equipmentwere placed on behalf of Tele-Art with the American electronic equipmentmanufacturing company. It appears that the required export license inquiriesand procedures were initiated by the distribution agent and the Americanmanufacturer. Thereafter, initial exports of Ion implanters, photomaskaligners, and a wafer track processing system were made to Hong Kong againstlicense number A519519, which was issued in or about November 1980 underthe sponsorship of Tele-Art Inc. From the correspondence and the fact thatan export license to Hong Kong was required, it was clear and acknowledgedthat reexport to the PRC was not authorized. When the American manufacturer/supplierof the equipment became aware that the Hua Ko company was in receipt ofand dealing with the equipment in Hong Kong, and that it was, in part,owned by the PRC, the supplier stopped exports under that license. Thereafter,in May 1981, representatives of the joint venture applied for a licenseto export technical information on semiconductor equipment (ion implantersand photo mask aligners). That application was returned with a requestfor specific information about plant activities and personnel. Such informationwas not provided, nor the applications resubmitted. During the same time period Hua Ko was also developing a domestic manufacturingfacility at San Jose, California. During 1980, that facility had been establishedas the Hua Ko Electronic Company, USA division. In August I981, the namewas changed and it was apparently reincorporated as Chipex, Inc.. In anycase, it continued as a subsidiary of Hua Ko. It continued to operate untilthe facility ceased operation in July 1982. Respondents <T3>Chipex Inc. (Chipex), </T3>located in San Jose, California, was formedin August 1981, as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Hua Ko Electronic Company,Ltd. For the previous twelve month period, it had operated in san Joseas Hua Ko Electronic Company, U.S.A. Division. Hua Ko/Chipex provided trainingror Hua Ko employees from Hong Kong and the PRC.<T3>Hua Ko Electronic Company, Ltd. (Hua Ko), </T3>located in Hong Kong,was formed in August 1980, as a joint venture between Tele-Art, a HongKong-based manufacturer of electronic watches, and Hua Yaun, a Hong Kongcompany engaged in export/import trade that was owned and controlled bythe PRC's Third Directorate (Light Industrial Import/Export Company). <T3>Yu Chueng Lee (Lee), </T3>a Hua Ko manager and Chipex Vice President,had overall responsibility for the day to day operations at Chipex in SanJose and for coordination with Hua Ko and various PRC organizations. <T3>Ying Min Li (Li), </T3>Chairman of the Hua Ko board of directors, wasalso on the board of directors of Hua Yuan, one of the joint venture partnersthat formed Hua Ko. <T3>Yi Chuno Nung (Nung), </T3>served as a director on the Hua Ko and theHua Yuan boards. Nung was also at one time chief of the Third BusinessDepartment of Hua Yuan. Additionally, Nung was the Vice President of HuaKo and President of Chipex, though he generally remained in Hong Kong.<T3>Ji Wai Sun (Sun), </T3>he had been a senior engineer with China GreatWall Industry Corporation, part of the PRC's Seventh Directorate (representedas being similar to the United States government's National Aeronauticsand Space Administration). He traveled from Beijing, PRC, to San Jose,in early 1981, where he served as Chipex's senior engineer for seventeenmonths, responsible for technological developments. In July 1982, Sun leftthe United States for the PRC via Hong Kong. Thereafter, Sun served asExecutive Vice President of Hua Ko. <T3>Elmer Yuen, </T3>he was a <T3>Hua Ko </T3>board member and also served on the board of directorsof Tele-Art, the other company that formed <T3>Hua Ko </T3>as a joint venture. He was the Managing Director of <T3>Tele-Art, </T3>and also the President of <T3>Hua Ko. Elmer Yuen </T3>was also President of Tele-Art's subsidiary,<T3>Tele-Precision Electronics, </T3>located in Canton, PRC, and a directorof Tele-Art's New York subsidiary, <T3>Tele-Art Watch Company, Ltd. </T3><T3>Robert Yuen, </T3>father of Elmer Yuen, also served as a director onthe Hua Ko and Tele-Art boards. He was also Vice Chairman of the Hua Koboard of directors. Findings 1. Hua Ko Electronic Company, Ltd. (Hua Ko) of Hong Kong was a joint businessventure of Tele-Art, Ltd. (Tele-Art) and Hua Yuan, Ltd. (Hua Yuan), a HongKong-based company controlled and financed by the People's Republic ofChina (PRC). During the period June 1979 to December 1982, Hua Yuan haddirect managerial and financial ties to the PRC. 2. In 1980, Ji Wai Sun, then employed by the China Great Wall IndustrialCorporation, Beijing, PRC, was hired by Hua Ko to obtain U.S.-origin commoditiesand technical data relating to the production, manufacture and constructionof complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (C-MOS) integrated circuit (IC)devices. 3. Hua Ko established an IC manufacturing facility in the United States,which was initially named Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., U.S. Division, andsubsequently incorporated in California as a subsidiary named Chipex, Inc.(Chipex) in August 1981. 4. In August 1980, the PRC Ministry of Light Industry, through the HongKong-based Hua Yuan, formed a joint venture with Tele-Art to develop andproduce integrated circuits (IC) devices in Hong Kong. 5. Hua Yuan contributed $12,000,000 (U.S.) initial working capital to theHua Ko venture in August 1980 while Tele-Art contributed marketing andtechnical expertise, as well as the factory that was then under constructionat the Tai Po Industrial Estate in Hong Kong. 6. During the period January 1980 to July 1982, Tele-Art was sole ownerof a subsidiary, Tele-Precision Electronics, in Canton, PRC. 7. Beginning in August 1980, Hua Ko attempted to establish a duplicateof its Hong Kong-based IC manufacturing facility in Canton, PRC. 8. Nung was actively involved in the construction of the Canton, PRC projectbetween August 1980 and November 1981. His participation and actions weretaken with the knowledge of Lee and Li. 9. In or about August 1980, Nung set up a wafer fabrication facility inSan Jose, California, to use U.S.-origin IC manufacturing and testing equipment,and to train Hong Kong and PRC engineers in IC methodology. These actionswere taken with the knowledge of Lee and Li. 10. Hua Ko established Chipex in San Jose, California, to train Hong Kongand PRC nationals in IC methodology and to purchase U.S.-origin IC manufacturingand testing equipment. 11. Between August 1980 and November 1981, Robert and Elmer Yuen were Directorsof Tele-Art, Ltd., and helped form, manage and direct Hua Ko and Chipex.12. Beginning approximately in August 1980, and continuing through 1981,Nung made representations to the American Consulate in Hong Kong in supportof visa applications for three Hua Ko engineers and a technician to travelfrom Hong Kong to Chipex in San Jose, California. These actions were takenwith the knowledge of Lee and Li. 13. On or about October 14, 1980, Hua Ko, through its director, Yi ChungNung, provided Peter Stauffer, a U.S. consultant to Hua Ko, with a letterof assurance stating that the technical knowledge Mr. Stauffer providedto Hua Ko would not be transmitted to the PRC. 14. In December 1980, Hua Ko, by Nung, made the necessary visa arrangementsthrough the American Embassy in Beijing for three PRC engineers from theChina Great Wall Corporation to travel from Beijing to Tele-Art Watch Company,Ltd., in New York City, New York. These actions were taken with the knowledgeof Lee and Li.15. In December 1980, Sun, Yu Shan Liu, and Jing Quing Zhu, all of whomwere employed by the China Great Wall Industry Corporation as engineers,applied to the American Embassy in Beijing for business visas to travelto Tele-Art Watch Company, Ltd., in New York City in January 1981 for astay of six months. 16. The purported purpose of the trip was to make a technical inspectionand have trade negotiations at the invitation of Elmer Yuen, Director,Tele-Art Watch Company, Ltd. 17. In December 1980, Hua Ko and/or Chipex officials, including Nung, Lee,Li, Robert Yuen, and Elmer Yuen, knew that three PRC engineers were totravel directly from Beijing to Hua Ko Electronic Company, Ltd., U.S. Division(Chipex) in San Jose, California, for training relating to the production,manufacture and construction of U.S.-origin complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor(C-MOS) IC devices. 18. In January 1981, Hua Ko made arrangements for the three PRC engineersto travel directly from Beijing, PRC to Chipex in San Jose, California.19. In January 1981, Sun, Liu, and Zhu traveled from Beijing, PRC, to HuaKo Electronic Company, Ltd., U.S. Division in San Jose, California, fortraining in C-MOS IC methodology. 20. In January 1981, Hua Ko placed Ji Wei Sun, a PRC national and an engineerfrom the China Great Wall Corporation, in charge of engineering projectsat Hua Ko Electronic Company, Ltd., U.S. Division (Chipex) in San Jose,California. 21. Between January 1981 and July 1982, Sun, in his capacity as the projectmanager at Chipex, acted with others to set up an IC foundry facility inthe United States. 22. Between January 1981 and July 1982, Sun, in his capacity as the projectmanager at Chipex of San Jose, California, acted with others to set upan IC foundry facility in the United States. 23. Between January 1981 and July 1982, Sun, in his capacity as the projectmanager at Chipex, acted with others to obtain U.S.-origin IC manufacturingand testing equipment and related technical data, such as C-MOS and N-MOSIC methodology, and to acquire. an unauthorized duplicate of a photomaskset (``Gate Array'' device) for the PRC. 24. Between January 1981 and July 1982, Hua Ko procured U.S.-origin ICmanufacturing/testing equipment and IC technical data through its Chipexfacility at San Jose. 25. Between January 1981 and July 1982, Hua Ko used its San Jose facilityto train PRC engineers from the China Great Wall Corporation in IC methodology.26. In February 1981, Hua Ko sent a letter to the American Consulate Generalin Hong Kong in support of visa applications enabling four engineers totravel to Hua Ko's ``branch'' facility (Chipex) in San Jose, California,to receive training in IC production processes and the maintenance andoperation of U.S.-origin IC manufacturing and testing equipment. This actionwas taken with the knowledge of Lee, Li and Nung. 27. In its February 1981 letter to the American Consulate General in HongKong in support of the visa applications, Hua Ko implied that the fourengineers were Hong Kong citizens. 28. On or about March 30, 1981, Hua Ko provided Kasper Instruments/EatonCorporation (Kasper Eaton) with a letter of assurance stating that no U.S.-origintechnology, direct product or equipment purchased from Kasper Eaton wouldbe transferred to the PRC and that training on and/or observation of theuse of that equipment by foreign nationals was strictly prohibited withoutauthorization from the United States Department of Commerce. 29. Hua Ko arranged, through the American Embassy in Beijing, for two PRCengineers and one PRC manager from the Beijing Quianmen Semiconductor DevicePlant to travel purportedly from Beijing to the Tele-Art Watch Company,Ltd., in New York City, New York. 30. In May 1981, Xian Zhou Liu, Guozhong Xiao and Hua Sheng You, all ofwhom were employed by the Beijing Quanmen Semiconductor Device Plant, appliedto the American Embassy in Beijing for business visas to travel to Tele-ArtWatch Company, Ltd., in New York City for a stay of three months. The purportedpurpose for Liu's, Xiao's, and You's travel was to study electronic techniquesat the invitation of Tele-Art Watch Company, Ltd.31. In May 1981, Liu, Xiao and You traveled from Beijing, PRC, to Hua KoElectronic Company, Ltd. (Chipex), U.S. Division in San Jose, California.32. In May 1981, Hua Ko knew that two PRC engineers and one PRC managerfrom the Beijing Qianmen Semiconductor Device Plant were to travel fromBeijing to Chipex in San Jose, California, to become familiar with U.S.-originIC manufacturing and testing equipment and to receive training in U.S.-origintechnical data relating to the production, manufacture and constructionof complimentary metal-oxide-semiconductor (C-MOS) IC devices. 33. In May 1981, Hua Ko placed Xian Zhou Liu, managing director from theBeijing Qianmen Semiconductor Device Plant, in charge of the Hua Ko ElectronicCompany, Ltd., U.S. Division (Chipex), facilities in San Jose, California,as plant Vice Manager. 34. In August 1981, Yi Chung Nung (Nung) was the Chief of the Third BusinessDepartment of Hua Yuan. 35. In August 1981, Nung was Vice President of Hua Ko and President ofChipex. 36. In August 1981, Elmer Yuen was President of Hua Ko. 37. In August 1981, Yu Chueng Lee was a Project Manager of Hua Ko and Secretaryof Chipex. 38. In August 1981, Ying Min Li (Li) was a partner in Hua Yuan. 39. In August 1981, Li was a Director of Hua Ko. 40. On October 29, 1981, the revised applications for photomask alignersand ion implanters were rejected for National Security reasons includingthe risk of illegal diversion. 41. In December 1981, Nung made the visa arrangements through the AmericanEmbassy in Beijing for four PRC technicians from the Xian Yen He RadioFactory to travel from Beijing to Chipex in San Jose, California. Theseactions were taken with the knowledge of Lee and Li. 42. In December 1981, Shizhong Xue, Xiuzhen Zhang, Zhilan Li and NanyuLu, employed by the Xian Yen He Radio Factory as technicians, applied tothe American Embassy in Beijing for business visas to travel to Chipex,Inc., in San Jose, California, in December 1981 for a stay of six months.43. In December 1981, Xue, Zhang, Li and Lu, travelled from Beijing, PRC,to Chipex in San Jose, California. 44. In December 1981, Hua Ko provided the American Manufacturer with aletter of assurance that no equipment or technology directly related tothe use of the equipment procured by Hua Ko would be transferred to thePRC, and that training on, or observation of, that equipment by the PRCmust be authorized by the United States Department of Commerce. 45. In December 1981, there were a manager, five engineers and four techniciansof PRC citizenship working and training at Chipex in San Jose, California.46. In 1982, Hua Ko, through its affiliate Chipex of San Jose, California,obtained and duplicated an LSI Computer, Inc., 3801 photomask set containingN-MOS silicon gate technology and transported it from the United Statesto Hua Ko in Hong Kong. These actions were taken by, or with the knowledgeof, Nung, Lee and Li. 47. In 1982, Hua Ko, through its affiliate Chipex of San Jose, California,obtained and duplicated California Devices, Inc., 3000/4000 and HC 5400photomask sets containing C-MOS silicon gate technology and transportedthem from the United States to Hua Ko in Hong Kong. These actions weretaken by or with the knowledge of Nung, Lee and Li. 48. Between January 1982 and July 1982, Nung and Lee acquired gate arraytechnology contained in the CDI 3000/4000 and HC 5400 IC photomask sets.49. Between January 1982 and July 1982, PRC engineers and technicians hadaccess to and used the LSI and the CDI photomask sets and related technologyto produce C-MOS and N-MOS IC devices at Chipex in San Jose, California.50. Between January 1982 and March 1982, Hua Ko, through its affiliateChipex, transported from the United States, seventy five U.S.-origin (four-inch)silicon wafers with IC devices (dies) to Hua Ko in Hong Kong. These actionswere taken with the knowledge of Lee, Li and Nung. 51. On or about May 1, 1982, Hua Ko, through its affiliate Chipex of SanJose, California, attempted to export seventy five U.S.-origin (four-inch)silicon wafers with IC devices (dies) from the United States to Hua Koin Hong Kong. These actions were taken with the knowledge of Lee, Li andNung. 52. In July 1982, Ji Wei Sun went to Hong Kong to become the Vice Presidentof Engineering at Hua Ko in Hong Kong. 53. Since July 1982, Sun has had access to U.S.-origin IC manufacturingand testing equipment and technical data at the Hua Ko facility in HongKong.54. Since July 1982, Ji Wei Sun, in his capacity as Vice President of Engineering,has been training PRC and Hong Kong engineers/technicians at Hua Ko inHong Kong. In his post-hearing brief, Agency counsel sets forth the details of themany transactions. Those proposed findings with modifications are adoptedand appended as schedule II. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary </ITAG>Though the record in these proceedings is massive, even as export enforcementproceedings go, many relevant details of what transpired among the namedparties and others, particularly in the Peoples Republic of China and HongKong, are fragmentary. That is not untypical of such proceedings wherethe details of activities in other, particularly eastern bloc, countriesare frequently not available. From what has been disclosed and the inferencesdrawn from the evidence presented, I conclude that in and before 1979,Elmer Yuen and his father Robert Yuen were principals of Tele-Art Ltd.,a watch manufacturer in Hong Kong, with a subsidiary Tele-Art Watch Companyin New York. In that time period the Yuens had set up some watch makingfacility in Canton China, under the name of Tele Precision Electronics.The company had also acquired a site at the Tai Po industrial estate inHong Kong. The activities of the Yuens and their company Tele-Art in the1979-1980 period, indicate that they were involved in a substantial expansionboth in product lines and facilities. The orders placed in the United Statesby Elmer Yuen on behalf of Tele-Art in July 1980, for wafer processingsystems, wafer aligners and ion implanters for export to Hong Kong reflectthe intention to engage in integrated circuit design, testing and productionapplicable to the manufacturer of digital watches. The usual statementof ultimate consignee and purchaser was executed by Elmer Yuen as a partof the export license application which was granted in November 1980. InAugust 1980, Tele-Art had entered into a joint business venture with HuaYuan, Ltd., a company owned by the Peoples Republic of China. That associationwas, what I conclude to have been, a successful venture on the part oforganizations and persons sponsored by the Peoples Republic of China toobtain equipment, technology and data from the United States without therequired export licenses. The findings of fact detail the activities ofthe Chipex Respondents and the Yuens which admit of no conclusion otherthan that the officers and representatives of Hua Yuan, Inc., by conductin Hong Kong and in San Jose, California, continuously acted to obtaina commodities and technical data from the United States, which would havebeen denied to them had their associations and intentions to export tothe Peoples Republic of China been made known. The more than one hundredexhibits, received with the presentations, clearly show that the Chipexoperation was conducted with a disregard for the export laws and regulations,in that, despite clear acknowledgement of export restrictions on technologyand equipment, nationals of the Peoples Republic of China were broughtto that facility, remained for extended periods of time and they, as wellas the management of Chipex, exported technology in the form of technicaldata and equipment, without licenses or other authorization. The Yuens representations that they terminated their relationship withHua Ko by resignation (November 21, 1981) and that they were not knowingparties to any exports of commodities or technical data to the PeoplesRepublic of China, even if true, which I do not accept, do not relievethem of the responsibility that they must bear for the total diversionswhich occurred here. As legitimate businessmen in Hong Kong, they werelicensed to receive commodities and related training which included licensabletechnical data. By not disclosing their association with Hua Yuan and it'sownership they became part of a web of deception which allowed ineligibleindividuals and companies to function under their aegis. All the acts involvedwere knowingly done. If the realization of the total possible consequenceswas not in their minds, that is no excuse, for by assisting in establishingthe Hua Ko enterprises in Hong Kong and San Jose, California, they helpedset up the mechanisms for diversion. That they, or either of them, didnot perform each and every act up to the diversion does not alleviate personalresponsibility. The pattern of conduct throughout the entire period wasconsistent with an extension of the Hua Ko/Tele-Art ventures. Having setit in motion, they, along with the other actors, are responsible for theinitial and subsequent actions taken in furtherance of the scheme whichthey had not repudiated or even disclosed to the responsible licensingauthorities. As I have previously observed, conspiracy is inherently secretiveby nature, and is often proved only by circumstantial evidence. ``Inferentialproof may be controlling where the offense charged is so inherently secretivein nature as to permit the marshalling of only circumstantial evidence.''<T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Pelfrey, </T3>822 F.2d 628, 632 (6th Cir. 1987). As another CircuitCourt has stated:<ITAG tagnum="21">For it is most often true, especially in broad schemes calling ofthe aid of many persons, that after discovery of enough to show clearlythe essence of the scheme and the identity of a number participating, theidentity and the fact of participation of others remain undiscovered andundiscoverable. Secrecy and concealment are essential features of successfulconspiracy. The more completely they are achieved, the more successfulthe crime. Hence, the law rightly gives room for allowing the convictionof those discovered upon showing sufficiently the essential nature of theplan and their connections with it, without requiring evidence of knowledgeof all its details or of the participation of others.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Donsky, </T3>825 F.2d 746, 753 (3d Cir. 1987), citing <T3>Blumenthal </T3>v. <T3>United States, </T3>332 U.S. 539, 556-7 (1947). It is also well-settledthat each conspirator does not have to know all of the details of the conspiracyor participate in every phase of the scheme. <T3>See, e.q., United States </T3>v. <T3>Carter, </T3>760 F.2d 1568 (11th Cir. 1985). Transactions involving arrangements to assist foreign enterprises, activities/oremployees assist in the acquisition or use of technology and more preciselythe transfer and export technical data in the course of such transactionsconstitutes communication made in the course of a conspiracy. <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Elder Industries, Inc. </T3>579 F.2d 516 (9th Cir. 1978). The assertions of inadequacy relating to technical data violations aredeficient. The commodities involved to which the technical data relates,were controlled. Training nationals from the Peoples Republic of Chinain the myriad details and operations of such equipment without full disclosureand licenses clearly constituted violations. It is concluded from the factsand inferences that technical data requiring licenses was conveyed to PRCnationals in the employ of Chipex; that the activity at Hua Kuo/Chipexwas aimed at gathering such data for export to the parent affiliates inHong Kong and the Peoples Republic of China; that all of the Respondentscooperated in exporting such data and that during and at the end of theChipex operation the data and commodities was exported to ineligible recipientsin Hong Kong and Peoples Republic of China without benefit of export license.Counsel for Respondents argues that the evidence does not establish knowingand intentional acts which constitute the violations charged. The thrustof their contentions appears to impose some requirement for a ``mens rea''type state of mind. That is not the standard that is to be applied here.The ``knowing or should have known'' language in the Regulations relatesto knowledge of the facts, not of the law. The type of verbiage used hereis construed in the same manner as in <T3>United States v. International Minerals and Chemical Corp. </T3>402<T3>U.S. </T3>588 (197I) and <T3>United States v. Jonas Bros of Seattle Inc. </T3>368 F. Supp. 783 (D.Alaska 1974) where it was reiterated that an ``ignorance of the law isno excuse.'' Each and every one of these Respondents should have knownof the requirements of this regulated activity in which they were engaged.The argument that others may have been equally responsible, who also hadan obligation to disclose and who perhaps had a better understanding ofthe technical requirements, is no defense. All of the parties involvedin export transactions are responsible for compliance with the law. Thedistributor and other representatives who, it is now suggested, were derelect,have not had the opportunity to explain their actions. Whether the Agencyhas initiated a proceeding against these others, or even found a basisto do so, is not before me for consideration. It is obvious that the Americanmanufacturer did ``blow the whistle'' on what appeared to be an unauthorizedexport, that there was no prompt follow-up is most unfortunate, but thatis not an excuse or justification. As mentioned above, the actions andrepresentations of the various Respondents were fraught with deception.That others, whom they would now accuse, did not recognize falsity, ismore than a distinct possibility. While much is made by Agency Counsel of the sponsorship by Tele-Art Inc.,of NY, of the visit by three engineers who went directly to the Chipex,California facility and did not visit the New York office of the sponsor,I conclude that the emphasis is, at least, exaggerated. There were a numberof other visits by PRC nationals to the Chipex facility with extended stays.The conclusion which I draw is that national security in this open sccietyjust wasn't very well preserved here. The inadequacies appear to existfrom the embassy level., where the visas were issued, to the individualfirms in the United States where they apparently had access to highly technicalproprietary machinery, products and information. Their alleged successfulefforts to borrow and copy proprietary systems certainly did not endearthem to those high-tech vendors. However, what was done at the San Josefacility of Hua Ko/Chipex was rather open and known to United States authorities.The actions constituted the ``great Chinese digital watch movement caper''which didn't even rate as a sting operation. Conclusion Based upon the foregoing findings, I conclude that with respect to HuaKo Electronic Co., Ltd and Chipex, Inc.: Between August 9, 1980 and July 1, 1982, with respect to Hua Ko, and betweenAugust 25, 1981 and July 1, 1982 with respect to Chipex Inc., in connectionwith each of the commodities listed as items No. 1 through No. 9 on scheduleI, Hua Ko caused, aided and abetted the export and Chipex, for its part,exported U.S.-origin technical data relating to the production, manufactureand construction of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (C-MOS) integratedcircuit (IC) devices from the United States to the People's Republic ofChina (PRC), knowing that the validated export licenses required by andSection;andSection;372.1(b), 379.2 and 379.5 of the Regulations had not been obtained. Inso doing, Hua Ko violated andSection;andSection; 387.2 and 387.4 and Chipexviolated andSection;andSection; 387.4 and 387.6 of the Regulations. Hua Ko set up an IC ``foundry'' facility in the U.S., initially named HuaKo Electronic Co., Ltd., U.S. Division, and in August 1981 incorporatedit as Chipex, Inc. (Chipex). Chipex was established as a subsidiary ofHua Ko to provide PRC engineers and technicians ``hands on'' experiencewith, and access to technical data concerning, high technolcgy equipmentwithin the United States. The release of such technical data to foreignnationals in the United States constituted an export under andSection; 379.1of the Regulations and required a validated export license for export tothe PRC under andSection;andSection; 379.2 and 379.5 of the Regulations. Between January 1981 and July 1982, with respect to Huo Ko, and from August1981 to July 1982, with respect to Chipex, in connection with each of thecommodities listed as items No. l through No. 9 on schedule I, Hua Ko andChipex caused, aided, and abetted the placement within Chipex of five engineers,four technicians, and one administrator, all from the PRC, for trainingin C-MOS IC methodology and acquiring photomasks and related C-MOS IC devices,without obtaining the validated export license required by andSection;andSection;379.2 and 379.5 of the Regulations. In so doing, Hua Ko violated andSection;387.2 and Chipex violated andSection; 387.6 of the Regulations. Between August 1980 and December 1981, with respect to Hua Ko, and betweenOctober 1981 and December 1981 with respect to Chipex, in connection witheach of the transactions listed as items No. 10 through No. 13 on scheduleI, Hua Ko and Chipex misrepresented and concealed from U.S. governmentagencies the fact that PRC personnel under the sponsorship of Hua Ko wouldhave access through the Chipex facility to the U.S.-origin commoditiesand technical data described in the attached schedule. In so doing, HuaKo and Chipex each violated andSection; 387.5 of the Regulations. BetweenJanuary 1982 and March 1982, in connection with each of the transactionslisted as items No. 6 and No. 8.on schedule I, Hua Ko caused, aided andabetted to Hong Kong a photomask set and approximately seventy five U.S.-originfour-inch silicon wafers containing C-MOS IC devices, knowing that thevalidated export license required by andSection; 372.1(b) of the Regulationshad not been obtained. In May 1982, in connection with the transactionlisted as item No. 9 on the schedule I, Hua Ko and Chipex caused, aided,abetted and attempted to export to Hong Kong an additional seventy fivesuch silicon wafers, knowing that the validated export license requiredby andSection; 372.1(b) of the Regulations had not been obtained. In so doing,Hua Ko violated andSection;andSection; 387.2 and 387.4 of the Regulations andChipex violated andSection; 387.4 and 387.6 of the Regulations. 2. With respect to Yu Chueng Lee, Ying Min Li, Yi Chung Nung, and Ji WaiSun: On or about November 1, 1979 and continuing through July 1, 1982, in connectionwith each of the commodities listed as items No. 1 through No. 9 on scheduleI, Respondents Yo Chung Lee (Lee), Ying Min Li (Li), Yi Chung Nung (Nung)and Ji Wai Sun (Sun) conspired and acted in concert with Elmer Yuen, adirector of both Hua Ko Electronic Co. and Tele-Art, Ltd., and others toexport, and did in fact export, U.S.-origin technical data relating tothe production, manufacture and construction of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor(C-MOS) integrated circuit (IC) devices from the United States to the People'sRepublic of China (PRC), knowing that the validated export licenses requiredby andSection;andSection; 372.1(b), 379.2 and 379.5 of the Regulations hadnot been obtained. In so doing, Respondents violated andSection;andSection;387.3, 387.4 and 387.6 of the Regulations.To implement the conspiracy and to facilitate the unlawful export of notonly technical data relating to C-MOS IC devices but also the actual devicesthemselves, Respondents Elmer Yuen and others formed the Hong Kong-basedcompany, Hua Ko, on August 27, 1980, as a joint venture between Tele-Art,Ltd., a Hong Kong manufacturer of electronic watches, and Hua Yuan, Ltd.,a Hong Kong-based import/export company controlled and financed by thePRC. Pursuing the conspiracy's purpose to obtain U.S.-origin commoditiesand technical data relating to the production, manufacture and constructionof C-MOS ICs, Respondents acted with others to set up an IC ``foundry''facility in the U.S., initially named Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., U.S.Division, and in August 1983 incorporated as Chipex, Inc. (Chipex). Chipex was established as a subsidiary of Hua Ko to provide PRC engineersand technicians ``hands on'' experience with, and access to technical dataconcerning, high technology equipment within the United States. The releaseof such technical data to foreign nationals in the United States constitutedan export under andSection; 379.1 of the Regulations and required a validatedexport license for export to the PRC under andSection;andSection; 379.2 and379.5 of the Regulations. In furtherance of their conspiracy, between January 1981 and July 1982,in connection with each of the commodities listed as items No. 1 throughNo. 9 on schedule I, Respondents Elmer Yuen and others placed within Chipexfive engineers, four technicians, and one administrator, all from the PRC,for training in C-MOS IC methodology and acquiring photomasks and relatedC-MOS IC devices, without obtaining the validated export license requiredby andSection;andSection; 379.2 and 379.5 of the Regulations. Between August 1980 and December 1981, in connection with each of the transactionslisted as items No. 10 through No. 13 on schedule I, Respondents individuallyand collectively misrepresented and concealed from U.S. government agenciesthe fact that PRC personnel under the sponsorship of Hua Ko would haveaccess, through the Chipex facility to the U.S.-origin commodities andtechnical data described in the attached schedule. In so doing, Respondentsviolated andSection; 387.5 of the Regulations. Between January 1982 and March 1982, in connection with each of the transactionslisted as items No. 6 and No. 8 on schedule I, Respondents exported toHong Kong a photomask set and approximately seventy five U.S.-origin four-inchsilicon wafers containing C-MOS IC devices, knowing that the validatedexport license required by andSection; 372.1(b) of the Regulations had notbeen obtained. In May 1982, in connection with the transaction listed asitem No. 9 on schedule I, Respondents attempted to export to Hong Kongan additional seventy five such silicon wafers, knowing that validatedexported license required by andSection; 372.1(b) of the Regulations hadnot been obtained. In so doing, Respondents violated andSection;andSection;387.3, 387.4 and 387.6 of the Regulations. 3. With respect to Robert Bu Yuen and Elmer Yuen: From on or about November 1, 1979 and continuing through November 2, 1981,in connection with each of the commodities listed as items No. 1 throughNo. 5 on schedule I, Respondents conspired and acted in concert with eachother, as directors of both Chipex, Inc. and Tele-Art, Ltd., and othersto export, and did in fact export, U.S.-origin technical data relatingto the production, manufacture and construction of complementary metaloxide-semiconductor(C-MOS) integrated circuit (IC) devices from the United States to the People'sRepublic of China (PRC), knowing that the validated export licenses requiredby andSection;andSection; 372.1(b), 379.2 and 379.5 of the Regulations hadnot been obtained. In so doing, Yuen violated andSection;andSection; 387.3,387.4 and 387.6 of the Regulations. To implement the conspiracy and to facilitate the unlawful export of, notonly technical data relating to C-MOS IC devices, but also the actual devicesthemselves, Respondents and others formed the Hong Kong-based company,Hua Ko Electronic Company, Ltd., (Hua Ko), on August 27, 1980, as a jointventure between Tele-Art, Ltd., a Hong-Kong manufacturer of electronicwatches, and Hua Yuan, Ltd., a Hong Kong-based import/export company controlledand financed by the PRC. Pursuing the conspiracy's purpose to obtain U.S.-origincommodities and technical data relating to the production, manufactureand construction of C-MOS ICs, Respondents acted with others to set upan IC ``foundry'' facility in the U.S., initially named Hua Ko ElectronicCo., Ltd., U.S. Division, and in August 1983 incorporated as Chipex, Inc.(Chipex). Chipex was established as a subsidiary of Hua Ko to provide PRC engineersand technicians ``hands on'' experience with, and access to technical dataconcerning, high technology equipment within the United States. The releaseof such technical data to foreign nationals in the United States constitutesan export under andSection; 379.1 of the Regulations and requires a validatedexport license for export to the PRC under andSection;andSection; 379.2 and379.5 of the Regulations.In furtherance of their conspiracy, between January 1981 and November 1981,in connection with each of the commodities listed as items No. 1 throughNo. 5 on schedule I, Respondents and others placed within Chipex five engineersand one administrator, all from the PRC, for training in C-MOS IC devices,without obtaining the validated export license required by andSection;andSection;379.2 and 379.5 of the Regulations. Between August 1980 and November 1981, in connection with each of the transactionslisted as items No. 6 through No. 8 on schedule I, Respondents misrepresentedand concealed from U.S. government agencies the fact that PRC personnelunder the sponsorship of Hua Ko would have access through the Chipex facilityto the U.S.-origin commodities and technical data described in scheduleI. In so doing, Respondents violated andSection; 387.5 of the Regulations.Comment The defective manner of pleading and proof fails to state the essentialfacts and the applicable Regulations with respect to each of the many separateviolations charged. Agency Counsel, who is also the scrivener of the Regulations,which he does not follow, tends to accumulate large collections of documentswhich succeed only in making for a ``garbage can'' record. Despite repeatedadmonitions, he and the scriveners of the charging letters refuse to setforth each violation in a separate, clear and concise fashion with citationsto the applicable regulatory provision. Because of the failure to arrangethe charging document, the effort at proof takes on a scattershot appearancewhich makes it impossible to arrange findings to each, as asserted, violationas is appropriate.\2\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ From and after July 1, 1988, charging letters which donot set forth each alleged violation and the applicable individual sectionof the Regulations or law will be subject to dismissal. The facts presented also appear to indicate that Chipex, Inc., of California,terminated operation in August 1982. The sanctions appear to amount tolittle more than kicking a dead horse. This entire proceeding is an exercisein overkill. No reason has been shown why the initial negotiated compromisewith Chipex was not in the proper ball park. The unexplained massive increasein sanctions simply is not warranted.\3\<NOTE/> It fortifies my impression that the Agency continues to withholdthe required statement of penalties at the outset (including in pre-chargingletters) so that it can chasten those who have the temerity to exercisetheir statutory right to an independent adjudication. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ In rendering this decision and disposition, I have notaltered my judgment respecting limitations, notice of penalties, specialtyof allegations, etc. The Agency policy is entitled to some deference. Any issue not specifically addressed has been resolved  contrary to theinterest of Respondents. Order I. For a period of 10 years from the date of the final Agency action, Respondents:<ITAG tagnum="25">Chipex, Inc., 2144 Bering Drive, San Jose, CA 94131 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hua Ko Electronic, Co, Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street, Tai Po IndustrialEstate, N.T., Hong Kong </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Yu Chueng Lee, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street,Tai Po Industrial Estate, N.T., Hong Kong </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ying Min Li, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street, TaiPo Industrial Estate, N.T., Hong Kong </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Yi Chung Nung, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 Dai Shun Street,Tai Po Industrial Estate, N.J., Hong Kong </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ji Wai Sun, a/k/a Ji Wei Sun, c/o Hua Ko Electronic Co., Ltd., 9 DaiShun Street, Tai Po Industrial Estate, N.T., Hong Kong </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Elmer Yuen, c/o Tele-Art, Ltd., with locations at both Central IndustrialBuilding, 6th Floor, Block B, 57-61 Ta Chen Ping Street, Kwai Chung, N.T.,Hong Kong </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Robert Yuen, c/o Tele-Art, Ltd., with locations at both Central IndustrialBuilding, 6th Floor, Block B, 57-61 Ta Chen Ping Street, Kwai Chung, N.T.,Hong Kong</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">and all successors, assignees, officers, partners, representatives,agents, and employees hereby are denied all privileges of participating,directly or indirectly, in any manner or capacity, in any transaction involvingcommodities or technical data exported from the United States in wholeor in part, or to be exported, or that are otherwise subject to the Regulations.II. Commencing five years from the date that this Order becomes effective,the denial of export privileges set forth above shall be suspended, inaccordance with andSection; 388.16 of the Regulations, for the remainderof the ten-year period set forth in Paragraph I above, and shall be terminatedat the end of such ten-year period, provided that the individual Respondenthas committed no further violations of the Act, the Regulations, or thefinal Order entered in this proceeding. During the five-year suspensionperiod, Respondents may participate in transactions involving the exportof U.S.-origin commodities or technical data from the United States orabroad in accordance with the requirements of the Act and the Regulations.The provisions of Paragraphs III to VI of this Order shall also be suspendedduring the five-year suspension period set forth above. III. Participation prohibited in any such transaction, either in the UnitedStates or abroad, shall include, but not be limited to, participation:(i) As a party or as a representative of a party to a validated exportlicense application; (ii) In preparing or filing any export license application or reexportauthorization, or any document to be submitted therewith; (iii) In obtaining or using any validated or general export license orother export control document; (iv) In carrying on negotiations with respect to, or in receiving, ordering,buying, selling, delivering, storing, using, or disposing of, in wholeor in part, any commodities or technical data exported from the UnitedStates, or to be exported; and (v) In the financing, forwarding, transporting, or other servicing of suchcommodities or technical data.Such denial of export privileges shall extend to matters which are subjectto the Act and the Regulations. IV. After notice and opportunity for comment, such denial of export privilegesmay be made applicable to any person, firm, corporation, or business organizationwith which the Respondent is now or hereafter may be related by affiliation,ownership, control, position of responsibility, or other connection inthe conduct of export trade or related service. V. All outstanding individual validated export licenses in which Respondent(s)appears or participates, in any manner or capacity, are hereby revokedand shall be returned forthwith to the Office of Export Licensing for cancellation.Further, all of Respondent(s) privileges of participating, in any manneror capacity, in any special licensing procedure, including, but not limitedto, distribution licenses, are hereby revoked. VI. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other business organization,whether in the United States or elsewhere, without prior disclosure andspecific authorization from the Office of Export Licensing, shall, withrespect to U.S.-origin commodities and technical data, do any of the followingacts, directly or indirectly, or carry on negotiations with respect thereto,in any manner or capacity, on behalf of or in any association with anyRespondent or any related person, or whereby any Respondent or any relatedperson may obtain any benefit therefrom or have any interest or participationtherein, directly or indirectly: (a) Apply for, obtain, transfer, or use any license, Shipper's Export Declaration,bill of lading, or other export control document relating to any export,reexport, transshipment, or diversion of any commodity or technical dataexported in whole or in part, or to be exported by, to, or for any Respondentor related person denied export privileges, or (b) Order, buy, receive, use, sell, deliver, store, dispose of, forward,transport, finance or otherwise service or participate in any export, reexport,transshipment or diversion of any commodity or technical data exportedor to be exported from the United States. VII. This Order as affirmed or modified shall become effective upon entryof the Secretary's final action in this proceeding pursuant to the Act(50 U.S.C. App. 2412(c)(1)).<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: June 30, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Hugh J. Dolan, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrative Law Judge.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix Schedule I </ITAG>Additional Findings 1. On August 15, 1979, a major United States manufacturing company (hereinafterthe American supplier), entered into a distribution agreement with TritekInternational Company, headed by Albert Chiang, president. The DistributionAgreement, among other things, refers to Tele-Art, Ltd. (Tele-Art) as acustomer. 2. On July 5, 1980, Elmer Yuen signed and placed purchase orders on behalfof Tele-Art with the American supplier for four Model 4000A Wafer Processsystems, six Model 3001P-4 wafer aligners, and two challenger Model 200MC-Aion implanters. 3. On August 27, 1980, Tele-Art and Hua Yuan, Ltd., a Hong Kong-based import/exportcompany controlled and financed by the People's Republic of China (PRC),formed Hua Ko as a joint venture. 4. On August 31, 1980, Elmer Yuen signed a statement by Ultimate Consigneeand Purchaser, Form DIB-629P, which was included with the American supplier'sOctober 12, 1980 application for an individual validated license (A519519)to export the equipment Tele-Art had purchased to Hong Kong. The licenseapplication also included three Hong Kong Government import license applicationsfor this equipment which Yi Chung Nung (Nung) had signed for Tele Art onSeptember 30, 1980. The validated export license was issued in November1980. 5. On October 14, 1980, Nung signed, on Hua Ko's behalf, a certificationstating that Peter Stauffer ``is employed by our company to help processthe design of Integrated Circuits productions and equipments testing,''and confirming that the ``technological knowledge (sic) Mr. Stauffer appliesshall not be transmitted to Mainland China (The People's Republic of China).''6. On October 15, 1980, Tritek's Mr. Chiang sent a status report to theAmerican supplier, stating that Tele-Art had leased a processing facilityin San Jose to do process training, asking that company to ship one alignerand two track systems to the San Jose facility in December 1980, and notingthat the ``potential problem of Tele-Art order is export license.'' 7. By telex, dated November 3, 1980, Chiang notified Elmer Yuen and Nungthat the aligner and wafer track equipment was scheduled for shipment inthe week of December 15-19, 1980. 8. On December 4, 1980, Tritek's Chiang confirmed by telex, Nung's agreementto accept shipment of one half of Tele-Art's order in December 1980, andspecified the number and amounts of letters of credit required for payment.On December 12, 1980, Chiang sent a telex to Nung, again asking that theletters of credit be opened, inquiring whether Nung had yet received aninvitation ``thru Teleart for training our engineers,'' and asking whenMr. Y.C. Lee will arrive in the U.S.A. The following day, Chiang sent Nunga telex saying that the Hua Ko letter of credit was acceptable, askingthat two letters of credit be opened, one for the equipment to be deliveredto Hua Ko's San Jose facility and the other for the equipment to be shippedto Tele-Art in Hong Kong.9. By cable dated December 17, 1980, the American Embassy in Beijing advisedthe United States Department of State (State Department) that three PRCnationals, identified as Ji Wai Sun, Yu Shan Liu, and Jing Qing Zhu, hadapplied for business visas. The cable stated: Applicants plan to leaveBeijing for New York on January 10, 1981, to make a technical inspectionand have trade negotiations at the invitation of Elmer Yuen, Director,Tele-Art Watch Co., Ltd., No. 32, West 44th St., 3-D, New York, NY 10018Tel: (212) 354-2133-4, for a stay of six months. 10. Tele-Art's Elmer Yuen acknowledged that in December 1980, he had arrangedfor Tele-Art's United States distributor to act as the sponsor in the UnitedStates in connection with visa applications for technicians from the People'sRepublic of China, in order to facilitate their dispatch to the UnitedStates. These three PRC nationals arrived in San Francisco and went directlyto Hua Ko's San Jose facility. 11. On January 9, 1981, Hua Ko sent a letter to ``Immigration Officer,Immigration Department, USA'' requesting business visas for five engineersfrom Hong Kong to Hua Ko's branch plant in San Jose to train personnelin machinery operation and maintenance, and attend compulsory trainingcourses offered by its machine suppliers, and stating that ``[a]ll of themare Hong Kong legal resident. (<T3>sic</T3>), they have signed contract with us for at least 2 years.''12. At about the same time, Nung confirmed Hua Ko's purchase order forone Nanoline IIIA Critical Dimension Computer Line Width Measurement System,for delivery initially to Hua Ko's San Jose facility and to be exportedto Hong Kong approximately six months later. 13. On January 21, 1981, Nung advised Peter Stauffer that ``[f]ive persons,two from Hong Kong and three from Beijing will arrive California on 28thJan. 81. Later I will inform you exact time the particulars of their arrivals.Please hire a house in advance and help solve their future messing [i.e.,meals] and transportation problems, etc.'' 14. On January 27, 1981, two and one-half months after the Agency had approvedthe license application to export to Tele-Art, the American supplier receivedChiang's memorandum advising: that Hua Ko was the new ultimate consigneefor the equipment originally ordered by Tele-Art; that because of the highpossibility that some of the equipment, particularly the ion implanter,may be transshipped from Hong Kong to China, the American supplier shouldmake a report to the Department of Commerce, that Hua Ko would be sendingsome engineers directly from China to the Hua Ko facility in San Jose,for training at Kasper/Eaton on the aligner, wafer track and ion implanter,and stating that ``Elmer Yuen, Nung and their engineers have made severalvisits to Kasper/Eason.'' Six wafer track systems and three aligners wereshipped to Hua Ko's San Jose facility on February 7, 1981. 15. On February 10, 1981, Hua Ko sent a letter to the American Consulatein Hong Kong requesting training visas to the United States for four engineers,Messrs. Won Sing Siu, Pui Wa Lee, Sze Hub Li, and Lui Shing Chiu. 16. By letter dated March 2, 1981, Hua Ko's Nung told the American supplierthat all of the equipment ordered previously by Tele-Art is half ownedby Hua Ko, that Hua Ko intends to produce integrated circuits and to supplythose complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (C-MOS) chips only for thedomestic market in Hong Kong, and that the Hua Ko board of directors thenconsisted of Robert Yuen, Elmer Yuen, Li and Nung. 17. On March 14, 1981, two articles appeared in the <T3>Business Standard, </T3>a Hong Kong newspaper. In one article, RobertYuen identified as a ``director of the joint venture'' formed by Hua Yuanand Tele-Art, is reported saying the previous day that China stands togain considerable expertise in microcircuit technology, that three techniciansfrom Beijing, together with three Hong Kong-based experts had already beensent to the United States for training, and that Tele-Art has already startedmanufacturing electronic watches in Guangzhou (Canton) under an earlieragreement with Hua Yuen. The other article refers to the joint venturebetween Hua Yuan and Tele-Art, commenting that this is the first time thatChina has invested in local light industry. The article continues: <T3>The project dates back to 1979 when Tele-Art was granted a site atTaipo Industrial Estate to produce integrated electronic microcircuitson silicon wafer chips using the ``Complementary metal oxide silicon''process. </T3>But <T3>Tele-Art </T3>later changed its mind and <T3>invited Hua Yuan to form a joint venture last Auqust. </T3><T3>The joint venture, Hua Ko Electronic, </T3>has an initial capital of$60 million and equity is split equally between Hua Yuan and Tele-Art.The factory will be in production by November and can produce one millioncircuit components a month in full production capacity, a Hua Ko executivesaid. These press reports are consistent with and confirm the relationship andprogress of the ventures and implantation. 18. The American supplier thereafter, on March 20, 1981, applied for twovalidated licenses (A545746, concerning Tele-Art/Hua Ko purchase orderKSPH003 for photomask aligners, and A545747, concerning Tele-Art/Hua Kopurchase order KSPH001 for ion implanters) to export this equipment toHua Ko's Hong Kong facility.19. In early April 1981, the Department returned both applications to KasperEaton without action, requesting specific additional information. On July10, 1981, the American supplier submitted revised applications, both ofwhich the Department rejected on October 29, 1981, for national securityreasons, stating that ``[t]he risk * * * of illegal diversion of your orderto unauthorized destinations is considered strong.'' 20. By letter dated March 30, 1981, Hua Ko's Nung provided the Americansupplier with the following requested assurances, concerning Tele-Art/HuaKo's purchase orders KSPH001 (ion implanters) and KSPH003 (mask aligners):(1) We certify that no technology, direct product of subject technology,or equipment purchased under our above-referenced orders will be transferredto any foreign nationals (i.e. The People's Republic of China) withoutprior authorization from the U.S. Department of Commerce; (2) We further agree to abide by all U.S. Export Regulations governingU.S. Export Commodity Code 1355A which applies to the equipment purchasedunder the above-referenced orders; (3) We understand and agree that training and/or observation of subjectequipment's use by foreign nationals from Country Groups P, Q, W, Y, andZ, as defined by U.S. Export Regulations, is strictly prohibited withoutprior authorization by the U.S. Department of Commerce. 21. On May 4, 1981, Hua Ko consultants Peter Stauffer and Henry Lee, listingHua Ko's San Jose address, applied for an individual validated license(A555458) to export ``technical information on semiconductor equipment''to Hua Ko. On or about June 6, 1981, OEE returned the license applicationwithout action, requesting specific additional information. There is norecord of any subsequent submission by or on behalf of Hua Ko for the exportof the technical data in question. 22. By cable dated May 9, 1981, the American Embassy in Beijing advisedthe State Department that three additional PRC nationals, identified asXian Zhou Liu, Guo Zhong Xiao and Hua Sheng You, had applied for businessvisas, representing to the Embassy that they were going to the United Statesat the invitation of Tele-Art Watch Co., Ltd., in New York for a stay ofthree months. 23. On June 12, 1981, Nung, Lee and other Hua Ko employees met to discussthe prospective product lines and plant layout for the first floor of HuaKo's Tai Po facility in Hong Kong. The minutes of that meeting reflectthat Lee was to start approaching mask design sources in the United Statesas soon as possible and that Lee would make a trip to Changzhow, Chinaon June 13, 1981, in order to obtain the C-MOS mask design on five-functionwatch chip so that he can bring it back to the United States. 24. On July 5, 1981, Lee, Sun, S.C. Liu and Walter Chiu met to discussHua Ko's U.S.A. Division. The minutes of that meeting show that Lee wasto be in overall charge of the San Jose facility, while Liu was to handleinternal management and Sun was in charge of technical works. 25. On August 28, 1981, Hua Ko's U.S.A. Division was incorporated as Chipex,Inc. The organization minutes of the Chipex Board of Directors show thatNung and Lee were appointed respectively as President and Vice President/Secretaryand that Li, Elmer Yuen and Robert Yuen were elected to serve as directorsof Chipex along with Nung. 26. On October 17, 1981, Chipex entered into a contract with the ChinaNational Light Industrial Products Import and Export Corporation, PekingBranch, to supply 100,000 integrated circuits for electronic watches. 27. By letters dated November 2, 1981, Elmer Yuen and Robert Yuen tenderedtheir resignations as directors of Hua Ko. 28. By cable dated December 14, 1981, the American Embassy in Beijing requestedbusiness visas for four PRC nationals from the Xian Yen He Radio Factory,identified as Shu Zhang Xue, Xiu Zhen Zhang, Zhi Lan Li and Nanyu Lu, togo to San Jose at Chipex's invitation for a visit of six months beginningDecember 26, 1981. The China Great Wall Industry Corporation had earliersent a telex to Sun's attention asking that he meet the four persons arrivingfrom the PRC. 29. On December 16, 1981, Hua Ko's Nung sent a letter to the American supplier,referencing its export license applications A54746 (concerning Tele-Art/HuaKo purchase order KSPH003 for photomask aligners) and A545747 (concerningTele-Art/Hua Ko purchase KSPH001 for ion implanters) and repeating nearlyverbatim the same assurances given to Kasper/Eaton on March 30, 1981. 30. By telex dated February 8, 1982, Nung authorized Chipex to begin productionof integrated circuits for California Devices Inc. (CDI). Nung's telexoriginated, not from Hua Ko in Hong Kong, but rather from the Qianmen SemiconductorDevice Factory (QSDFB) in Beijing. 31. By letter of May 14, 1982, Chipex provided the Agency investigatorwith a listing of the Hua Ko employees sent to Chipex and the trainingthey received on the same equipment specified. 32. On July 1, 1982, the Special Agent from the Office of Export Enforcementaccompanied special agents from the United States Customs Service and theFederal Bureau of Investigations during a search of the Chipex premises.33. On July 5, 1982, the PRC personnel employed by Chipex flew from SanFrancisco International Airport enroute to Shanghai, PRC, via Hong Kong.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-17538 Filed 8-3-87; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-DT-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>