<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88218-0127 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-18-88.f2.A1126</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><T4>Federal Register </T4>/ Vol. 53, No. 31 / Wednesday, February 17, 1988/ Notices <ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Department of Education.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of Final Funding Priorities for Fiscal Year 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Secretary of Education announces final funding prioritiesfor research activities to be supported under the Research and Demonstration(Randamp;D) and Knowledge Dissemination and Utilization (Dandamp;U) programsof the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR)in fiscal year 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>These priorities take effect either 45 days afterpublication in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>or later if Congress takes certain adjournments.If you want to know the effective date of these priorities, call or writethe Department of Education contact person.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Betty Jo Berland, National Instituteon Disability and Rehabilitation Research (Telephone: (202) 732-1141).Deaf and hearing-impaired individuals may call (202) 732-1198 for TDD services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Authority for the research programsof NIDRR is contained in section 204 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973,as amended. Under these programs, awards are made to public and privateagencies and organizations, including institutions of higher education,Indian tribes, and tribal organizations. NIDRR can make awards for up to60 months. The purpose of the awards is to support research, demonstrations, and relatedactivities that have a direct bearing on the development of methods, procedures,and devices to assist in providing vocational and other rehabilitationservices to individuals with handicaps, especially those with the mostsevere handicaps. NIDRR regulations authorize the Secretary to establish research prioritiesby reserving funds to support particular research activities (see 34 CFR351.32). A notice of proposed priorities was published for public commentin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on November 10, 1987 at 52 FR 43300. The noticerequesting transmittal of applications was also published in that issueof the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, and the closing date for receipt of applicationswas published as of February 16, 1988. This notice does not solicit applications,nor will NIDRR accept applications after February 16, 1988. These finalpriorities were established on the basis of the NIDRR initial planningprocess and public comments received during the comment period. The publicationof these proposed priorities does not bind the United States Departmentof Education to fund projects in any or all of these research areas, unlessotherwise specified in statute. Funding of particular projects dependson both the nature of the final priorities and the quality of the applicationsreceived. The following sixteen final funding priorities represent areas in whichNIDRR expects to support research and related activities through grantsor cooperative agreements in two programs, the Research and DemonstrationProjects Program (Randamp;D), and the Knowledge Dissemination and UtilizationProjects Program (Dandamp;U).<ITAG tagnum="84">Analysis of Comments and Changes </ITAG>NIDRR received eleven letters of comment from the public. A discussionof the requests for substantive changes and clarifications follows, withgeneral comments first, and then comments on individual priorities. <T3>Comment: </T3>One commenter questioned the absence of priorities relatingto persons with chronic mental illness. <T3>Discussion: </T3>NIDRR funds four Rehabilitation Research and TrainingCenters (RRTCs) and several discrete projects dealing with the rehabilitationof persons with mental illness. NIDRR also intends to undertake planningactivities in 1988 to establish an agenda for future research in this area.Interested parties are also encouraged to seek support for research inthis area through NIDRR's investigator-initiated programs_Field-InitiatedResearch, Innovation Grants, and Fellowships. <T3>Changes: </T3>None. <T3>Comment: </T3>Several commenters requested information about the processthat NIDRR used to select these priorities and asked to be advised aboutthe processes NIDRR would use in the future. <T3>Discussion: </T3>NIDRR has used a variety of planning processes inthe past, and is oriented toward increasing the scope and depth of publicinvolvement in planning. Many of the current priorities relate to worknot yet completed from NIDRR's original Long-Range Plan, submitted to Congressin 1981. However, there have been more recent planning activities in manyof these areas. For example, NIDRR cosponsored a conference on arthritisrehabilitation with the National Institute on Arthritis and MusculoskeletalDisorders and the Arthritis Foundation, which led to the priority on arthritisrehabilitation. A similar planning meeting was held with a group of researchersand clinicians in cardiac rehabilitation and led to the development ofthat priority. The Department of Education has had an active Task Forceon Traumatic Brain Injury over the last year, and from that group evolvedthe two priorities on brain injury and stroke. In response to congressionalinterest in the area of therapeutic recreation, the Director of NIDRR metwith several leading professional associations and researchers in thatfield to develop the current priority. In response to new legislation concerningsupported employment, NIDRR has met with representatives of the independentliving movement and vocational rehabilitation administrators to developthe priority concerned with models for involving independent living centersas supported employment delivery agencies. The priority for public educationin spinal cord injury is part of NIDRR's plan to undertake public educationin several disability areas in which it is likely to be most effective;a public education project in traumatic brain injury was funded in 1987.The regional rehabilitation exchange priority furthers NIDRR's long-rangedissemination plan to feature diffusion networks structured on a regionalbasis. NIDRR also held a constituent planning meeting in November 1986,involving representatives from research, service delivery, and consumercommunities. Participants at this meeting recommended several cross-cuttingpriorities to NIDRR, including more emphasis on families in rehabilitationand more emphasis on dissemination of research results. NIDRR is scheduling a number of planning activities for the next fiscalyear, including state-of-the-art studies; work with the Interagency Committeeon Handicapped Research and its subcommittees; and a planning conferenceon rehabilitation research priorities in the area of mental health. Itis the goal of NIDRR to involve a broad constituency of researchers, serviceproviders, consumers with disabilities, other Federal agencies, and policymakersat all levels in deliberations about future research directions. NIDRRintends to use a variety of approaches and processes to obtain the inputof these constituent groups and expects to continually improve the process.<T3>Changes: </T3>None. Therapeutic Recreation <T3>Comment: </T3>One commenter suggested that the project on therapeuticrecreation examine two additional issues: (1) how therapeutic recreationservices contribute to the rehabilitation process; and (2) the benefitsand outcomes of therapeutic recreation services. <T3>Discussion: </T3>The priority calls for an evaluation of the efficacyof therapeutic recreation as a rehabilitation modality, at one point specificallyasking that applicants investigate the correlation between therapeuticrecreation and rehabilitation outcomes. The Secretary believes that thepriority implies that potential applicants should address these issuesin some form and does not believe it is necessary to modify the priority.<T3>Changes: </T3>None. <T3>Comment: </T3>One commenter recommended that the state-of-the-art studyrequired in the priority should also include the development of a long-termresearch agenda. <T3>Discussion: </T3>NIDRR believes that the identification of future researchdirections is one of the major components of a state-of-the-art study orconference. For this reason, the Secretary does not believe it is necessaryto modify the priority. <T3>Changes: </T3>None. Traumatic Brain Injury in Children <T3>Comment: </T3>One commenter stated that defining children as personsunder sixteen years of age for the purposes of this priority is too restrictive,and that older adolescents should be included. <T3>Discussion: </T3>The Secretary agrees that any age cut-off, of necessity,is somewhat arbitrary. However, NIDRR funds considerable research and relatedactivities in the area of traumatic brain injury. Most of the clients seenin these programs are adolescents and young adults. Therefore, NIDRR wantsto focus this project on younger persons in order to develop new knowledgeand service models relevant to a younger population. <T3>Changes: </T3>None. Cardiovascular Rehabilitation <T3>Comment: </T3>One commenter suggested that several modifications bemade to the priority on cardiovascular rehabilitation. The first of thesewas that the priority consider rehabilitation of individuals with othersubsets of coronary disease beyond myocardial infarction, such as angioplasty,coronary bypass, or angiographic documented coronary heart disease. Thiscommenter also urged that the priority specifically address individualswith coronary disease who also have neurological and/or musculoskeletaldisability, and include elderly (aged 65 or older) coronary patients. Finally,this commenter recommended that the priority include research on detectionof silent ischemia and consider its role in secondary prevention. <T3>Discussion: </T3>The Secretary agrees that the research priority shouldbe expanded to include individuals with additional forms of cardiovasculardisability. Although researchers are not precluded from studying individualswho also have neurological or musculoskeletal impairments, the intent ofthe priority is to increase understanding of rehabilitation of cardiovascularimpairments, and this should not be confounded by the presence of otherdisabilities. Elderly persons with disabilities are included in the generalpopulation of concern to NIDRR, but at this time NIDRR will not specifythat all researchers must include definitive studies of an elderly populationin this project. Studies of silent ischemia and secondary prevention arealso important; however it is the judgment of NIDRR that these issues couldnot also be addressed within the time frame and resource level for thisproject. NIDRR will consider these issues for future priorities, and alsosuggests that interested researchers consider using the investigator-initiatedprogram mechanisms to address some of these problems. <T3>Changes: </T3>The priority has been changed to include individualswith other forms of cardiovascular impairments, such as angioplasty, bypasssurgery, and angiographic document coronary disease. Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) <T3>Comment: </T3>One commenter suggested that additional research projectson FES are not needed, but that a clearinghouse to catalog, correlate,and evaluate other FES studies is needed. <T3>Discussion: </T3>NIDRR believes that there remains a need to developadditional clinical knowledge about the applications of selected FES regimensto specific impairments. However, the suggestion for a compilation andreview of developments in the field is an interesting one and NIDRR willgive it further consideration as a future priority. At the same time, theSecretary encourages those interested in a project of this type to considersubmitting an application to one of NIDRR's investigator-initiated programs.<T3>Changes: </T3>None.<ITAG tagnum="84">Priorities for Research and Demonstration Projects (12) </ITAG>Improving Job Retention for Disabled Small Business Employees Early rehabilitation services at the worksite assist disabled individualsto continue as productive workers with a minimum of lost work time. Morethan half a million workers each year leave work for five or more monthsbecause of serious physical disabilities. However, only a very small percentageof these workers receive rehabilitation services to promote return to work.The average worker who becomes disabled is over fifty years of age, worksfor a small employer, and will receive a monetary benefit as a result ofa disability. Despite numerous obstacles, many of America's larger corporations havesuccessfully implemented employee-based disability management programs.Observers have noted that early interventions at the worksite appear tohave beneficial results for both workers and employers. These benefitsinclude prevention of job loss; continued optimal worker performance; increasedindependence rather than dependence; efficient use of health resources;cost-control of expensive disability-related services; and improved coordinationof community rehabilitation services. These large corporations can provideexcellent employer-sponsored human resources programs, which have resultedin these advances in disability management. However, the majority of the work force is employed in small businessesthat have few resources to use for disability management at the workplace.Research and demonstration activities are needed to develop and test innovativemodels to address the problems of disability in a small business setting.An absolute priority is announced for a research project to: andbullet; Identify existing, and develop new, management approaches forjob retention and return-to-work of employees who become disabled whileemployed in a small business; andbullet; Investigate the feasibility of organizing consortia for the purchaseof rehabilitation services; sharing the costs of rehabilitation for highrisk employees; disability-management ``health maintenance organizations'';or similar mechanisms to enable appropriate combinations of small businesses,business associations, labor unions, public employers, entrepreneurs, andself-employed individuals to join together to obtain job retention/returnto work assistance for workers who become disabled while employed in smallbusinesses; andbullet; Explore possible roles for independent living centers, universityextension programs, adult and continuing education programs, and relatededucational and information centers in advising employers and employeesin small businesses on work accommodations, counseling on disability programsand benefits, and related disability management components; andbullet; Identify the financial impact on small businesses of lost productivityand worker separation due to sudden onset of disability or traumatic injury,and provide estimates of possible cost savings through disability managementapproaches; andbullet; Identify financial and other obstacles to alternative privateand public solutions to the problems of disability and the small employerand possible approaches to overcome these impediments; andbullet; Conduct one or more tests or demonstrations, focusing on a specificindustry, geographic area, or other discrete group, of innovative solutionsthat will reduce job separation for workers who become disabled while employedin a small business; and andbullet; Disseminate project findings to small businesses, business andlabor associations, universities, public agencies, and rehabilitation organizations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Evaluation of Therapeutic Interventions in Arthritis Rehabilitation</ITAG>There are over thirty-one million arthritic patients in the United States,and one million new cases of arthritis appear each year. The economic impactof the total number of arthritis patients per year is $13 billion, accountingfor lost wages, hospitalization, and physicians' fees. More than five percentof the U.S. population, aged 25-74, has had to change job status due toarthritis with a loss of $4 billion in wages. Arthritis includes more than 100 diseases and syndromes. The possibilityof developing arthritis increases dramatically with age. Approximatelyone-fourth of those between the ages of 45 and 64 and 40 percent of those65 and older have arthritis. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Investigate and evaluate current techniques to reduce and controlpain resulting from arthritis; andbullet; Identify the causes of weakness and fatigue associated with arthritisand determine the most effective intervention strategies available to reversethese effects; andbullet; Investigate the potential benefits of exercise, if any, for certaintypes of arthritic conditions; andbullet; Determine the efficacy of dry and moist heat as well as cold intherapeutic regimens for various types of arthritic conditions; and andbullet; Identify and evaluate various therapies that could retard theprogression of arthritis and prevent more severe disability. andbullet; Identify approaches for job placement, retention, and return-to-workfor individuals with arthritis. <ITAG tagnum="85">Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) To Control Bladder and BowelIncontinence </ITAG>Millions of people are affected adversely by the loss of voluntary controlof bladder and bowel functions, resulting in either urinary or fecal incontinenceor both. Incontinence is a major cause of institutionalization of elderlyand disabled persons and seriously impedes rehabilitation and restorationto full functioning. Among the impairments that may result in this lossof control are neural injury, bladder imbalance, and stress incontinence.Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) has been proven to be somewhateffective in helping persons with weakened pelvic floor muscles to improvevoluntary control. The efficacy of FES for incontinence resulting fromneurogenic dysfunction has not been as clearly demonstrated, but improveddiagnostic methods and the development of FES systems to control bladderand bowel function hold great promise. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Develop and evaluate microcomputer-controlled diagnostic systemsfor simplified and precise diagnosis of bladder and bowel loop functionand evaluation of the effects of FES on these loop functions; andbullet; Conduct studies of methods for using FES on pelvic floor musculature;and andbullet; Design and develop new applications of functional electrical stimulationbased on the range of bladder and bowel dysfunctions defined by the newdiagnostic systems.<ITAG tagnum="84">Cardiovascular Rehabilitation </ITAG>Cardiovascular diseases comprise a major group of medical problems in theU.S. Currently, four million persons are disabled by some manifestationof coronary heart disease, and 1.3 million suffer an acute myocardial infarctionannually. Some of the 600,000 survivors will return to work after a normalconvalescence, others will have to be retrained for new occupations, andthe vast majority will experience complications that will curtail or hindertheir successful rehabilitation. Additional numbers of persons have cardiovasculardisabilities resulting from angioplasty, bypass surgery, or angiographicdocumented coronary disease. The problem is magnified by the fact that the majority of the survivorsof infarctions are under age sixty-five, and thus would be expected tohave additional years of productive work, family responsibilities, andcommunity activities. Unfortunately, the number of persons disabled bycardiovascular disease who are receiving rehabilitation services is smallin proportion to the seriousness of the disease. Clinical application of exercise physiology, accompanied by exercise stresstesting, is a promising approach to enhance rehabilitation for this population.An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Study and evaluate quantitative methods to assess myocardial performanceand functional outcomes, and develop techniques to measure the functionalcapacity of the heart that can be used in vascular rehabilitation programs;andbullet; Conduct normative studies to quantify the demands made upon cardiaccapacity by various kinds of vocational and avocational physical activitiesand psychological stresses; and andbullet; Develop, evaluate, and disseminate an effective intervention modelto reduce impairment and enhance comprehensive rehabilitation of cardiovasculardisability due to coronary infarction, angioplasty, bypass surgery, orangiographic documented coronary disease. <ITAG tagnum="84">Functional Electrical Stimulation and Pressure Sores </ITAG>Several million persons have reduced resistance to ulceration of the skinand soft tissues as a result of impaired circulation and concentrated externalpressures. Among those who often acquire these debilitating conditionsare those who are elderly or paralyzed. Recent preliminary studies, withoutcontrol groups, have indicated that the application of electrical stimulationacross severe wounds has led to the healing of these wounds in surprisinglyshort times without surgical or other interventions. There is also fairlyclear evidence that paraplegic subjects participating in research studiesto develop the capacity to stand and walk have experienced greatly reducedincidence of pressure sores. Research is needed to investigate these observations,which, if accurate, will reduce debilitation and other costs resultingfrom pressure sores. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Investigate the effects of electrical stimulation by both pulsedand direct current across pressure sore wounds to determine the efficacyof electrical stimulation for wound healing; andbullet; Identify possible mechanisms and techniques to determine optimalquantities of FES to achieve good wound healing results; and andbullet; Investigate the short-term dynamic effects of electrical stimulation,tissue undulation, shape reconfiguration, pressure variation, and increasedblood circulation in relation to the prevention of pressure sores. <ITAG tagnum="84">New Technologies To Address Problems of Low Vision </ITAG>According to a 1977 household survey administered by the National Centeron Health Statistics, 1.4 million Americans are unable to read ordinarynewsprint at a normal viewing distance without some form of visual aid.Fewer than ten percent of these individuals are totally blind. The vastmajority, however, have sufficient visual impairment to affect significantlytheir ability to perform everyday tasks. The major causes of low-vision are macular degeneration, cataracts, glaucoma,and diabetes. Three-fourths of the population with low vision problemsare over fifty years of age. The low-vision population will significantlyincrease in number as the population grows older. Assuming no change inthe efficacy of medical treatment for sight-threatening diseases, the numberof individuals with low-vision is projected to increase by 78 percent toabout 2.5 million by the year 2000. New technologies can provide the means whereby persons with low-visiondisabilities can improve their functional sight substantially. A criticalelement of any project to be funded under this priority is the involvementof individuals with low-vision in the planning and assessment of the researchand its products. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Design an improved macrofocusing monocular with a larger fieldof view, automatic focus, and more acceptable appearance; andbullet; Design and develop new illumination devices that are portable,compact, and cool, require minimum energy, have variable beam size, variableillumination capability, and vertical polarization features; and andbullet; Design and develop a valid vision assessment device to measurespatial resolution, contrast sensitivity, visual field, binocular function,and glare sensitivity. <ITAG tagnum="84">Psychological and Social Adjustment After Stroke </ITAG>Stroke is the third leading cause of death in the U.S., accounting for169,000 deaths in 1980. There are an estimated 1.7 million persons whohave cerebrovascular disease. Each year there are 400,000 new strokes and100,000 recurrences. Although stroke remains the fifth-leading cause ofdeath in persons aged 45 to 54 years, the number of persons in that agegroup who are surviving strokes has increased dramatically. However, innovations in rehabilitation have not been sufficient to provideoptimal independent functioning and maintenance of productive life stylefor the younger stroke survivor. The prognosis for these stroke survivorsvaries. It is estimated in the professional literature that ten percentwill return to work, forty percent will have a residual mild disability,forty percent will require moderate assistance with activities of dailyliving, and ten percent will need long-term residential care. The goalsof comprehensive rehabilitation should be to maximize the functional independenceand productivity of the stroke patient by minimizing residual functionalimpairment, preventing secondary medical complications, treating psychologicaland social adjustment problems, and reducing vocational displacement. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Study and evaluate new approaches and techniques to enable achievementof optimal psychological and social adjustment following stroke, with emphasison the adjustment needs of stroke survivors who are in the ages for workingand rearing families; andbullet; Identify and describe those characteristics that maximize thefamily's ability to cope successfully with the challenge imposed by a stroke,including strokes occurring to young or middle-aged members of the family;and andbullet; Develop and evaluate new methods designed to promote the highdegree of motivation necessary for successful cooperation of the patientand family in a rehabilitation program. <ITAG tagnum="84">Efficacy of Therapeutic Recreation as a Treatment Modality </ITAG>A large increase in the number of rehabilitation programs following WorldWar II resulted in a proliferation of various types of therapeutic recreationservices with diverse approaches and techniques but no coherent or commonlyaccepted guidelines or theoretical perspective. Since that time, therapeuticrecreation has continued to gain acceptance as an apparently useful activity.However, there has been no systematic collection of data that assess thecontribution of recreational therapy to the physical and mental functioningof persons with disabilities. There are varying schools of thought concerning the types of benefits thatcan be derived from therapeutic recreation. One perspective is that recreationis purely diversionary, and has only peripheral benefits that are not absolutelynecessary to the successful rehabilitation of disabled individuals. Othersbelieve that therapeutic recreation can have a significant and positiveimpact on both the physical and psychological rehabilitation outcomes fordisabled individuals and should be an indispensable factor in the rehabilitationprocess. NIDRR proposes to assess definitively the merits of therapeutic recreation,and to measure its impact on the rehabilitation of disabled persons. Thisannounced priority is designed to produce scientific data on the potentialbenefits of therapeutic recreation as a treatment modality in the rehabilitationprocess.An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Determine the correlation between therapeutic recreation and successfulrehabilitation outcomes in order to establish the effectiveness of thisactivity in rehabilitation; andbullet; Investigate the impact of various types of therapeutic recreationalactivities on the physiology of persons with disabilities, including suchvariables as heart rate, oxygen intake, ventilatory volume, and blood pressure,and on psychological well-being, including such variables as self-esteem,emotional stability, internal control, and interpersonal adjustment; andbullet; Assess the effectiveness of recreational activity in reducingand preventing secondary disability and readmittance to medical and rehabilitationfacilities; andbullet; Assess the effect of therapeutic recreation on the disabled individual'slength of stay in a hospital or rehabilitation facility; andbullet; Investigate the comparative effects on the psychological well-beingof participants in recreational programs that integrate disabled individualswith those who do not have disabilities; and andbullet; Conduct a state-of-the-art meeting in the final year of the projectto promote consensus on the benefits of therapeutic recreation in rehabilitation.<ITAG tagnum="85">Studies on Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) in Young Children </ITAG>``Few crises in life are as devastating as an illness or sudden traumaof a child that results in brain injury. Whether eighteen months or eighteenyears, the child's life is drastically changed.'' (Hutzler, 1985) The childfrom birth to adolescence may experience major cognitive, emotional, andbehavioral changes that severely alter his or her prior levels of functioning.These changes necessitate adjustments in the educational programs, familyinteractions, and social relationships of the child. From the time of injury, families must learn to cope with a new set ofeconomic, emotional, and psychological problems. In addition, familiesmust learn to communicate with medical caregivers, to locate needed communityservices, and to identify and manage financial support and insurance reimbursementprovisions. As a prerequisite to developing new strategies and service programs toassist children with brain injuries and their families, it is necessaryto understand thoroughly the scope and dimensions of the problem, and todocument an effective role for families in the rehabilitation process.This priority would have a positive impact on the family and is consistentwith the requirements of Executive Order 12606_The Family. This prioritywould strengthen the authority and participation of parents in the rehabilitationof their children who are disabled. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Study the social, economic, and psychological impact of TBI onfamilies of children up to age sixteen; and andbullet; Develop and evaluate techniques for family involvement as partof the treatment/education/rehabilitation team in the re-entry processand study incentives and disincentives to family involvement. <ITAG tagnum="84">English Language Acquisition in Deaf Children </ITAG>There are persistent problems inhibiting successful transition into post-secondaryschool activities for deaf youth. Frequently, efforts to provide trainingfor employment or career advancement require extensive supplementary trainingin basic English language skills before any meaningful instruction canproceed. The problem is not new, but has generated increased concern overthe past decade. In an effort to gain clearer understanding of the current trends in teachingEnglish language skills to deaf students, particularly very young deafchildren, NIDRR proposes to fund a project that will examine the methodscurrently used in selected schools, classes, and programs throughout theUnited States. The study will also assess the availability of various typesof support services, including educational interpreters, and develop acomprehensive state-of-the-art document setting forth action steps forimplementation at the national, state and local levels and also, additionalresearch needs. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Analyze current processes used in teaching English language skillsto deaf children in selected nationally representative schools, classes,and programs for deaf students; andbullet; Assess English language competency levels of deaf youth leavingthese programs over the past five years, differentiating among studentswith various levels of hearing impairment, numbers of additional disabilities,and primary family languages; andbullet; Analyze the English language acquisition methods and techniquesused in various training programs for teachers of deaf students; andbullet; Analyze certification requirements related to instruction in Englishlanguage skills for various local, State, and national bodies involvedin awarding certificates to teachers of deaf youth; andbullet; Analyze the literature on language acquisition in general, andits application to persons with deafness in particular; and andbullet; Provide an authoritative report on the current state-of-the-artin teaching English language skills to deaf children, involving nationallyrecognized experts as well as deaf youth and their families, and includingrecommendations for future research. <ITAG tagnum="85">The Therapeutic Effects of Functional Electrical Stimulation on PersonsWith Paralysis or Vascular Insufficiency </ITAG>Several million persons who are either paralyzed or have severe vascularinsufficiency that compromises their ability to perform physical tasksmay benefit from the application of Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES).It is important that the effects of the use of FES on those populationsbe evaluated in the context of improving tissue viability and general physicalcondition. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Investigate therapeutic effects of the use of FES to promote standingand walking, using loop control modes with natural and implanted biosensors;andbullet; Investigate the effects of FES on persons with vascular insufficiencywhen used as a therapeutic intervention to improve local or general physicalconditioning that has been compromised by ischemia and peripheral neuropathy;and andbullet; Develop and evaluate new FES techniques to increase blood flowand bone strength in paralyzed extremities. <ITAG tagnum="84">Research in Adventitious Hearing Impairment </ITAG>Most research on adult onset hearing loss has focused on diagnostic andamplification technologies and on neurological, anatomical and physiologicalchanges in the cochlea, auditory nerve, brain stem, and cortex. Aural rehabilitationmodels have been published. However, despite the prevalence of hearingloss, and despite abundant anecdotal accounts of its human and economiccosts, there has been surprisingly little research to examine the psychosocialeffects of hearing loss in adulthood. In 1986, NIDRR convened a conference on aging and rehabilitation; in onesegment of that conference, a number of research scientists, health careprofessionals and persons from service-delivery agencies met to discusspriorities for collaborative research on adult onset hearing loss. Thispriority is based on research needs identified at that conference. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Analyze characteristics of adults who have adjusted successfullyto hearing impairment, including such variables as personality factors,nature and severity of the hearing loss, communication styles, supportnetworks, and interventions with professionals; andbullet; Identify successful rehabilitation strategies, emphasizing professionalattitudes and behaviors that may impede or facilitate adjustment; andbullet; Investigate interactions between biological and psychosocial phenomena,with an emphasis on assessing the extent to which these interactions exacerbatedisability caused by hearing loss in middle and later life; and andbullet; Evaluate existing databases on health status, psychological characteristics,and behavioral patterns to determine their value in providing informationabout the effects of adult onset of hearing impairment.<ITAG tagnum="85">Priorities for Knowledge Dissemination and Utilization Projects (4)</ITAG>Development and Management of Supported Work Programs by Consumer-DirectedIndependent Living Centers The Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986 authorize the RehabilitationServices Administration (RSA) to make grants to assist State rehabilitationagencies to develop collaborative programs with appropriate public agenciesand private nonprofit organizations for traditionally time-limited post-employmentservices leading to supported employment for individuals with severe handicaps.Independent living centers (ILCs) are eligible, although at present fewILCs operate these programs. Independent Living Centers may represent anuntapped resource for supported employment, since the Centers already havecontact with many of the disabled individuals in the targeted group, havenetworking capabilities in local communities, and have some experienceat providing some of the support services necessary for supported workprograms. Many ILCs are interested in expanding their services to two ofthe major target groups of supported work_those considered mentally retardedand chronically mentally ill. Many of the services provided by ILCs toeligible clients enable disabled individuals to live in community settingsand in many cases enable disabled people to undertake employment. However,these services have not been developed and managed in a manner to constitutesupported work. This project is designed to explore the potential valueof ILCs as developers and managers of supported work projects, to developmodels for effective ILC implementation of these programs, and to explorethe value of supported work programs in assisting ILCs to expand theirservice bases to all eligible clients, including underserved populations.An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Develop appropriate models and training and technical assistancematerials to enable ILCs to develop and sponsor supported work programs;andbullet; Test models and materials to ensure they are appropriate to ruraland urban ILCs; andbullet; Evaluate the effectiveness of ILCs as providers of supported workservices and programs; and andbullet; Disseminate materials to ILCs and State vocational rehabilitationagencies and provide training and technical assistance on their use. <ITAG tagnum="84">Public Education in Spinal Cord Injury </ITAG>Traumatic injuries to the spinal cord are among the most catastrophic ofall disabling conditions. The annual incidence of spinal cord injurieshas been estimated at 30-50 new injuries per million persons per year.There are estimated to be as many as 900 persons with spinal cord injuryfor every million persons in the population. Epidemiologic and demographicdata indicate that spinal cord injury affects mainly young adults. Moreinjuries occur in the 16 to 30 year old age group than all other groupscombined. The overwhelming majority of people affected is male (82 percent).This is largely related to the high risk activities engaged in by youngmales. Motor vehicle accidents cause nearly half of these injuries; falls andbeing hit by falling objects account for twenty percent; acts of violenceand sports/recreation injuries each account for about fifteen percent ofthese injuries. Diving and football accidents are the two most common formsof sports injuries. Most injuries are sustained on weekends, and the incidenceof injuries increases in summer months, and during daylight hours. A public education effort is needed to inform young people, parents, andothers about the prevention of spinal cord injury through protective sportsequipment, seat belts, and safe driving and recreational practices, andto provide information on emergency procedures that can reduce the possibilityof secondary complications. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Develop a program of public education materials for the generalpublic, especially young people, emphasizing primary and secondary prevention,early intervention, and resources for information and treatment; andbullet; Develop materials on prevention of spinal cord injuries, to includeprint and audiovisual training materials, posters, and pamphlets, thatcan be used by both the general and the special media; and andbullet; Devise a plan for the dissemination of the materials developedin this project. <ITAG tagnum="84">Investigations of Patterns of Research Utilization </ITAG>To maximize the value of applied research, NIDRR and other agencies havesponsored programs to promote and ensure the use of new disability-relatedknowledge by consumers and service providers. These efforts include informationcenters, clearinghouses, bibliographic databases, networks, publicationsin various media, information brokers, technical assistance, and training.While many of these projects have had significant achievements, there hasbeen no systematic assessment of the most effective methods to promoteknowledge utilization by various target populations. In order to develop a reliable knowledge base for planning and implementingfuture utilization programs, NIDRR proposes to evaluate various strategiesand practices of information dissemination. Not enough is known about howprofessionals, service providers, and disabled consumers define their informationneeds and what types of products and services they expect. Even less isknown about the extent or manner in which recipients of rehabilitation-relatedinformation actually use information and what value they attribute to research-basedknowledge. An absolute priority is announced for a project to: andbullet; Conduct an inventory and substantive review of existing researchon information utilization, particularly new research-based knowledge,in a variety of selected fields, including examinations of both conceptualand practical literature, and determine its applicability to the rehabilitationfield; andbullet; Review the use of existing rehabilitation information servicesand databases according to volume of users, characteristics of users, andtypes of requests and compare the findings to uses of selected other informationsystems (e.g., medicine, education, aging); andbullet; Investigate the use of information by disabled consumers and theirfamilies, and assess the relative effectiveness of various strategies forreaching this audience; andbullet; Develop and test techniques to reach segments of the disabledpopulation that are less likely to access information, including elderlypersons, disadvantaged persons, residents of rural areas, minorities, andindividuals whose primary language is not English; and andbullet; Develop programs to train individuals with disabilities in theskills of effective information access and to train consumer organizationsin the best methods to reach their target audiences in their disseminationefforts.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regional Information Exchanges </ITAG>There is a need to promote the widespread use of new, validated rehabilitationpractices and exemplary rehabilitation programs in selected priority areasin order to improve the service delivery system for disabled individuals.NIDRR proposes to address this need by establishing one or more regionalinformation exchanges similar to the regional diffusion networks whichare now operating in the East (Federal Regions I and II). NIDRR believesthat these exchanges will be most effective if they focus on facilitatingthe adoption of program models developed locally or within the same region.Also, NIDRR believes that this information exchange will be strengthenedby the inclusion of expert consultants available to provide specific technicalassistance aimed at rehabilitation agencies. Priority areas for diffusion efforts during the period of this prioritywill include the use of rehabilitation technology in vocational rehabilitation,barrier-free environments, transitional employment programs, and othertopic areas which are of concern to the specific region or which are agreedupon by NIDRR and the recipient of the award. An absolute priority is announced for one or more projects to: andbullet; Develop criteria for identifying exemplary rehabilitation programs,and develop information collection instruments which include measurementsrelated to the identified criteria; andbullet; Solicit nominations of exemplary programs in the priority areasfrom program operators, consumer organizations, and other relevant partiesin the selected region; andbullet; Develop and implement a procedure to select the most promisingprograms for further consideration and arrange independent peer reviewsof those programs to determine exemplary programs for diffusion purposes;andbullet; Develop public relations and marketing approaches to make thewide audience of rehabilitation service providers and special educatorsaware of the exemplary programs and stimulate their interest in adoptingor adapting similar models, assisted by the diffusion network; andbullet; Facilitate the exchange of technical assistance between the exemplaryprogram and the requesting adopter program through onsite demonstrations,training materials, and direct consultation; andbullet; Develop and maintain a referral system of expert consultants inthese priority areas of the project to facilitate the linkage of serviceproviders and disabled consumers to knowledgeable resources; and andbullet; Maintain appropriate data on the diffusion network to supportan evaluation of its effectiveness.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Program Authority: 29 U.S.C. 761a, 762)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 29, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William J. Bennett, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Education.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance No. 84.133, National Instituteon Disability and Rehabilitation Research)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-3242 Filed 2-16-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4000-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>