<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88126-0109 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-26-88.f2.A1108</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">Privacy Act of 1974; Proposed Changes to Two System Notices</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Personnel Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice; proposed changes to two systems notices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The purpose of this notice is to propose changes to twoOffice of Personnel Management (Office) Privacy Act System Notices identifiedas OPM/GOVT-5, Recruiting, Examining, and Placement Records and OPM/GOVT-10,Employee Medical File System Records. The changes result from the passageof the Urgent Relief for the Homeless Supplemental Appropriations Act of1987, Public Law 100-71.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>The changes will become effective March 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>John Sanet, Office of WorkforceInformation, (202) 632-4455.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments to Assistant Director for Workforce Information,Room 5415, U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Washington, DC 20415.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On June 12, 1987 in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (52 FR 2564), the Office modified the two systemsof records cited above to incorporate records created under Executive Order12564, ``Drug-Free Federal Workplace.'' The modifications included addinga routine use (``i'' for the OPM/GOVT-5 and ``d'' for the OPM/GOVT-10)that permit, but not require, the disclosure to the Department of Justiceof records arising from the drug-testing of applicants and employees underE.O. 12564. Disclosure of these records was limited to the very specificlanguage as stated in the routine use. In addition, routine use ``o'' forthe OPM/GOVT-10 system of records permitted disclosing information aboutan individual, when that individual is mentally incompetent or under otherlegal disability, to a person who is responsible for caring for that individual.Subsequent to the Office's amending the two systems of records, Congresspassed Pub. L. 100-71, which further narrows the disclosure of drug-testresults and prohibits the disclosure to the Department of Justice as contemplatedby the routine uses. Therefore, the Office is proposing to eliminate theroutine uses cited in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> for the two systems of records as they pertainto drug-test records created under the Executive Order. The routine useswill remain applicable for other records <T3>not </T3>associated with the drug-test area.Public Law 100-71 does permit the disclosure of the results of a drug testof a Federal employee if the disclosure would be: (1) To the employee'smedical review official (as defined in the Department of Health and HumanService's scientific and technical guidelines referred to in subsection(a)(1)(A)(ii)) of Pub. L. 100-71; (2) to the administrator of any EmployeeAssistance Program in which the employee is receiving counseling or treatmentor is otherwise participating; (3) to any supervisory or management officialwithin the employee's agency having authority to take adverse personnelaction against such employee; or (4) pursuant to the order of a court ofcompetent jurisdiction where required by the United States Government todefend against any challenge against any adverse personnel action. Therefore,the Office is establishing a new routine use ``p'' for the OPM/GOVT-5 systemand a new routine use ``u'' for the OPM/GOVT-10 system of records thatwill permit, but not require, the disclosure of drug-test results of Federalemployees in accordance with the limitations expressed in Pub. L. 100-71as reflected in point (4) above. The Office also believes that, in viewof Congressional interest and as well as the requirements of Pub. L. 100-71,a ``Report on New System'' should be made within the meaning of the PrivacyAct guidelines established by the Office of Management and Budget. Sucha report has been filed. To provide a greater understanding of the processconnected with the collection of drug-test results, the Office is publishingthe entire texts of the two Government-wide systems of records that willcontain such information. This action in amending the two systems of recordsand publishing the entire systems notices should ensure a more comprehensiveunderstanding of the Office's safeguarding of drug test records.<ITAG tagnum="20">U.S. Office of Personnel Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Constance Horner,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director.</ITAG>Accordingly, the Office proposes the following changes to the OPM/GOVT-5,system (Recruiting, Examining, and Placement Records) and the OPM/GOVT-10,(Employee Medical File System File Records) as indicated by <T3>italicized text</T3> in those notices reprinted here in their entirety:<ITAG tagnum="66">OPM/GOVT-5</ITAG>System Name:Recruiting, Examination, and Placement Records.System Location:Associate Director, Career Entry Group, Office of Personnel Management,1900 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20415, OPM regional and area offices;and personnel or other designated offices of Federal agencies that areauthorized to make appointments and to act for the Office by delegatedauthority.Categories of Individuals Covered by the System:a. Persons who have applied to the Office or agencies for Federal employmentand current and former Federal employees submitting applications for otherpositions in the Federal service.b. Applicants for Federal employment believed or found to be unsuitablefor employment on medical grounds.Categories of Records in the System: In general, all records in this system contain identifying informationincluding name, date of birth, social security number, and home address.These records pertain to assembled and unassembled examining proceduresand contain information on both competitive examinations and to certainnoncompetitive actions, such as determinations of time-in-grade restrictionwaivers, waiver of qualification requirement determinations, and variationsin regulatory requirements in individual cases. This system includes suchrecords as_a. Applications for employment that contain information on work and education,military service, convictions for offenses against the law, and indicationsof specialized training or receipt of awards or honors. These records mayalso include copies of correspondence between the applicant and the Officeor agency.b. Results of written exams and indications of how information in the applicationwas rated. These records also contain information on the ranking of anapplicant, his or her placement on a list of eligibles, what certificatesapplicant's names appeared, an agency's request for Office approval ofthe agency's objection to an eligible's qualifications and the Office'sdecision in the matter, an agency's request for Office approval for theagency to pass over an eligible and the Office's decision in the matter,and an agency's decision to object/pass over an eligible when the agencyhas authority to make such decisions under agreement with the Office.c. Records regarding the Office's final decision on an agency's decisionto object/pass over an eligible for suitability or medical reasons or whenthe objection/pass over decision applies to a compensable preference eligiblewith 30 percent or more disability. (Does not include a rating of ineligibilityfor employment because of a confirmed positive test result under ExecutiveOrder 12564.)d. Responses to and results of approved personality or similar tests administeredby the Office or agency.e. Records relating to rating appeals filed with the Office or agency.f. Registration sheets, control cards, and related documents regardingFederal employees requesting placement assistance in view of pending orrealized displacement because of reduction in force, transfer or discontinuanceof function, or reorganization.g. Records concerning non-competitive action cases referred to the Officefor decision. These files include such records as waiver of time-in-graderequirements, decisions on superior qualification appointments, temporaryappointments outside a register, and employee status determinations. Authorityfor making decisions on many of these actions has also been delegated toagencies. The records retained by the Office on such actions and copiesof such files retained by the agency submitting the request to the Office,along with records that agencies maintain as a result of the Office's delegationsof authorities, are considered part of this system of records.h. Records retained to support Schedule A appointments of severely physicallyhandicapped individuals, retained both by the Office and agencies actingunder the Office delegated authorities, are part of this system.i. Agency applicant supply file systems (when the agency retains applications,resumes, and other related records for hard-to-fill or unique positions,for future consideration), along with any pre-employment vouchers obtainedin connection with an agency's processing of an application, are includedin this system.j. Records derived from the Office-developed or agency-developed assessmentcenter exercises.k. Case files related to medical suitability determinations and appeals.l. Records related to an applicant's examination for use of illegal drugsunder provisions of Executive Order 12564. Such records may be retainedby the agency (e.g., evidence of confirmed positive test results and copiesof notices to applicants of their being rated ineligible for Federal employmentbecause of the confirmed positive test results) or by a contractor laboratory(e.g., the record of the testing of an applicant, whether negative, orconfirmed or unconfirmed positive test result).<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note 1: </T4><T3>Only Routine Use ``p'' identified for this system of records is applicableto records relating to drug testing under Executive Order 12564. Further,such records shall be disclosed only to a very limited number of officialswithin the agency, generally only to the agency Medical Review Official(MRO), the administrator of the agency Employee Assistance Program, andany supervisory or management official within the employee's agency havingauthority to take the adverse personnel action against the employee.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note 2: </T4>The Office does not intend that records created by agenciesin connection with the agency's Merit Promotion Plan program be includedin the term ``Applicant Supply File'' as used within this notice. It isthe Office's position that Merit Promotion Plan records are not a systemof records within the meaning of the Privacy Act as such records are usuallyfiled by a vacancy announcement number or some other key that is not aunique personal identifier. Agencies may choose to consider such recordsas within the meaning of a system of records as used in the Privacy Act,but if they do so, they are solely responsible for implementing PrivacyAct requirements, including establishment and notice of a system of recordspertaining to such records.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note 3: </T4>To the extent that an agency utilizes an automated mediumin connection with maintenance of records in this system, the automatedversions of these records are considered covered by this system of records.</ITAG>Authority for Maintenance of the System:5 U.S.C. 1302, 3109, 3301, 3302, 3304, 3306, 3307, 3309, 3313, 3317, 3318,3319, 3326, 4103, 4723, 5532, and 5533, and Executive Order 9397.Purpose:The records are used in considering individuals who have applied for positionsin the Federal service by making determinations of qualifications includingmedical qualifications, for positions applied for, and to rate and rankapplicants applying for the same or similar positions. They are also usedto refer candidates to Federal agencies for employment consideration, includingappointment, transfer, reinstatement, reassignment, or promotion. Recordsderived from the Office-developed or agency-developed assessment centerexercises may be used to determine training needs of participants. Theserecords may also be used to locate individuals for personnel research.Routine Uses of Records Maintained in the System, Including Categoriesof Users and the Purpose of Such Uses:None of the Routine Uses apply to records identified in paragraph 1 ofthe Categories of Records in the System section of this notice. Otherwise,records and information in this system may be used_a. To refer applicants, including current and former Federal employeesto Federal agencies for consideration for employment, transfer, reassignment,reinstatement, or promotion.b. With the permission of the applicant, to refer applicants to State andlocal governments, congressional offices, international organizations,and other public offices for employment consideration.c. To disclose pertinent information to the appropriate Federal, State,or local agency responsible for investigating, prosecuting, enforcing,or implementing a statute, rule, regulation, or order, when the disclosingagency becomes aware of an indication of a violation or potential violationof civil or criminal law or regulation.d. To disclose information to any source from which additional informationis requested (to the extent necessary to identify the individual, informthe source of the purpose(s) of the request, and to identify the type ofinformation requested), when necessary to obtain information relevant toan agency decision concerning hiring or retaining an employee, issuinga security clearance, conducting a security or suitability investigationof an individual, classifying positions, letting a contract, or issuinga license, grant, or other benefit.e. To disclose information to a Federal agency, in response to its request,in connection with hiring or retaining an employee, issuing a securityclearance, conducting a security or suitability investigation of an individual,classifying positions, letting a contract, or issuing a license, grant,or other benefit by the requesting agency, to the extent that the informationis relevant and necessary to the requesting agency's decision in the matter.f. To disclose information to the Office of Management and Budget at anystage in the legislative coordination and clearance process in connectionwith private relief legislation as set forth in OMB Circular No. A-19.g. To provide information to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from that congressional officemade at the request of that individual. h. To disclose information to another Federal agency, to a court, or aparty in litigation before a court or in an administrative proceeding beingconducted by a Federal agency, either when the Government is a party toa judicial proceeding or in order to comply with the issuance of a subpoena.i. To disclose information to the Department of Justice, or in a proceedingbefore a court, adjudicative body, or other administrative body beforewhich the agency is authorized to appear, when: 1. The agency, or any component thereof; or 2. Any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity; or 3. Any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity where theDepartment of Justice or the agency has agreed to represent the employee;or 4. The United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, andthe use of such records by the Department of Justice or the agency is deemedby the agency to be relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided,however, that in each case it has been determined that the disclosure iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected. j. By the National Archives and Records Administration in records managementinspections conducted under authority of 44 U.S.C. 2904 and 2906. k. By the agency maintaining the records or by the Office to locate individualsfor personnel research or survey response or in producing summary descriptivestatistics and analytical studies in support of the function for whichthe records are collected and maintained, or for related work force studies.While published statistics and studies do not contain individual identifiers,in some instances the selection of elements of data included in the studymay be structured in such a way as to make the data individually identifiableby inference. l. To disclose information to officials of the Merit Systems ProtectionBoard, including its Office of Special Counsel, when requested in connectionwith appeals, special studies of the civil service and other merit systems,review of Office rules and regulations, investigations of alleged or possibleprohibited personnel practices, and such other functions; e.g., as prescribedin 5 U.S.C. 1205 and 1206, or as may be authorized by law. m. To disclose information to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commissionwhen requested in connection with investigations into alleged or possiblediscrimination practices in the Federal sector, examination of Federalaffirmative employment programs, compliance by Federal agencies with theUniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures, or other functionsvested in the Commission by the President's Reorganization Plan No. 1 of1978. n. To disclose information to the Federal Labor Relations Authority orits General Counsel when requested in connection with investigations ofallegations of unfair labor practices or matters before the Federal ServiceImpasses Panel. o. To disclose, in response to a request for discovery or for an appearanceof a witness, information that is relevant to the subject matter involvedin a pending judicial or administrative proceeding. <T3>p. To disclose the results of a drug test of a Federal employee pursuantto an order of a court of competent jurisdiction where required by theUnited States Government to defend against any challenge against any adversepersonnel action. </T3>Policies and Practices for Storing, Retrieving, Safeguarding, and Retainingand Disposing of Records in the System: Storage: Records are maintained on magnetic tapes, disk, punched cards, microfiche,cards, list, and forms. Retrievability: Records are retrieved by the name, date of birth, social security number,and/or identification number assigned to the individual on whom they aremaintained. Safeguards: Records are maintained in a secured area or automated media with accesslimited to authorized personnel whose duties require access. Retention and Disposal: Records in this system are retained for varying lengths of time, rangingfrom a few months to 5 years; e.g., applicant records that are part ofmedical determination case files or medical suitability appeal files areretained for 3 years from completion of action on the case. Most recordsare retained for a period of 1 to 2 years. Some records, such as individualapplications, become part of the person's permanent official records whenhired, while some records (e.g., non-competitive action case files), areretained for 5 years. Some records are destroyed by shredding or burningwhile magnetic tapes or disks are erased.System Manager and Address:Associate Director, Career Entry Group, Office of Personnel Management,1900 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20415.Notification Procedure:Individuals wishing to inquire whether this system of records containsinformation about them should contact the agency or the Office where applicationwas made or examination was taken. Individuals must provide the followinginformation for their records to be located and identified:a. Name.b. Date of birth.c. Social security number.d. Identification number (if known).e. Approximate date of record.f. Title of examination or announcement with which concerned.g. Geographic area in which consideration was requested.Record Access Procedure:Specific materials in this system have been exempted from Privacy Act provisionsat 5 U.S.C. 552a (c)(3) and (d), regarding access to records.The section of this notice titled ``Systems Exempted from Certain Provisionsof the Act'' indicates the kind of material exempted and the reasons forexempting them from access. Individuals wishing to request access to theirnon-exempt records should contact the agency or the Office where applicationwas made or examination was taken. Individuals must provide the followinginformation for their records to be located and identified:a. Name.b. Date of birth.c. Social security number.d. Identification number (if known).e. Approximate date of record.f. Title of examination or announcement with which concerned.g. Geographic area in which consideration was requested.Individuals requesting access must also comply with the Office's PrivacyAct regulations on verification of identity and access to records (5 CFRPart 297).Contesting Record Procedure:Specific materials in this system have been exempted from Privacy Act provisionsat 5 U.S.C. 552a(d), regarding amendment of records. The section of thisnotice titled ``Systems Exempted from Certain Provisions of the Act'' indicatesthe kinds of material exempted and the reasons for exempting them fromamendment. An individual may contact the agency or the Office where applicationis filed at any time to update qualifications, education, experience, orother data maintained in the system.Such regular administrative updating of records should not be requestedunder the provisions of the Privacy Act. However, individuals wishing torequest amendment of other records under the provisions of the PrivacyAct should contact the agency or the Office where application was madeor examination was taken. Individuals must provide the following informationfor their records to be located and identified:a. Name.b. Date of birth.c. Social security number.d. Identification number (if known).e. Approximate date of record.f. Title of examination or announcement with which concerned.g. Geographic area in which consideration was requested.Individuals requesting amendment must also comply with the Office's PrivacyAct regulations on verification of identity and amendment of records (5CFR Part 297).<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note:</T4> In responding to an inquiry or a request for access or amendment,resource specialists may contact the Office's area office that providesexamining and rating assistance for help in processing the request.</ITAG>Record Source Categories:Information in this system of records comes from the individual to whomit applies or is derived from information the individual supplied, reportsfrom medical personnel on physical qualifications, results of examinationsthat are made known to applicants, agencies, and Office records, and voucherssupplied by references or other sources that the applicant lists or thatare developed.Systems Exempted from Certain Provisions of the Act:This system contains investigative materials that are used solely to determinethe appropriateness of a request for approval of an objection to an eligible'squalifications for Federal civilian employment or vouchers received duringthe processing of an application. The Privacy Act, at 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5),permits an agency to exempt such investigative material from certain provisionsof the Act, to the extent that release of the material to the individualwhom the information is about would_a. Reveal the identity of a source who furnished information to the Governmentunder an express promise (granted on or after September 27, 1975) thatthe identity of the source would be held in confidence; orb. Reveal the identity of a source who, prior to September 27, 1975, furnishedinformation to the Government under an implied promise that the identityof the source would be held in confidence.This system contains testing and examination materials used solely to determineindividual qualifications for appointment or promotion in the Federal service.The Privacy Act, at 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(6), permits an agency to exempt allsuch testing or examination material and information from certain provisionsof the Act, when disclosure of the material would compromise the objectivityor fairness of the testing or examination process. The Office has claimedexemptions from the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 552a(d), which relate to accessto and amendment of records.The specific materials exempted include, but are not limited to, the following:a. Answer keys.b. Assessment center exercises.c. Assessment center exercise reports.d. Assessor guidance material.e. Assessment center observation reports.f. Assessment center summary reports.g. Other applicant appraisal methods, such as performance tests, work samplesand simulations, miniature training and evaluation exercises, structuredinterviews, and their associated evaluation guides and reports.h. Item analyses and similar data that contain test keys.i. Ratings given for validating examinations.j. Rating schedules, including crediting plans and scoring formulas forother selection procedures.k. Rating sheets.l. Test booklets, including the written instructions for their preparation.m. Test item files.n. Test answer sheets.<ITAG tagnum="66">OPM/GOVT-10</ITAG>System Name:Employee Medical File System Records.System Location:a. For current employees, records are located in agency medical, personnel,dispensary, health, safety, or other designated offices within the agency,with another agency providing such services for the employing agency, orwith private sector contractors.b. For former employees, most records will be located in an Employee MedicalFolder (EMF) stored in Federal Records Storage Centers operated by theNational Archives and Records Administration (NARA). In some cases, agenciesmay retain for a limited time (e.g., up to 3 years) some records on formeremployees.Categories of Individuals Covered by the System:Current and former Federal civilian employees.Categories of Records in the System:Records maintained in this system include:a. Medical records, forms, and reports completed or obtained when an individualapplies for a Federal job and is subsequently employed;b. Medical records, forms, and reports completed during employment as acondition of employment, either by the employing agency or by another agency,State or local government entity, or a private sector entity under contractto the employing agency;c. Records resulting from the testing of the employee for use of illegaldrugs under Executive Order 12564. Such records may be retained by theagency (e.g., by the agency Medical Review Official) <T3>or by a contractor laboratory. This includes records of negative results,confirmed or unconfirmed positive test results, and lists of who has beentested, who failed to report for testing, and related documents.</T3><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note._</T4>Records maintained by an agency dispensary are includedin the system only when they are the result of a condition of employmentor related to an on-the-job occurrence.</ITAG>d. Agency maintained files containing reports of on-the-job injuries andmedical records, forms, and reports generated as a result of the filingof a claim for Workers' Compensation, whether the claim is accepted ornot. (The official compensation claim file, physically being maintainedby the Department of Labor's Office of Workers' Compensation Program (OWCP)is part of that agency's system of records and not covered by this notice.)e. All other medical records, forms, and reports created on an employeeduring his or her period of employment, including records retained on ashort-term/temporary basis (i.e., those designated to be retained onlywhile the employee is with that agency) and records designated for long-termretention (i.e., those retained for the employee's duration of FederalService and for some period of time after).<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Records pertaining to employee drug or alcohol abuse counselingor treatment, and those pertaining to other employee counseling programsconducted under Health service Programs established pursuant to 5 U.S.C.chapter 79, are not part of this system of records.</ITAG>Authority for Maintenance of the System:Executive Orders 12107 and 12564 and 5 U.S.C. Chapters 11, 31, 33, 43,61, 63, and 83.Purposes:Records in this system of records are maintained for a variety of purposes,which include the following:a. To ensure that records required to be retained on a long-term basisto meet the mandates of law, Executive order, or regulations (e.g., theDepartment of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)and OWCP regulations), are so maintained.b. To provide data necessary for proper medical evaluations and diagnoses,to ensure that proper treatment is administered, and to maintain continuityof medical care.c. To provide an accurate medical history of the total health care andmedical treatment received by the individual as well as job and/or hazardexposure documentation and health monitoring in relation to health statusand claims of the individual.d. To enable the planning for further care of the patient.e. To provide a record of communications among members of the health careteam who contribute to the patient's care.     f. To provide a legal discount describing the health care administeredand any exposure incident. g. To provide a method for evaluating quality of health care rendered andjob-health-protection including engineering protection provided, protectiveequipment worn, workplace monitoring, and medical exam monitoring requiredby OSHA or by good practice.h. To ensure that all relevant, necessary, accurate, and timely data areavailable to support any medically-related employment decisions affectingthe subject of the records (e.g., in connection with fitness-for-duty anddisability retirement decisions). i. To document claims filed with the decisions reached by OWCP and theindividual's possible reemployment rights under statutes governing thatprogram. j. To document employee's reporting of on-the-job injuries or unhealthyor unsafe working conditions, including the reporting of such conditionsto OSHA and actions taken by that agency or by the employing agency. k. To ensure proper and accurate operation of the agency's employee drugtesting program under Executive Order 12564.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4><T3>Except for Routine Use u, no other Routine Use for this system of recordsapplies to records included in paragraph c in the Categories of Recordsin the System section of this notice. </T3>Further, agencies are remindedthat Routine Use disclosures are permissive in nature and should be limitedto only those records/portions of a record that meet the requirements ofthe requester. </ITAG>Routine Uses of Records Maintained in the System, Including Categoriesof Users and the Purpose of Such Uses: These records and information in these records may be used: a. To disclose information to the Department of Labor, Veterans Administration,Social Security Administration, or a national, State, or local social securitytype agency, when necessary to adjudicate a claim (filed by or on behalfof the individual) under a retirement, insurance, or health benefit program.b. To disclose information to a Federal, State, or local agency to theextent necessary to comply with laws governing reporting of communicablediseases. c. To disclose information to another Federal agency, to a court, or aparty in litigation before a court or in an administrative proceeding beingconducted by a Federal agency, either when the Government is a party toa judicial proceeding or to comply with the issuance of a subpoena. d. To disclose information to the Department of Justice, or in a proceedingbefore a court, adjudicative body, or other administrative body beforewhich the agency is authorized to appear, when: 1. The agency, or any component thereof; or 2. Any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity; or 3. Any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity where theDepartment of Justice or the agency has agreed to represent the employee;or 4. The United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, andthe use of such records by the Department of Justice or the agency is deemedby the agency to be relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided,however, that in each case it has been determined that the disclosure iscompatible with the purpose of which the records were collected. e. To disclose in response to a request for discovery or for appearanceof a witness, information that is relevant to the subject matter involvedin a pending judicial or administrative proceeding. f. To disclose pertinent information to the appropriate Federal, State,or local agency responsible for investigating, prosecuting, enforcing,or implementing a statute, rule, regulation, or order when the disclosingagency becomes aware of an indication of a violation or potential violationof civil or criminal law or regulation. g. To disclose information to the Office of Management and Budget at anystage in the legislative coordination and clearance process in connectionwith private relief legislation as set forth in OMB Circular No. A-19.h. To disclose information to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the Congressional office madeat the request of that individual. i. To disclose information to officials of the Merit Systems ProtectionBoard including the Office of Special Counsel, the Federal Labor RelationsAuthority and its general counsel, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,arbitrators, and hearing examiners to the extent necessary to carry outtheir authorized duties.j. To disclose information to survey team members from the Joint Commissionon Accreditation of Hospitals (JCAH) when requested in connection withan accreditation review, but only to the extent that the information isrelevant and necessary to meet JCAH standards.k. To disclose information to the National Archives and Records Servicein records management inspections conducted under authority of 44 U.S.C.2904 and 2906.l. To disclose information to health insurance carriers contracting withthe Office of Personnel Management (hereafter referred to as ``the Office'')to provide a health benefits plan under the Federal Employees Health BenefitsProgram information necessary to verify eligibility for payment of a claimfor health benefits.m. By the agency maintaining or responsible for generating the recordsto locate individuals for health research or survey response and in theproduction of summary descriptive statistics and analytical studies (e.g.,epidemiological studies) in support of the function for which the recordsare collected and maintained. While published statistics and studies donot contain individual identifiers, in some instances the selection ofelements of data included in the study might be structured in such a wayas to make the data individually identifiable by inference.n. To disclose information to the Office of Federal Employees Group LifeInsurance that is relevant and necessary to adjudicate claims.o. To disclose information, when an individual to whom a record pertainsis mentally incompetent or under other legal disability, to any personwho is responsible for the care of the individual, to the extent necessary.p. To disclose to the agency-appointed representative of an employee allnotices, determinations, decisions, or other written communications issuedto the employee, in connection with an examination ordered by the agencyunder:(1) Medical evaluation (formerly Fitness for Duty) examinations procedures;or(2) Agency-filed disability retirement procedures.q. To disclose to a requesting agency, organization, or individual thehome address and other information concerning those individuals who itis reasonably believed might have contracted an illness or been exposedto or suffered from a health hazard while employed in the Federal workforce.r. To disclose information to a Federal agency, in response to its requestor at the initiation of the agency maintaining the records, in connectionwith the retention of an employee, the issuance of a security clearance,the conducting of a suitability or security investigation of an individual,the classifying of jobs, the letting of a contract, or the issuance ofa license, grant, or other benefit by the requesting agency, or the lawful,statutory, administrative, or investigative purpose of the agency, to theextent that the information is relevant and necessary to the requestingagency's decision on the matter.s. To disclose to any Federal, State, or local government agency, in responseto its request or at the initiation of the agency maintaining the records,information relevant and necessary to the lawful, statutory, administrative,or investigatory purpose of that agency as it relates to the conduct ofjob related epidemiological research or the ensurance of compliance withFederal, State, or local government laws on health and safety in the workenvironment.t. To disclose to officials of labor organizations recognized under 5 U.S.C.Chapter 71, analyses using exposure or medical records and employee exposurerecords, in accordance with the records access rules of the Departmentof Labor's OSHA, and subject to the limitations at 29 CFR 1910.20(e)(2)(iii)(B).<T3>u. To disclose the results of a drug test of a Federal employee pursuantto an order of a court of competent jurisdiction where required by theUnited States Government to defend against any challenge against any adversepersonnel action.</T3>Policies and Practices of Storing, Retrieving, Safeguarding, and Retainingand Disposing of Records in the System:Storage:Records are stored in file folders, on microfiche, in automated recordsystems, and on file cards, X-rays, or other medical reports and forms.Retrievability:Records are retrieved by the employee's name, date of birth, social securitynumber, or any combination of those identifiers.<T3>Safeguards:</T3>Records are stored in locked file cabinets or locked rooms. Automated recordsare protected by restricted access procedures and audit trails. Accessto records is strictly limited to agency or contractor officials with abona fide need for the records.<T3>Retention and Disposal:</T3>Some records are retained for the duration of employment with a given agency.Other records are retained for the duration of Federal employment, plus30 years. Records arising in connection with employee drug testing underExecutive Order 12564 are generally retained for up to 2 years. Recordsare destroyed by shredding, burning, or by erasing the disk.<T3>System Manager and Address:</T3>Assistant Director for Workforce Information, Personnel Systems and OversightGroup, U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Room 5415, 1900 E Street, NW.,Washington, DC 20415.<T3>Notification Procedure:</T3>Individuals wishing to inquire whether this system of records containsrecord on them should follow the appropriate procedure listed below.a. <T3>Current employees. </T3>Current employees should contact their employingagency's personnel, dispensary, health, safety, medical, or other designatedoffice responsible for maintaining the records, as identified in the agency'sinternal issuance covering this system. Individuls must furnish such identifyinginformation as required by the agency for their records to be located toand identified.b. <T3>Former employees. </T3>Former employees should contact their formeragency's personnel, dispensary, health, safety, medical, or other designatedoffice responsible for maintaining the records, as identified in the agency'sinternal issuance covering this system. Additionally, for access to theirEMF, they should submit a request to the Office's regional office nearesttheir residence. Individuals submitting requests to the Office's regionaland area offices must submit the following information for the recordsto be located and identified:1. Full name.2. Date of birth.3. Social security number.4. Name and location of agency where last employeed and dates of employment.5. Signature.<T3>Records Access Procedure:</T3>a. Current employees should contact the appropriate agency office as indicatedin the ``Notification Procedure'' section and furnish such identifyinginformation as required by the agency to locate and identify the recordssought.b. Former employees should contact the appropriate agency office as indicatedin the Notification Procedure section and furnish such identifying informationas required by the agency to locate and identify the records sought. Formeremployees may also submit a request to the Office's regional or area officenearest their residence for access to their EMF. When submitting a requestto the Office, the individual must furnish the following information tolocate and indentify the record sought:1. Full name.2. Date of birth.3. Social security number.4. Name and location of agency where last employeed and dates of employment.5. Signature.c. Individuals requesting access must also comply with the Office's PrivacyAct regulations on verification of identity and access to records (5 CFRPart 297).Contesting Records Procedure: Because medical practitioners often provide differing but equally validmedical judgments and opinions when making medical evaluations of an individual'shealth status, review of requests from individuals seeking amendment oftheir medical records, beyond correction and updating of the records, willbe limited to consideration of including the differing opinion in the recordrather than attempting to determine whether the original opinion is accurate.Individuals wishing to amend their records should: a. For a current employee, contact the appropriate agency office identifiedin the Notification Procedure section and furnish such identifying informationas required by the agency to locate and identify the records to be amended.b. For a former employee, contact the appropriate agency office identifiedin the Notification Procedure section and furnish such identifying informationas required by the agency to locate and identify the record to be amended.Former employees may also submit such a request to amend records in theirEMF to the system manager. When submitting a request to the system manager,the individual must furnish the following information to locate and identifythe records to be amended: 1. Full name. 2. Date of birth. 3. Social security number. 4. Name and location of agency where last employed and dates of employment.5. Signature. c. Individuals seeking amendment of their records must also follow theOffice's Privacy Act regulations on verification of identity and amendmentof records (5 CFR Part 297). Records Source Categories: Records in this system are obtained from: a. The individual to whom the records pertain. b. Agency employee health unit staff. c. Federal and private sector medical practitioners and treatment facilities.d. Superviors/managers and other agency officials. e. Other agency records. <ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-1509 Filed 1-25-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6325-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>