<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88901-0052 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-01-88.f2.A1051</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. CP88-689-000 et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Southern Natural Gas Co. et al., Natural gas Certificate Filings</ITAG>Take notice that the following filings have been made with the Commission:<ITAG tagnum="84">1. Southern Natural Gas Company</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">Docket No. CP88-689-000]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">August 25, 1988.</ITAG>Take notice that on August 17, 1988, Southern Natural Gas Company Southern),Post Office Box 2563, Birmingham, Alabama 35202-2563, pursuant to its blanketcertificate of public convenience and necessity issued in Docket No. CP82-406-000,filed in Docket No. CP88-689-000 a request pursuant to section 157.205of the Relgulations under the Natural Gas Act (18 CFR 157.205) for authorizationto install and operate an additional point of delivery for an existingcustomer, all as more fully set forth in the request on file with the Commissionand open to public inspection.Southern states that it provides natural gas service to the Alabaster Waterand Gas Board (Alabaster), at points of delivery (Alabaster Nos. 1 and2) in Shelby County, Alabama, as specified in the Service Agreement betweenSouthern and Alabaster dated September 16, 1969. Southern proposes to installand operate an additional point of delivery (Alabaster No. 3) in ShelbyCounty, Alabama. Southern states that Alabaster has informed Southern thatthe additional point of delivery will be used to provide natural gas serviceto an industrial customer of Alabaster at its plant in Shelby County, Alabama.In order to implement the new point of delivery, Southern states that itplans to construct, install, and operate a new meter station and appurtenantfacilities. The total estimated cost of the proposed construction and installationof these facilities is $80,000. Alabaster has agreed to reimburse Southernfor the total actual cost of the proposed construction and installation.Southern states that the total volumes to be delviered to Alabaster afterthe proposed installation will not exceed the total volumes authroizedprior to the implementation of the point of delivery so that the activitiesare not prohibited by any existing tariff of Southern. Southern proposesto provide Alabaster No. 3 with a contract delivery pressure of 60 psig.Southern also states that it has sufficient capacity to accomplish thedeliveries proposed by the installation and operation of the new pointof delivery without detriment to Southern's other customers, and that theconstruction and operation of the facilities will not result in any terminationof service and will have a de minimis impact on Southern's peak day andannual deliveries.<T3>Comment date: </T3>October 11, 1988, in accordance with Standard ParagraphG at the end of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">2. Northern Natural Gas Company Division of Enron Corp.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Docket No. CP88-680-000]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">August 25, 1988.</ITAG>Take notice that on August 15, 1988, Northern Natural Gas Company, Divisionof Enron Corp. (Northern), 1400 Smith Street, P.O. Box 1188, Houston, Texas77251-1188, filed in Docket No. CP88-680-000 an application pursuant tosection 7(b) of the Natural Gas Act for permission and approval to abandonand remove wellhead measurement facilities, all as more fully set forthin the application which is on file with the Commission and open to publicinspection.Northern states that the facilities proposed to be abandoned were originallyrequired and installed for the measurement and connection of natural gaspurchased by Northern from producers at the wellhead at locations in theStates of Kansas, Oklahoma and Montana. Northern further states that suchwells have been plugged and abandoned, as documented by reports filed withthe respective State Public Utilities Commission. Northern asserts thatthe facilities proposed to be abandoned are no longer required and theirabandonment would not result in the termination of service or detrimentto any of Northern's customers. Northern further asserts that it has operationalrequirements to use these proposed abandoned facilities elsewhere on itssystem to avoid the purchase of new facilities to perform the requiredfunction. Northern indicates that the removal cost of wellhead meteringfacilities would average approximately $100.00 each.Northern states that although the producer has ceased the production andsale of gas to Northern at each of the various wells, the producer hasnot received, or in most cases even requested, Commission authorizationpermitting the abandonment of its sale to Northern. Without evidence ofCommission approved abandonment, on behalf of the producer, Northern claimsit is unable to utilize its blanket certificate (Docket No. CP82-401-000)and andSection; 157.216 of the Commission's Regulations to abandon and removethe facilities. Northern states it has attempted, without success, to persuadethe producers to secure the necessary abandonment authority. However, Northernindicates it is aware of a report required to be filed by a producer witha state utility commission before a well can be plugged and abandoned bythe producer. This report provides documented proof that such wells havebeen plugged and abandoned and are physically incapable of any future gasproduction. It is further indicated that these reports describe the procedureused in plugging the wells, along with pertinent information concerningthe owner/operator, their addresses and location of the wells. Northernsubmits that the Commission can accept the respective States' pluggingand abandoning reports as an appropriate basis for Northern to abandonthe idled wellhead facilities serving the wells. <T3>Comment date</T3>: September 15, 1988, in accordance with StandardParagraph F at the end of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">3. Natural Gas Pipeline Company of America</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Docket No. CP88-708-000]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">August 25, 1988.</ITAG>Take notice that on August 22, 1988, Natural Gas Pipeline Company of America(Natural), 701 East 22nd Street, P.O. Box 1208, Lombard, Illinois 60148,filed in Docket No. CP88-708-000 an application pursuant to section 7(c)of the Natural Gas Act for a certificate of public convenience and necessityauthorizing the construction and operation of major new pipeline and compressionfacilities which, in conjunction with certain existing facilities, wouldpermit Natural to establish an interconnect between its Amarillo and GulfCoast mainlines, all as more fully set forth in the application which ison file with the Commission and open to public inspection.Natural proposes to construct and operate:andbullet; 97 miles of 30-inch pipeline to be located in Carter, Murray,Johnston and Bryan Counties, Oklahoma.andbullet; 94 miles of 30-inch pipeline to be located in Lamar, Red River,Franklin, Titus, Morris and Cass Counties, Texas.andbullet; 8700 horsepower of compression at a new compressor station tobe located in Carter County, Oklahoma at the interconnection of the westernend of the proposed 97-mile segment and Natural's existing Oklahoma Extension.It is indicated that the proposed facilities, together with 39 miles ofexisting 30-inch pipeline already owned and operated by Natural pursuantto general section 7(c) certification in Bryan County Oklahoma and Fanninand Lamr Counties, Texas with which they would be connected, would be knownas the ``NGPL Interconnect''. Natural states that the project would resultin the interconnection for the first time of Natural's two main transmissionsystems, the Amarillo Line and the Gulf Coast Line.Natural states that its Amarillo and Gulf Coast mainlines do not interconnectin the producing regions of Texas and Oklahoma, and that over the yearsit has experienced periods of gas supply imbalance between the two lineswhich have restricted the supply available to meet market requirements.Natural notes that while past efforts to connect the mainlines have nevermaterialized, there is now a greater need for the systems to be connectedthan at any time in the past.Natural states that the proposed NGPL Interconnect is needed primarilyto alleviate the substantial unmet demand for transportation service outof the Oklahoma Triangle area of Natural's Amarillo system and also toprovide needed system-wide operational flexibility. Natural asserts thatits experience as an open access transporter under the Order 436/500 programhas demonstrated that there is substantial unsatisfied demand for transportationout of the Oklahoma Triange area and that the proposed NGPL Interconnectwould provide the necessary additional pipeline capacity in an efficientmanner. Natural states that the proposed project would also be importantto the management of its system supply as well as the general operationof its two large field storage facilities, the Sayre Field in Oklahomaand the North Lansing Field in Texas.Natural states that while it requires the proposed facilities primarilyfor movement of gas to the Gulf Coast Line, it has designed the projectto allow for reverse flow in certain circumstances.Natural states that the capacity of the proposed pipeline facilities, includingcompression, would be approximately 350,000 Mcf per day. It is estimatedthat the cost of the project would be $107,713,000, which would be financedfrom corporate funds on hand. Natural proposes to charge incremental ratesfor transportation service across the segments of the NGPL Interconnectbased on a cost of service using a Modified Fixed Variable cost allocation,designed on a 90 percent load factor basis and using a three-year averagerate base. Natural further proposes to establish maximum and minimum ratesfor each of the two new pipeline segments. Natural notes that it does notseek a determination in this proceeding as to whether the cost of the proposedfacilities (and the existing 39-mile segment) should be included in itsrate base. Natural asserts that while it would be inclined to eventuallyseek rate base treatment, this issue can be resolved at a later time.<T3>Comment date</T3>: September 15, 1988, in accordance with StandardParagraph F at the end of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">4. Southern Natural Gas Company</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Docket No. CP88-695-000]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">August 26, 1988.</ITAG>Take notice that on August 18, 1988, Southern Natural Gas Company (Southern),P.O. Box 2563, Birmingham, Alabama 35202-2563, filed in Docket No. CP88-695-000,a request pursuant to andSection; 157.205 of the Commission's Regulationsunder the Natural Gas Act (18 CFR 157.205) for authorization to construct,install, and operate certain pipeline facilities under its blanket certificateissued in Docket No. CP82-406-000 pursuant to section 7 of the NaturalGas Act, all as more fully set forth in the request on file with the Commissionand open to public inspection.Southern states that it has the right to purchase natural gas reservesproduced in the Carthage, Joaquin, Logansport, and Spider Fields in DeSoto Parish, Louisiana and Panola and Shelby Counties, Texas. Southernfurther states that based on the daily deliverability dedicated to Southernin these fields, Southern needs additional pipeline capacity to deliversupplies to points downstream of the fields on its pipeline system. Accordingly,Southern proposes to construct, install, and operate approximately 45 milesof 16-inch loop pipeline to extend from its Logansport Compressor Stationin De Soto Parish, Louisiana, to a point of interconnection near Mile Post80 on Southern's 14-inch Logansport Line in Bienville Parish, Louisiana.Southern states that the estimated cost of the proposed facilities wouldbe $10,664,700; which Southern expects to finance initially from short-termloans and/or cash on hand, and ultimately from permanent financing.<T3>Comment date: </T3>October 11, 1988, in accordance with Standard ParagraphG at the end of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">5. Williams Natural Gas Company</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Docket No. CP88-691-000]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">August 26, 1988.</ITAG>Take notice that on August 17, 1988, Williams Natural Gas Company (WNG),P.O. Box 3288, Tulsa, Oklahoma 74101, filed in Docket No. CP88-691-000a request pursuant to andSection; 157.205 of the Regulations under the NaturalGas Act (18 CFR 157.205) for authorization to abandon in place and by saleapproximately 0.8 miles of 2-inch lateral pipeline in Anderson County,Kansas, and the transportation of gas through said facilities under theauthorization issued in Docket No. CP82-479-000 pursuant to section 7 ofthe Natural Gas Act, all as more fully set forth in the request on filewith the Commission and open to public inspection.WNG states that the pipeline is no longer in use and proposes to abandonin place 0.5 miles and to abandon by sale 0.3 miles of 2-inch lateral pipeline.WNG further states that the reclaim cost is estimated to be $270, the salvagevalue $0 and the sales price $1.<T3>Comment date: </T3>October 11, 1988, in accordance with Standard ParagraphG at the end of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">6. Natural Gas Pipeline Company of America</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Docket No. CP88-694-000]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">August 26, 1988.</ITAG>Take notice that on August 18, 1988, Natural Gas Pipeline Company of America(Natural), 701 East 22nd Street, Lombard, Illinois 60148, filed in DocketNo. CP88-694-000 a request pursuant to andSection; 157.205 of the Commission'sRegulations for authorization to transport natural gas on behalf of HadsonGas Systems, Inc. (Hadson), a marketer of natural gas, under Natural'sblanket certificate issued in Docket No. CP86-582-000, pursuant to section7 of the Natural Gas Act, all as more fully set forth in the request whichis on file with the Commission and open to public inspection.Natural proposes to transport, on an interruptible basis, up to 75,000MMBtu of natural gas on a peak day, plus excess volumes pursuant to theoverrun provisions of its Rate Schedule ITS, and 18,250,000 MMBtu on anannual basis for Hadson. It is stated that Natural would receive the gasfor Hadson's account at various existing receipt points in Oklahoma, Texas,Illinois, Louisiana, offshore Louisiana, New Mexico and Wyoming. Naturalthen proposes to deliver equivalent volumes of gas in Louisiana, New Mexico,Illinois and Iowa. It is asserted that the transportation service wouldbe effected using existing facilities and would not require the constructionof additional facilities. It is explained that the service commenced June16, 1988, under the automatic authorization provisions of andSection; 284.223of the Commission's Regulations.<T3>Comment date: </T3>October 11, 1988, in accordance with Standard ParagraphG at the end of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">7. Jubilee Pipeline Company</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Docket No. CP88-646-000]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">August 26, 1988.</ITAG>Take notice that on August 12, 1988,\1\<NOTE/> Jubilee Pipeline Company (Jubilee) filed in Docket No. CP88-646-000,pursuant to andSection; 157.14, 157.201, and 284.221 of the Commission'sRegulations under the Natural Gas Act and the Natural Gas Policy Act, itsapplication requesting (1) authorization to construct and operate a totalof approximately 81.6 miles of various diameter pipeline, ranging in sizefrom 8 inches to 24 inches in diameter, together with metering and appurtenantfacilities and 6,000 horsepower (HP) of compression, extending from a pointonshore in Mobile County, Alabama to offshore federal waters, in orderto connect reserves to be produced in the vicinity of Mobile Bay; (2) approvalof its FERC Gas Tariff, Original Volume No. 1, including its proposed transportationRate Schedules, FT and IT, and initial rates, all as more fully describedtherein; (3) a blanket certificate authorizing Jubilee to render self-implementing,open access transportation services; and (4) a blanket facilities certificateauthorizing minor additions and other transactions, all as more fully setforth in the application which is on file with the Commission and opento public inspection.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The application was tendered for filing on July 29, 1988,however, the fees required by andSection; 381.207 of the Commission's Rules(18 CFR 381.207) were not paid until August 12, 1988. Section 381.103 ofthe Commission's Rules provides that the filing date is the date on whichfees are paid.Jubilee proposes to construct and operate approximately 81.6 miles of pipelineextending from a point near Bayou La Batre, Alabama on the west bank ofMobile Bay, where Jubilee proposes to connect with the pipline systemsof Citrus Interstate Pipeline Company (CIPCO) and Transcontinental GasPipe Line Corporation (Transco) to points on production platforms in thefederal offshore area, in Mobile Blocks 870, 908, 914, and 960 and VioscaKnoll Blocks 31 and 203. Jubilee also proposes to construct and operatemetering facilities on such platforms and 6,000 HP of compression at anonshore facility in Mobile County.Jubilee's proposed pipeline would connect gas reserves to be produced generallyfrom the Mobile Bay and Viosca Knoll Areas. Jubilee states that estimatesof proven and probable reserves in the Mobile Bay Area range from 3.5 Tcfto 10 Tcf. Estimates of the shallow Miocene production, which Jubilee'sproposed pipeline would attach, currently indicate a maximum levelizedproduction of 315 MMcf per day, Jubilee states. Jubilee asserts that provenand probable reserves from these blocks are now estimated at 366 Bcf, ofwhich 146 Bcf is committed to Jubilee's system.Jubilee states that the proposed pipeline is designed to transport 315MMcf of natural gas per day with the proposed compression.The total estimated cost of the proposed facilities is $66.91 million.Jubilee states that the facilities are scheduled to be constructed andin service by January 1, 1990 assuming all regulatory approvals are receivedbefore March 1, 1989.Jubilee states that the proposed offshore pipeline route would parallel,in part, an existing pipeline right-of-way. The pipeline has been designedto minimize the crossing of offshore shipping lanes to the extent possible,and avoids wetland areas, oyster reefs, shell beds, and artificial reefs.The onshore segment, for most of its length, would also be adjacent toan existing pipeline right-of-way. Land use would not be significantlyaffected, and no heavily populated areas would be disturbed by the proposedpipeline or related facilities. The only adverse effects of the project,Jubilee asserts, would be insignificant and of limited duration, occurringduring the construction of the proposed facilities.Jubilee proposes to finance the proposed facilities with one hundred percentof equity contributions from its owners. Although Jubilee proposes to financethe project totally with equity contributions, its proposed rates assumea capitalization ratio of 40% debt and 60% equity for the initial threeyears of operation of the facilities.Jubilee also requests a blanket certificate, under andSection; 284.221, ofthe Commission's Regulations, authorizing it, on a self-implementing basis,to transport gas from one or more receipt points offshore to the proposedinterconnections with the facilities of CIPCO and Transco in Mobile County,for possible further transportation.Jubilee states it received a number of requests for information concerningtransportation services. Jubilee states it has provided and is in the processof providing such information as well as furnishing precedent agreementsto those potential shippers indicating a desire for such. Jubilee advisesthat it has received several executed agreements and that it is maintaininga log of all requests received.In order to provide all potential shippers an opportunity to obtain initialtransportation services, Jubilee is proposing, for a period of 30 daysfollowing publication of this notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (Request Period), to accept requests for bothfirm and interruptible transportation services. Jubilee states that itwill file all executed precedent agreements as a supplement to ExhibitI to this application, shortly after the end of the Request Period.For shippers requiring downstream transportation services, Jubilee anticipatesthat any applications required for authorization to render such servicesfor these shippers would be filed with the Commision. At Docket No. CP87-415-001,CIPCO has filed for downstream transportation authorization for a numberof shippers.In an attempt to accommodate both the Commission's existing (18 CFR 284.221,<T3>et seq</T3>.) as well as its proposed policies (see Notice of ProposedRulemaking issued on April 1, 1988 in Docket No. RM88-15-000) for offshoretransportation services and to incorporate a pro rata allocation of capacityto the extent equitable and administratively feasible, Jubilee is proposinga modified pro rata allocation program. As to firm service, Jubilee proposesto allocate capacity on a pro rata basis if the total of firm requestsreceived during a thirty-day open season period exceeds Jubilee's capacity.Shippers requesting firm transportation services subsequent to the openseason period would, however, be allocated on a pro rata basis among allshippers with unsatisfied requests on Jubilee's log at the time any suchcapacity is released. As to interruptible transportation services, Jubileeis proposing to allocate capacity on a pro rata basis, based on daily volumesscheduled by Jubilee at the request of shippers.Jubilee states that its proposed tariff is designed to generally reflectthe Commission's current policies regarding the rendering of transportationservices on a nondiscriminatory basis.The maximum rates being proposed for firm transportation service underRate Schedule FT consist of three charges: (1) A Reservation Charge, (2)a Commodity Charge, and (3) an Overrun Charge. The Reservation Charge,Jubilee states, is designed to recover all fixed costs associated withproviding the firm transportation service including fixed operation andmaintenance expense, return, income taxes, and taxes other than income.Jubilee is proposing a Commodity Charge designed to recover all variablecosts, including the cost of compression facilities and depreciation expensewhich are proposed to be computed and recognized on a unit of throughputbasis. In addition, Jubilee is proposing an Overrun Charge designed tobe equal to the IT Commodity Charge for quantities received from a shipperin excess of its maximum contract quantity for any receipt point.The maximum rate being proposed for interruptible transportation serviceunder Rate Schedule IT consists of a Commodity Charge designed to recoverall fixed and variable costs associated with providing the interruptibletransportation service.Under both the FT and IT Rate Schedules, a shipper is also required toreimburse Jubilee for any incidental charges incurred by Jubilee in connectionwith providing the transportation service. The proposed initial rates arebased on the average costs of service and throughput for the first threeyears of operation following construction.Jubilee is proposing, at its sole discretion, to charge any Shipper fortransportation service, under either Rate Schedule FT or IT, a rate whichis lower than the applicable maximum rates described above, provided thatthe total rate charged will not be less than the minimum rate which isdesigned to recover the variable cost associated with such service. Jubileerequests approval of its proposed minimum rates. Jubilee states this rateflexibility would allow Jubilee to respond to changing economic conditionsthat may exist from time to time.Jubilee also requests a blanket certificate pursuant to Section 157.204of the Commission's Regulations, authorizing the construction, operation,and abandonment of facilities, as well as other minor transactions eligiblethereunder. Jubilee states that such a certificate would allow it, amongother things, to make minor alterations and additions to its facilitieswith a minimum of delay, in order to connect its system to additional suppliersor to interconnect with the systems of other pipeline companies holdingblanket transportation certificates under andSection; 284.221.Jubilee states that the Mobile Bay Area is expected to prove a significantsource of long-term domestic gas supplies in the near future. Jubilee'sproposed pipeline would provide facilities to move a portion of this gasonshore, thus allowing the country's major interstate pipeline systemsaccess to such supplies. Jubilee asserts that the pipeline represents acrucial segment of the transportation network necessary for the ultimatedistribution of this gas to markets throughout the country.Comment date: September 16, 1988, in accordance with Standard ParagraphF at the end of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">Standard Paragraphs</ITAG>F. Any person desiring to be heard or make any protest with reference tosaid filing should on or before the comment date file with the FederalEnergy Regulatory Commission, 825 North Capitol Street NE., Washington,DC 20426, a motion to intervene or a protest in accordance with the requirementsof the Commission's Rules of Practice and Procedure (18 CFR 385.211 and385.214) and the Regulations under the Natural Gas Act (18 CFR 157.10).All protests filed with the Commission will be considered by it in determiningthe appropriate action to be taken but will not serve to make the protestantsparties to the proceeding. Any person wishing to become a party to a proceedingor to participate as a party in any hearing therein must file a motionto intervene in accordance with the Commisson's Rules.Take further notice that, pursuant to the authority contained in and subjectto jurisdiction conferred upon the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionby sections 7 and 15 of the Natural Gas Act and the Commission's Rulesof Practice and Procedure, a hearing will be held without further noticebefore the Commission or its designee on this filing if no motion to interveneis filed within the time required herein, if the Commission on its ownreview of the matter finds that a grant of the certificate is requiredby the public convenience and necessity. If a motion for leave to interveneis timely filed, or if the Commission on its own motion believes that aformal hearing is required, further notice of such hearing will be dulygiven.Under the procedure herein provided for, unless otherwise advised, it willbe unnecessary for the applicant to appear or be represented at the hearing.G. Any person or the Commission's staff may, within 45 days after the issuanceof the instant notice by the Commission, file pursuant to Rule 214 of theCommission's Procedural Rules (18 CFR 385.214) a motion to intervene ornotice of intervention and pursuant to andSection; 157.205 of the Regulationsunder the Natural Gas Act (18 CFR 157.205) a protest to the request. Ifno protest is filed within the time allowed therefor, the proposed activityshall be deemed to be authorized effective the day after the time allowedfor filing a protest. If a protest is filed and not withdrawn within 30days after the time allowed for filing a protest, the instant request shallbe treated as an application for authorization pursuant to section 7 ofthe Natural Gas Act.<ITAG tagnum="6">Lois D. Cashell,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-19931 Filed 8-31-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING 6717-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>