<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88808-0079 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-08-88.f2.A1078</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Social Security Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Statement of Organization, Functions and Delegations of Authority</ITAG>Part S of the Statement of Organization, Functions and Delegations of Authorityfor the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) covers the SocialSecurity Administration (SSA). Notice is given that Part S, as publishedin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on January 8, 1986, is being amended to reflectchanges in the organizational designations and functional responsibilitiesfor the Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA). Accordingly, Chapter S isbeing amended to show the reorganization of OHA.The revisions are as follows:Section S.20 <T3>The Social Security Administration</T3>_(Functions):Chapter S3G <T3>The Office of Hearings and Appeals</T3>.Delete:Section SG.00 <T3>The Office of Hearings and Appeals</T3>_(Mission): in its entirety.Section SG.10 <T3>The Office of Hearings and Appeals</T3>_(Organization): in its entirety.Section SG.20 <T3>The Office of Hearings and Appeals</T3>_(Functions): in its entirety.Add:Section S3G.00 <T3>The Office of Hearings and Appeals</T3>_(Mission):The Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA), under direct delegation fromthe Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, administersthe nationwide hearings and appeals program for the Social Security Administration(SSA). The Office of Hearings and Appeals issues the final decision ofthe Secretary on highly complex appealed determinations involving retirement,survivors, disability, health insurance, black lung, and supplemental securityincome benefits. OHA provides the basic mechanisms through which individualsand organizations dissatisfied with determinations affecting their rightsto and amounts of benefits or their participation in programs under theSocial Security Act may administratively appeal these determinations inan impartial and unbiased forum in accordance with the requirements ofthe Administrative Procedure and Social Security Acts. OHA includes a nationwidefield organization staffed with Administrative Law Judges (ALJs) who conductimpartial hearings and make decisions on appeals filed by claimants, attorneys,providers-of-service institutions and others under the Social SecurityAct. The Appeals Council of OHA impartially reviews ALJ decisions, eitheron the Appeals Council's own motion or at the request of the claimant,and renders the Secretary's final decision when review is taken. OHA reviewsnew court cases to determine whether the case should be defended on therecord or the Secretary should seek voluntary remand, and reviews finalcourt decisions in light of the programmatic and administrative implicationsinvolved and makes recommendations as to whether appeal should be sought.Provides advice and recommendations on Social Security Administration programpolicy and related matters, including proposed Social Security Rulings.Section S3G.10 <T3>The Office of Hearings and Appeals</T3>_(Organization): The Officeof Hearings and Appeals, under the leadership of the Associate Commissionerfor Hearings and Appeals, includes:A. The Associate Commissioner for Hearings and Appeals (S3GA).B. The Deputy Associate Commissioner for Hearings and Appeals (S3GA).C. The Immediate Office of the Associate Commissioner for Hearings andAppeals (S3GA) which includes:1. The Executive Secretariat (S3GA1).2. The Special Counsel Staff (S3G4).D. The Office of the Chief Administrative Law Judge (S3GJ).1. The Division of Field Operations and Liaison (S3GJ1).2. The Division of Field Practices and Procedures (S3GJ2).3. The Vocational Expert and Medical Advisor Staff (S3GJ4).E. The Offices of the Regional Chief Administrative Law Judges (S3G-FX_S3G-F9).F. The Office of Appellate Operations (S3GC), which includes the ExecutiveDirector, the Appeals Council and its members, and a Deputy Director forOperations. Units within the Office of Appellate Operations include: 1. The Operations Management, Analysis and Coordination Staff (S3GC3).2. The Administrative Support Staff. (S3GC4).3. The Retirement and Survivors Insurance, Health Insurance and SupplementalSecurity Income Staff (S3GC5).4. Program Review Branch 1 (S3GC6).5. Program Review Branch 2 (S3GC7).6. Program Review Branch 3(S3GC8).7. Program Review Branch 4 (S3GC9).8. Program Review Branch 5 (S3GC11).9. Program Review Branch 6 (S3GC12).10. Program Review Branch 7 (S3GC13).11. Program Review Branch 8 (S3GC14).12. Program Review Branch 9 (S3GC15).13. Program Review Branch 10 (S3GC16).14. Program Review Branch 11 (S3GC17).15. Program Review Branch 12 (S3GC18).16. Program Review Branch 13 (S3GC19).17. Program Review Branch 14 (S3GC21).18. Program Review Branch 15 (S3GC22).19. Program Review Branch 16 (S3GC23).G. The Office of Civil Actions (S3GL). 1. The Division of Litigation Analysis and Coordination (S3GL1).2. Division I (S3GL2).3. Division II (S3GL3).4. Division III (S3GL4).5. Division IV (S3GL5).6. Division V (S3GL6).H. The Office of Management (S3GQ).1. The Operational Planning and Analysis Staff (S3GQ3).2. The Equal Opportunity Staff (S3GQ4).3. The Division of Congressional and Public Inquiries (S3GQ5).4. The Division of Budget and Financial Management (S3GQ6).5. The Division of Human Resources (S3GQ7).6. The Division of Materiel Resources (S3GQ8).7. The Division of Systems Resources (S3GQ9).I. The Office of Policy, Planning and Evaluation (S3GP).7. The Division of Planning and Education (S3GP). 2. The Division of Policy (S3GP5).Section S3G.20. <T3>The Office of Hearings and Appeals_</T3>(Functions):A. The Associate Commissioner of Hearings and Appeals (S3GA) is directlyresponsible to the Commissioner of Social Security for carrying out OHA'smission of holding hearings and rendering decisions on appeals filed underTitles II, XVI, and XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended, and TitleIV of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, as amended.The Associate Commissioner is a principal SSA executive and serves as advisorand consultant to the Commissioner of Social Security, the Deputy Commissionerfor Programs, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services on the fullrange of SSA policies, concerns and activities relating to the hearingsand appeals process, including current and proposed legislation which directlyor indirectly affects that process. The Associate Commissioner is responsiblefor planning, directing, managing, coordinating, and maintaining the integrityof the nationwide SSA hearings and appeals system by directing the planning,development, and promulgation of regulations, policies, and proceduresgoverning the hearings and appeals program of the Social Security Administration.The Associate Commissioner is responsible for maintaining a hearings andappeals system which is impartial and which supports the tenets of fairnessand equal treatment under the law. The Associate Commissioner providesexecutive leadership to, and administrative and management support functionsfor, the field organization which holds hearings and renders decisionsunder the Social Security Act. As Chair of the Appeals Council, the AssociateCommissioner is responsible for the decisions issued at the final administrativelevel of the Social Security Administration. Following Appeals Councilaction, dissatisfied claimants or organizations may file civil actionsin the United States District Courts. As Chair of the Appeals Council,the Associate Commissioner directs and coordinates the program for reviewingdecisions issued by Administrative Law Judges under the Social SecurityAct. The Associate Commissioner monitors decisions rendered in the courtsand provides recommendations as to appeal and/or interpretations for useby SSA in policymaking. The Associate Commissioner provides executive leadershipand direction to the major components of OHA by establishing specific objectives,standards, and management and program policies with respect to the organizationalresponsibilities of these components.B. The Deputy Associate Commissioner for Hearings and Appeals (S3GA) isan alter ego to the Associate Commissioner. As such the Deputy AssociateCommissioner shares responsibility with the Associate Commissioner forthe operations of the Office of Hearings and Appeals. The Deputy AssociateCommissioner assists the Associate Commissioner in carrying out his/herOHA-wide responsibilities and performs other duties as the Associate Commissionermay prescribe.C. The Immediate Office of the Associate Commissioner for Hearings andAppeals (S3GA) assists the Associate Commissioner and the Deputy AssociateCommissioner by providing a full range of staff services to assist themin carrying out their duties.1. The Executive Secretariat (S3GA1) maintains liaison and coordinationbetween the Office of the Associate Commissioner and major OHA components.Communicates the objectives, priorities and standards of the AssociateCommissioner to individuals charged with preparing official OHA correspondenceand/or publications, and ensures that communications signed or approvedby the Associate Commissioner are consistent with those standards and objectives.Reviews and analyzes memoranda and other communications directed to theAssociate Commissioner for adequacy of coordination and clearances, clarityand conciseness of presentation, timeliness, necessary follow-through,consistency with stated policy and other elements of completed staff work.Assigns responsibility for action on requests made by or to the AssociateCommissioner and monitors the status of assigned projects and tasks. Preparesand/or coordinates the preparation of briefing material for meetings attendedby the Associate Commissioner. Attends meetings held by the Associate Commissionerto record decisions and action requests and follows through to ensure theyare implemented. Provides guidance to OHA executive staff in the area ofcommunications. Through regularly printed communications distributed toOHA employees in the field and at headquarters, plans, develops, and administersa comprehensive communications network designed to provide general informationabout OHA activities to employees; to promote favorable attitudes towardsthe agency by OHA employees; and to highlight SSA/OHA's policies, programs,or procedural requirements. Improves OHA's overall image with the publicby writing or editing articles, publications, speeches, or news releasesthat are definitive expressions and/or explanations of the agency's policies,programs, or procedural requirements. Plans and directs the developmentof internal communications policies, techniques and practices for use throughoutOHA.2. The Special Counsel Staff (S3GA4) serves as professional legal advisorto the Associate Commissioner, OHA, and to other members of the OHA executivestaff on all matters pertaining to the legislative process, labor relationslaw, ethics and administrative law, with special emphasis on the AdministrativeProcedure Act. Provides advice and recommendations regarding problem areaswhich have far-reaching implications to SSA in general and to the hearingsand appeals process in particular. Develops trial strategies and supervisesthe presentation of cases involving court and administrative hearings whichraise unique, precedential or novel issues. Responsible for preparing andtrying administrative hearings in disciplinary proceedings against AdministrativeLaw Judges before the Merit Systems Protection Board. Responsible for attorneysanction matters for the Office of Hearings and Appeals. Represents OHAin liaison activities with Congress, the American Bar Association, theAdministrative Conference of the United States, and other governmentalorganizations, with special emphasis on pending, proposed, and prospectivelegislation pertaining to the Administrative Procedure Act. Provides recommendationsfor modification of prospective legislation which could adversely affectthe hearings and appeals process. Serves as technical advisor to the Departmentof Health and Human Services (DHHS) representatives on the AdministrativeConference of the United States. Conducts studies in the field of administrativelaw and of the more complex problems arising in the hearings and appealsprocess and provides recommendations as to improvements as a result ofthese studies. Reviews regulations and procedures for legality and conformityto SSA/OHA policy. Acts as ethics officer for OHA headquarters. Conductsor coordinates investigations of allegations of misconduct, waste, fraudor abuse by OHA employees in the field and at headquaters.D. The Office of the Chief Administrative Law Judge (S3GJ) serves as theprincipal consultant and advisor to the Associate Commissioner on all mattersconcerning the Adminstrative Law Judge (ALJ) hearing function. Under theexecutive leadership of the Associate Commissioner, the Chief AdministrativeLaw Judge manages and administers a hearings organization consisting of132 hearing offices and 10 regional offices nationwide. Plans, directsmanages, coordinates and evaluates for the Associate Commissioner, thenationwide hearings process of the Social Security Administration. In coordinationwith the Director of Management, is responsible for staffing and otherresources needed to achieve organizational objectives. With the assistanceof seven Regional Chief Administrative Law Judges (RCALJs), oversees thehearings process conducted by OHA's ALJs, who conduct hearings and renderdecisions in cases in which claimants disagree with reconsidered and reviseddeterminations issued under the provisions of the Social Security Act.These determinations involve claims for retirement, survivors, disability,health insurance, and supplemental security income benefits under TitleII, XVI and XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended, including claimsby hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, and independent laboratoriesseeking certification or continued certification under the Social SecurityAct, and disability and survivors insurance benefits under Title IV ofthe Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, as amended. The ChiefAdministrative Law Judge formulates and develops broad policies and objectivesand establishes program goals for OHA's ALJ corps. The Chief AdministrativeLaw Judge has primary responsibility for maintaining effective channelsof communication between the Associate Commissioner and the RCALJs andthe ALJ corps. The Chief Administrative Law Judge maintains a continuousreview of all aspects of OHA field operations, and implements improvementswhere needed. Responsible for developing and maintaining the proceduresfor effective operation of the hearings process. Directs a professionalstaff engaged in providing liaision services to field personnel with respectto implementing substantive policy, program and procedural matters; providesmanagement oversight for all administrative and managerial functions involvedin the day-to-day operations of field activities; coordinates hearing officeactivities; and conducts liaison with other government and private agencieson issues falling within the Office's area of responsibility.1. The Division of Field Operations and Liaison (S3GJ1) serves as liaisonfor the field with all headquarters components, and provides advice, guidance,and counsel to field units in all areas of identified needs. Serves asthe field's main point of contact with OHA headquarters. Through telephone,mail, and on-site contact with field personnel, maintains an indepth knowledgeof regional and hearing office operations. Keeps abreast of field problemsin the respective areas of program, administration, management, and operations;develops alternative remedies or solutions to these problems, and makesappropriate recommendations to responsible components. Assists the ChiefAdministrative Law Judge in setting field office objectives to meet themanagement and operations goals established by the Associate Commissioner,the Chief Administrative Law Judge or other OHA management officials. Reviewsfield requests for allocation of resources, including staffing, equipment,training, and travel. Analyzes resource needs and ensures resource allocationto the regions according to OHA's Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) allocationsystem. Responsible for day-to-day monitoring of field operations, includingproblem identification and resolution, assessment of progress in meetingthe established goals of SSA/OHA, compliance with established policiesand procedures, etc. Prepares briefing reports for top management and agendasfor major field conferences. Tracks implementation of initiatives arisingfrom national and regional field conferences. Identifies the need for specialstudies or management reviews related to field operations. Represents thefield on ongoing or ad hoc workgroups, task forces, etc.2. The Division of Field Practices and Procedures (S3GJ2) formulates, develops,and oversees field practices and procedures governing the conduct of thehearing process and other program operations issues in response to theAssociate Commissioner, the Chief Administrative Law Judge, or other OHAmanagement officials, as well as a result of court orders and /or changesin the law and regulations. Coordinates with the Division of Field Operationsand Liaison in developing and maintaining a system for communicating fieldpractices and procedures through such means as operational manuals, handbooks,or instructional notices. On an ongoing basis reviews and, when necessary,revises existing field practices and procedures. Reviews and recommendsrevisions to forms and notices related to the hearings process. Reviewsand comments on a wide variety of policies and procedures prepared by componentsboth within and outside of OHA. Provides recommendations on policies and/orprocedures which may effect the field, assessing the appropriateness, claritypracticability, comprehensiveness, and the probable effect of such on fieldoperations, workloads, and staffing. Maintains an ongoing liaison withOHA, SSA, Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), and Office of GeneralCounsel (OGC) components regarding the hearings process and field needs.E. Each Office of the Regional Chief Administrative Law Judge (S3G-FX-S3G-F9)acts on behalf of the Associate Commissioner and the Chief AdministrativeLaw Judge at the respective regional levels on all matters involving thehearings process, and is directly reponsible for the effective executionof the hearings process within the region. Provides direction, leadership,management and guidance to the regional office staff and to the hearingoffices in the region, including Administrative Law Judges (ALJs) and theirstaffs. Responsible for the regional implementation of national policies,goals, objectives, and procedures pertaining to the hearings process, andformulates policies, goals, and objectives for the ALJs and support staffin the region. Plans, organizes and administers regional programs for schedulingand conducting independent and impartial hearings on appealed determinationsinvolving claims for retirement, survivors, disability and health insurancebenefits; supplemental security income; and black lung benefits. Developsand recommends OHA action with respect to allegations of unfair hearingswithin the region. Responsible for evaluating the effectiveness of regionaland hearing office management, including workload, personnel, and overallresource management; and executing and making critical evaluations andnecessary revisions of applicable regional objectives, policies, practices,and procedures. Reviews hearing practices and procedures to detect trends,training needs, and operational problems. Investigates allegations of improperALJ conduct, and makes recommendations as to necessary corrective action.Responsible for the acquisition and distribution of human and materielresources within the region; directs the preparation of the regional budget;and justifies the fiscal requirements needed to carry out the hearingsprogram within the region. Coordinates operation and administrative activitieswith DHHS regional offices, other SSA regional components, State Agencies,and others, as necessary. Establishes a program to maintain ongoing communicationwith congressional offices on issues of mutual interest and ensures timelyand accurate responses to congressional inquiries. Ensures that court remandsare processed efficiently within the region, and coordinates with the Officeof the Chief Counsel in the region to foster OHA compliance with courtrequirements. Directs regional activities to ensure effective consultationand communication between the field and headquarters to enhance the effectivenessof hearing office operations. Serves as an expert advisor on substantiveissues within the region, and upon request by ALJs, provides advice andguidance in matters relating to adjudicating cases under the provisionsof the Social Security Act, as amended. Reviews and analyzes fee petitionsfrom attorneys and representatives of claimants for the provision of servicesat the hearing level, and authorizes payment of fees in those cases wherethe fees are beyond the authority of a hearing office Administrative LawJudge. F. The Office of Appellate Operations (S3GC) consists of the Appeals Counciland its support staff. In accordance with a direct delegation of authorityfrom the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Appeals Council isthe final level of administrative review under the Administrative ProcedureAct for claims filed under Titles II, XVI, and XVIII of the Social SecurityAct, as amended, and Title IV of the Federal Coal Mine Health and SafetyAct of 1969, as amended. The Director of the Office of Appellate Operationsis responsible for the day-to-day operations of a program of administrativereview of ALJ decisions issued under the provisions of the Social SecurityAct. Upon claimant request or on the Appeals Council's own motion, theOffice of Appellate Operations reviews ALJ decisions and dismissals involvingclaims for benefits filed under Titles II and XVI of the Social SecurityAct, as amended, health insurance cases under Title XVIII of the Act, includingclaims for individual enrollment to participate under Parts A and/or Bof Title XVIII and claims by hospitals, skilled nursing facilities andindependent laboratories seeking certification or continued certificationunder the Act, and claims under Title IV of the Federal Coal Mine Healthand Safety Act of 1969, as amended, to determine if jurisdiction exists,and, if so, takes appropriate action. The Office of Appellate Operationsprepares documents to implement such actions while analyzing the appealsprocess to identify problem areas. The Appeals Council identifies caseswhich represent broad policy matters or have national impact and acts toresolve the issues in such cases, establishing binding adjudicatory standardsand decisional principles that govern OHA's adjudicatory process. The AppealsCouncil identifies and recommends appropriate improvements in the appealsprocess. The Appeals Council, through its Members, participates in ALJconferences, training programs, visits to hearing offices, and public relationsactivities designed to improve the hearings and appeals process. The Directorof the Office of Appellate Operations is a member of the OHA ExecutiveStaff and, as such, is a key advisor to the Associate Commissioner on programoperations matters, adjudicative trends at both the administrative appealslevel and the court level, and related OHA functions. In conjunction withother Executive Staff members, the Director provides leadership in thedevelopment and implementation of new or revised adjudicatory policies,procedures, and evidentiary and decisional techniques. Participates withother OHA Executive Staff members in considering broad aspects of programpolicy, in formulating long-range policies and guidelines for the administrationof the hearings and appeals program, and in the establishing an OHA positionon broad matters of operational, administrative, program and legislativeplanning. The Director of the Office of Appellate Operations maintainsliaison with the Offices of the U.S. Attorneys and the Office of the GeneralCounsel, including its Chief Counsels in the regions, to ensure their understandingof the hearings and appeals operating functions and procedures. The Directoralso maintains close liaison with OHA regional offices to promote a uniforminterpretation and implementation of OHA, SSA and DHHS program policies.To assure high quality and uniformity in case adjudication and overallcase processing, the Office of Appellate Operations conducts ongoing reviewsand evaluations of the substantive aspects of Appeals Council actions andthose of its support staff, and recommends corrective actions where appropriate.1. The Operations Management, Analysis and Coordination Staff (S3GC3) providesa comprehensive program of management analysis and evaluative servicesto assist the Appeals Council Members in adjudicating cases, to assistthe Director of the Office of Appellate Operations, and to assist the supportstaff of the Appeals Council in performing their program review function.Maintains an effective system of written instructions and prepares newprocedures consistent with changes in the law and regulations and statementsof SSA/OHA policy. Analyzes proposed procedural and administrative changesin the appeals process. Conducts a quality review program and, based onthe results of the progam, recommends corrective action and training. 2. The Administrative Support Staff (S3GC4) under the direction of theDeputy Director for Operations of the Office of Appellate Operations, providessupport services to Appeals Council Members, including maintenance of filesreceived in OHA headquarters, reconstruction of lost claim files and receivingand analyzing fee petitions. 3. The Retirement and Survivors Insurance, Health Insurance and SupplementalSecurity Income Staff (S3GC5) serves as support staff for the Appeals Councilin reviewing ALJ decicions and dismissals involving claims to establishentitlement to retirement and survivors insurance benefits; claims to establishdependency status under Title II of the Act; non-disability Title XVI cases;and health insurance cases under Title XVIII of the Act, including claimsfor individual enrollment to participate under Parts A and/or B of TitleXVIII and claims by hospitals, skilled nursing facilities and independentlaboratories seeking certification or continued certification under theAct. Advises the Appeals Council on all matters relating to entitlementto benefits under the Social Security Act, as amended, for retirement andsurvivors insurance benefits, non-disability Title XVI claims, and healthinsurance claims, and supports the Appeals Council in all phases of itsreview function as the final step in the administrative appeals process.Acting on behalf of the Appeals Council, the staff undertakes necessarydevelopment and responds to such administrative matters as requests foran extension of time to submit additional evidence, requests for copiesof exhibits from the claim file and requests for a copy of the hearingcassette or transcript of the hearing. Following an analysis of the recordand any additional evidence and/or argument submitted, and applying a thoroughknowledge of applicable case law, the staff examines hearing decisionsand other final actions of the Administrative Law Judge, and requests forAppeals Council review, and makes recommendations to the Appeals CouncilMember as to what action should be taken on cases pending before the Council.The staff recommendations include: (a) Whether own motion review shouldbe taken or review granted and (b) the appropriate course of action ifjurisdiction is assumed, including issuing a decision, dismissal, or remandof the case to an Administrative Law Judge. The staff initiates implementingaction on behalf of the Appeals Council Members, including drafting comprehensivedecisions and orders.4. The Program Review Branches (S3GC6- S3GC23) serve as support staff forthe Appeals Council in reviewing ALJ decisions and dismissals involvingclaims for benefits filed under Titles II and XVI of the Social SecurityAct, as amended, and Title IV of the Federal Coal Mine Health and SafetyAct of 1969, as amended. The Program Review Branches advise the AppealsCouncil on all matters relating to entitlement to benefits under the applicableprovisions of the Social Security Act and Title IV of the Federal CoalMine Health and Safety Act, and support the Appeals Council in all phasesof its review function as the final step in the administrative appealsprocess. Acting on behalf of the Appeals Council, the staff in the programreview branches undertake necessary development and respond to such administrativematters as requests for an extension of time to submit additional evidenceor to file a civil action, requests for copies of exhibits from the claimfile, and requests for a copy of the hearing cassette or transcript ofthe hearing. Following an analysis of the record and any additional evidenceand/or argument submitted, and applying a thorough knowledge of applicablecase law, the staff in the program review branches examine hearing decisionsand other final actions of the Administrative Law Judges, and requestsfor Appeals Council review, and make recommendations to the Appeals CouncilMembers as to what action should be taken on cases pending before the Council.The staff recommendations include: (a) Whether own motion review shouldbe taken or review granted and (b) the appropriate course of action ifjurisdiction is assumed, including issuing a decision, dismissal, or remandof the case to an Administrative Law Judge. The Program Review Branchesinitiate implementing action on behalf of the Appeals Council Members,including drafting comprehensive decisions and orders.G. The Office of Civil Actions (S3GL) is headed by a Director who is alsoa Member of the Appeals Council, and is responsible for OHA action on casesin which a civil suit has been filed, including new court case review,acting on requests for voluntary remand, and recommending whether appealshould be sought when an adverse decision has been made by a federal court.Serves as lead OHA component responsible for formulating, implementing,and evaluating the Associate Commissioner's litigation management strategy,and is the focal point for representing that strategy to other SSA, DHHS,and Department of Justice components. Provides professional and technicaladvice to the Associate Commissioner, the Appeals Council, the Chief AdministrativeLaw Judge and other OHA officials in all litigated cases involving claimsfor benefits filed under Titles II, XVI and XVIII of the Social SecurityAct, as amended, and Title IV of the Federal Coal Mine Health and SafetyAct of 1969, as amended; claims to establish dependency status under TitleII of the Act; claims for individual enrollment to participate under PartsA and/or B of Title XVIII of the Act; and claims by hospitals, skillednursing facilities and independent laboratories seeking certification orcontinued certification under the Social Security Act. Develops and issuesinstructions for implementing class action court orders and precedentialcourt decisions. Tracks and analyzes court case trends and disseminatesinformation to guide adjudicators with respect to case law, to implementan effective appeals strategy, and to identify areas and make recommendationsas to policies which need to be developed and/or clarified, new regulationsneed to be developed, or clarifying legislation should be sought.1. The Division of Litigation Analysis and Implementation (S3GL1), workingwith other OHA components, develops and implements an appeals strategywhich identifies the issues and types of cases which OHA believes shouldbe appealed. Captures court trend information for dissemination to othercomponents to assist in formulating the agency's litigation strategy andin improving adjudication. Develops and maintains a compendium of circuitcourt case law with systems-based access. Tracks pending class actions,forecasts potential workload impact, and makes recommendations to workloadcomponents regarding workload impact. Uses court trend information to identifyand make appropriate recommendations with respect to areas in which policiesneed to be developed and/or clarified, new regulations need to be developed,or clarifying legislation should be sought. Prepares and updates significantcourt case requirements used in reviewing court cases. Uses court trendinformation to identify areas where additional training is needed or othermeasures are needed to improve defensibility. Advises the Associate Commissioner,the Chief Administrative Law Judge, and other OHA officials, as appropriate,of significant cases and trends, and of litigation issues which may requirerevision of operating instructions, and assists with the preparation ofinstructions. Coordinates OHA's views on proposed Social Security AcquiescenceRulings. In response to OHA-identified cases, and to requests for appealsrecommendations from the Litigation Staff, Office of the Deputy Commissionerfor Programs, obtains the views of affected OHA components and formulatesan OHA position on appeal. Maintains liaison with the Office of GeneralCounsel (OGC) and the Litigation Staffs of the Office of the Deputy Commissionerfor Programs and the Office of Disability to coordinate class action implementation.In coordination with the Office of the Chief Administrative Law Judge andother OHA components, develops instructions for OHA implementation of classaction orders. Monitors class action implementation within OHA. Servesas a focal point for questions from OHA adjudicators concerning class actionorders. Acts as contact point for OGC and Litigation Staff (SSA) requestsfor information regarding OHA's procedures, statistics, and other informationwith respect to OHA operations requested in the course of litigation. CoordinatesOHA's response to discovery requests, including maintaining a central fileof information disclosed. Administers and coordinates the Freedom of InformationAct and Privacy Act provisions for OHA. Develops and maintains internaloperating procedures for the Office of Civil Actions.2. Divisions I-V (S3GL2-S3GL6) provide professional and technical adviceto the Associate Commissioner, the Director of the Office of Civil Actions,other Members of the Appeals Council, and other OHA officials in all litigatedcases involving claims for benefits filed under Titles II, XVI and XVIIIof the Social Security Act, as amended, and Title IV of the Federal CoalMine Health and Safety Act of 1969, as amended; claims to establish dependencystatus under Title II of the Act; claims for individual enrollment to participateunder Parts A and/or B of Title XVIII of the Act; and claims by hospitals,skilled nursing facilities and independent laboratories seeking certificationor continued certification under the Social Security Act. Analyze and recommendaction on cases referred by the Office of General Counsel (OGC) for considerationof whether remand should be requested on the Secretary's motion. Withinpublished guidelines, recommend to OGC defense on the record of certainlitigated cases if further administrative action is not warranted. Analyzeand recommend action on cases remanded by the courts. As appropriate, conductdefensibility review of decisions issued by ALJs. Prepare remand orders,affidavits, and related correspondence on behalf of the Director and otherAppeals Council Members, and, as necessary, prepare comprehensive decisionsfor the Director and other Members of the Appeals Council in civil actioncases.3. The Program Support Staff (S3GL7) provides translation services fordocuments to be entered into the certified record, and performs necessarytranslation services in support of the Office of Appellate Operations.Provides reprographics services in preparation of the official answer tocivil actions filed against the Secretary of DHHS under Titles II, XVI,and XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended, and Title IV of the FederalCoal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, as amended. Manages equipment,personnel and facilities necessary to ensure timely provision of reprographicservices. Performs audit functions for hearing transcripts returned fromprivate contractor. Provides mail distribution services to the operatingdivision of the Office of Civil Actions and prepares sequential filingof all certified transcripts. Purges court transcripts as scheduled andoversees teletype system to receive notification of suit.H. The Office of Management (S3GQ) provides administrative support to theAssociate Commissioner for all management related activities for OHA. Coordinateswith the Chief Administrative Law Judge with respect to management supportfunctions which affect field operations. Has direct line authority forall management and administrative support functions for the headquartersand field components of the Office of Hearings and Appeals, including 10regional offices and 132 hearing offices nationwide. Is directly responsiblefor the formulation and interpretation of goals, objectives, and policiesgoverning the development and implementation of OHA's resource supportprograms. Plans, directs and administers a comprehensive human resourcedevelopment and utilization program to enable OHA to carry out its programmaticfunctions. Provides personnel administration and management services toOHA headquarters and field employees. Develops and administers an OHA-wideprogram to identify training needs; develops mechanisms to meet identifiedtraining needs; and assesses the effectiveness of the OHA training programin meeting the training needs of managers, supervisors and employees. Directsthe policy development and implementation of a comprehensive budget formulationand financial management program to include formulation and execution ofbudget requirements and controls in the areas of resource management, workmeasurement and workload forecasting; administrative cost allocation; costbenefit analysis; pay and travel; and position ceiling control and contractservices. Provides administrative support services to enable OHA to carryout its nationwide programmatic and operational functions. Executes thefull range of policies and activities relating to the resource operationsof OHA. Responsible for space and property management and planning, includingmaintenance of space and equipment and procurement of supplies and othermateriel which supports the hearings and appeals process. Plans, developsand administers a program of systems support and data base management forthe design and programming of OHA's ADP systems and OHA's management informationand statistical reporting activities. Develops and maintains operationalplanning systems, including analysis of management reports, and formulatesmanagement plans, objectives, and priorities for OHA. Coordinates and integratesthe management programs and administrative planning initiatives of OHAinto the long-range goals and objectives of SSA and DHHS. Monitors OHA'sprogress toward meeting established agency goals and makes recommendationsfor needed adjustments to enable OHA to meet these goals. Plans, directs,and implements an equal employment opportunity program within OHA. Plans,directs, administers, and evaluates the congressional and public inquiriesactivities for OHA.1. The Operational Planning and Analysis Staff (S3GQ3) provides supportto the Director of Management and to the Office of the Associate Commissionerfor OHA's operational planning activities. Provides advice and recommendationsto the executive management staff of OHA in the formulation of programand administrative plans. Analyzes management reports submitted by OHAheadquarters and field components to assess progress in accomplishing SSA/OHAgoals and objectives, prepares recommendations for meeting those goalsand objectives, and prepares periodic reports of OHA accomplishments. Formulatesa planning system for OHA, and coordinates and integrates the management,program, and administrative planning initiatives into the goals and objectivesof SSA and DHHS. Analyzes plans submitted by OHA headquarters components,provides guidance and recommendations for improvements in the plans submitted,and recommends Associate Commissioner approval or disapproval of the plans.Develops, implements and maintains continuing responsibility for the AssociateCommissioner's management review system. Provides oversight and coordinationof the collection and distribution of management information reports andprovides advice and guidance to management staff for streamlining OHA'smanagement reports system. Assesses the effectiveness of OHA's internalcontrols in preventing integrity problems and, as appropriate, recommendsways of strengthening these controls or improving integrity monitoringof susceptible processes.2. The Equal Opportunity Staff (S3GQ4) is responsible for OHA's equal opportunityprogram. Plans, develops, implements, and monitors OHA's affirmative actionprogram, and administers the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) complaintprocess for OHA headquarters. Provides guidance for and monitoring of OHAregional EEO programs. Attempts to resolve informal complaints of discriminationmade by OHA employees, and evaluates issues in complaints after Departmentalinvestigation. Provides recommendations to SSA's Office of Civil Rightsand Equal Opportunity with respect to the development of equal opportunitypolicies and procedures, and ensures that OHA's EEO policies, procedures,standards and guidelines are consistent with SSA's standards.3. The Division of Congressional and Public Inquiries (S3GQ5) formulatespolicies, procedures, and guidelines for use in responding to high prioritycorrespondence from the public and congressional offices. Coordinates withother OHA components to obtain information needed to respond to congressionaland public inquiries, and prepares and reviews OHA responses to congressionaland public inquiries. Evaluates correspondence for conformance with OHAand SSA standards, policies and procedures, and for determining necessaryaction. Serves as the correspondence liaison staff with the Commissioner'sOffice, the Office of Public Inquiries, and other SSA and DHHS components.The Division of Budget and Financial Management (S3GQ6) plans, developsand coordinates OHA's budget and financial management programs, advisingthe Director of Management and/or the Associate Commissioner of the financialimpact of all decisions which affect OHA. Advises OHA officials on allbudget decisions which may affect the program and administrative operationsof the agency. Formulates, justifies and presents OHA's annual and multi-yearbudget submissions. Controls the collection, recording, and reporting ofall financial data in connection with the budget formulation and executionfunctions. Provides technical and policy guidance to OHA officials in headquartersand the field on the formulation and presentation phases of the budgetprocess. Reviews and analyzes budget requests submitted by OHA componentsand formulates OHA's financial operating plans and budget projections.Responsible for presenting OHA's budget submissions and the justificationsfor these submissions to SSA officials, and for the assessment of and responseto SSA's reviews of these submissions. Administers cost allocation functionsof the budget process. Works with SSA budget officials to obtain the resourcesnecessary to meet OHA goals and objectives. Develops all necessary applicationsfor generating budget data and financial management reports. Responsiblefor the execution of OHA's budget. Executes and administers a financialmanagement system, integrating resource management controls in the followngareas: workload forecasting; work measurement and productivity; employmentceiling control; cost benefit analysis; administrative cost allocation;payroll and travel; and fiscal operations. Provides technical and policyguidance to regional offices and headquarters components on the executionof OHA's budget. Monitors workload projections for budget execution andcontrol purposes, and monitors and controls employment and fiscal resourcesbased on analyses of work measurement, productivity, cost benefit, andresource utilization. Ensures that employment ceilings and obligationsand expenditures of funds are in conformance with authorized allotmentsand allowances. Performs periodic reviews of budget execution and financialmanagement practices in OHA offices. Maintains liaison with SSA to integrateOHA's financial management system with the financial management systemat SSA. Administers the travel and payroll function for all OHA headquarterscomponents and ALJs nationwide. 5. The Division of Human Resources (S3GQ7) plans, develops and administersOHA's human resources management program, including recruitment and placement;position management; classification; pay administration; employee awards;organizational management; labor management and employee relations. Providesadvice to the Director of Management and/or the Associate Commissioneron all matters related to the utilization of OHA's human resources. Isthe principal advisor to the Director of Management and the Associate Commissioneron OHA's delegations of administrative authority. Effectuates the AssociateCommissioner's decisions with respect to delegations of authority. Preparesand maintains documentation with respect to the organizational structureof OHA. Conducts classification and organizational surveys and studies,and develops responses to classification appeals. Administers OHA's positionclassification and organization management programs in a way that ensuresthat organization and/or position proposals may by OHA are within establishedOPM, DHHS, SA, and OHA goals and objectives. Secures and maintains personnelrecords for all ALJs and headquarters employees. Develops and reviews qualificationstandards for OHA positions. Maintains and oversees position descriptionsfor OHA, including writing and/or assisting in the preparation of positiondescriptions; reviewing OHA position descriptions to determine correcttitle, series and grade; and recommending corrective action where necessary.Exercises appointment authority for headquarters positions, and acts onbehalf of the Associate Commissioner to recruit and appoint ALJs in mannerconsistent with DHHS/SSA/OPM policies and procedures. Evaluates the effectivenessof OHA's personnel management functions and activities and prepares recommendationsfor the resolution of personnel management and employee relations issues.Administers OHA's flextime program to ensure compliance with government-wideregulations and OHA policy. Develops and sets national policy for field-interactionwith the National Treasury Employees Union (NTEU) regarding labor relations,and administers the American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE)National Agreement. Outlines and disseminates to OHA headquarters and fieldcomponents general policies for disciplinary and adverse actions, reprimands,etc. Prepares recommendations as to arbitration of employee and contractgrievances. Administers OHA's human resource development and training programsto ensure their educational validity, timeliness and appropriateness. Participateswith other OHA components in planning, scheduling and preparing materialsfor training OHA headquarters and field staff. Locates appropriate sourcesfor outside training or consultant services for internal programs to resolveOHA training needs. Counsels employees on career development opportunities,including staff development, executive development and other developmentprograms. Coordinates with other OHA officials in the preparation of on-the-jobtraining and provides support for orientation training needs of vocationaland medical consultants. Coordinates training activities with SSA headquartersand regional components.6. The Division of Material Resources (S3GQ8) plans, directs and providesadministrative support services in the areas of space planning and management;forms and records management; property management; equipment control andmaintenance; graphic arts; safety and self-protection, including emergencyplanning; security; procurement and supply; laboring services; mail andmessenger services; motor vehicle operations; communications systems management;and library reference. Organizes, controls and coordinates procurementand property management activities, including development of specificationsand requisitions for procurement of property, inspections of property ownedor leased by the U.S. Government, and property accountability. Maintainsliaison with other government officials and private concerns to obtainthe latest available information and advice on current trends and developmentin facilities planning and management. Coordinates administrative supportservices provided to OHA by SSA, DHHS, OPM, GSA, and other agencies, includingsuch services as building maintenance, alterations, and inventory management.Develops and administers a comprehensive space management program for theassignment and utilization of offices in OHA. Plans, directs, and coordinatesthe acquisition and installation of a communications network system forOHA. Provides advice and assistance to OHA officials regarding alterations,renovations, repairs, etc. Assures contractual completion of all work requestedfor headquarters components. Identifies and maintains property and equipmentmanagement requirements, including storing and securing supplies and equipment;identifying the need for maintenance, repair, or replacement of equipment;and maintaining catalogs, brochures and sources of technical data to ensurethat OHA's current and future supply requirements are met. Revises procurementprocedures as necessary to ensure that the supply needs of OHA field andheadquarters components are met. Administers an occupational health andsafety program in compliance with established health and safety concepts,regulations, standards and procedures. Administers security programs andinspections, and coordinates with local law enforcement officials to ensureprotection of OHA property and personnel. 7. The Division of Systems Resources (S3GQ9) is the focal point for allOHA systems-related activities. Provides office automation and data processingsupport to all OHA components. Develops OHA's long-range systems goalsand objectives. Provides computer programming and systems support for theplanning, design, development, and implementation of all OHA ADP systems.Serves as liaison with the Office of Systems, SSA, on all matters pertainingto systems, and ensures that OHA systems efforts are undertaken, that projectsunderway are carried out successfully, and that OHA participates fullyin the SSA systems strategy. Ensures that OHA systems-related projectsare integrated within SSA's Systems Modernization Plan, and analyzes theimpact of SSA's Claims Modernization Program upon OHA programs and processes.Maintains an indepth knowledge of SSA system development activities andadvises the Director of Management of changing plans and strategies withrespect to systems. Prepares data for the OHA ADP/TC budget submission,and evaluates OHA user requests for ADP services. Ensures that OHA systemsmeet user needs and management information requirements, and resolves automationproblems of systems users. Responsible for the OHA Case Control System,including the integrity of the management information resulting from thatsystem. Maintains management plans for all automation projects. Developsplans, strategies and user data requirements to respond to OHA's automationneeds. Develops proposed automation initiatives in response to user needsand new legislative requirements. Develops and maintains the systems configurationmanagement plan and strategy. Monitors OHA's Information Technology Services(ITS) procurements through the SSA procurement cycle and ensures that theyprogress through critical processing points. Provides policy and operationalguidance in the development of long and short-range systems planning. IdentifiesOHA training needs with respect to systems activities, and coordinateswith responsible OHA/SSA components to ensure that these needs are met.Responsible for the logical and physical structure of all OHA databases,including the establishment and maintenance of the OHA Data Dictionary,coordination with SSA Database Administrators, and mapping OHA databasedesigns against the OHA strategic plan. In compliance with the PrivacyAct, ensures that necessary documentation is published for OHA ADP systemschanges. Responsible for the security, maintenance and integrity of theADP equipment inventory. Identifies the functions, policies and relatedpersonnel needs to support and manage word/data processing and telecommunicationssystems. Provides technical support for the nationwide OHA telecommunicationsnetwork, and ensures efficient and effective implementation and operationof the various telecommunications networks used by OHA and of the telecommunicationshost. Develops, implements and maintains applications systems for OHA.I. The Office of Policy, Planning and Evaluation (S3GP) plans, analyzesand develops OHA-wide policy for the hearings, appeals and civil actionsprocesses. Manages the overall OHA policy communications system. Responsiblefor OHA activity with respect to Social Security regulations, includingdeveloping the regulations governing OHA processes and developing an OHAposition with respect to program regulations proposed by SSA components.Monitors OHA's implementation of program regulations governing the hearingsand appeals process. Plans and conducts a comprehensive OHA-wide evaluationprogram designed to support OHA policy and regulatory initiatives and measurethe overall effectiveness of the nationwide hearings and appeals process.Provides advice and guidance throughout OHA on matters involving programpolicies, planning, and evaluation. Coordinates policy, planning and evaluationmatters within OHA, with other SSA components, and with Health Care FinancingAdministration (HCFA), Office of General Counsel (OGC), and other Departmentof Health and Human Services (DHHS) components, other Federal agenciesand private organizations. Responsible for SSA policy with respect to claimantrepresentation and the fees charged for these services. Develops and coordinatesprogram training in conjuction with appropriate OHA, SSA, HCFA, DHHS, andOGC components. 1. The Division of Planning and Evaluation (S3GP1) plans, develops, coordinates,and conducts a comprehensive OHA-wide program of studies and analyses ofthe application of, and compliance with, SSA and OHA policies and proceduresin all phases of OHA's hearings and appeals processes and the quality ofresults achieved. Provides advice and assistance to other OHA componentsin designing and implementing appropriate systems and procedures for collecting,recording, analyzing and evaluating data pertinent to assessing the qualityof work emanating from the hearings and appeals processes. Conducts studiesof policy implementation within OHA. Conducts special studies and analysesof claims processes that impact on the quality, quantity and timelinessof the hearings and appeals process or OHA workloads to develop OHA recommendationsfor SSA policy and procedural changes or other corrective managerial initiatives.Identifies problem areas and deficiencies in policies, policy application,methods and procedures, and recommends corrective action. Develops techniquesand systems for conducting evaluations of the substantive and technicalaspects of claims processing throughout OHA. Designs and conducts a varietyof program evaluation studies and analyses in support of OHA program policyand administrative initiatives. Develops long-range program related plansfor OHA. Responsible for strategic planning for OHA, including managingimplementation of strategic initiatives and coordinating OHA action oninitiatives for simplifying the appeals process, for exploring the feasibilityof two-way video hearings, for modernized information architecture, forelectronic storage and retrieval of evidentiary materials, and for exploringthe applicability of expert systems for OHA, including full implementationof available automated processes. Designs and conducts various programintegrity studies and analyses of OHA processes and operations to ensurethat OHA programs, policies and practices are consistent with the higheststandards of integrity and equity. Analyses the results of OHA's evaluationsystems to determine deviations from statutory, regulatory, policy, orprocedural requirements and/or from established administrative qualitystandards. Assesses the compatibility of operating results with programphilosophy and objectives, and recommends corrective action to programmanagers and other OHA officials. 2. The Division of Policy (S3GP2) is responsible for policy matters relatedto the hearings and appeals process and for SSA program-related policymatters for the Office of Hearings and Appeals. Plans, develops, and coordinatesthe preparation of regulations, policies, and guidelines for the hearings,appeals and claimant representation processes under Titles II, XVI, andXVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended, and under Title IV of theFederal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, as amended. Ensures thatoperating procedures and instructions developed to implement the hearingsand appeals process conform with national SSA and OHA policy. Providesadvisory services, consultation, and staff assistance to other componentsof OHA. Maintains an effective system for communicating policy positionsthrough program guides and directives and informational notices necessaryfor an effective hearings and appeals process. Develops and maintains publications,informational materials, references and forms on the hearings, appeals,claimant representation and civil actions processes. Maintains ongoingliaison with SSA, HCFA, DHHS, OGC and others with respect to program, legislative,and policy matters. Develops and coordinates benefit program policy andregulatory activity for OHA. Responds to inquiries on OHA program policymatters. Reviews, coordinates, develops and comments on program regulations,rulings, and other program instructions emanating from SSA, DHHS and otheradministrative law bodies that may influence or impact on OHA policy areas.Reviews current and developing trends in administrative law and litigation;analyzes and prepares policy recommendations; and develops long-range andshort-range plans for hearings and appeals policy matters and OHA's implementationof benefit program policy matters. Develops and coordinates program trainingin conjunction with other OHA components and SSA, HCFA, DHHS and OGC programcomponents.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: July 19, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Dorcas R. Hardy, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Commissioner of Social Security. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-17780 Filed 8-5-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4190-11-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>