<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88922-0079 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-22-88.f2.A1078</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement Program </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Closing date: November 21, 1988. </ITAG>Copies of the program announcement and guidelines for the Instrumentationand Laboratory Improvement Program are available from the Forms and PublicationsUnit, National Science Foundation, 1800 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20550;(202/357-7452), request publication NSF 88-90. The program announcementcontains all information and forms needed for submission of proposals.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Program Description </ITAG>A. Purpose and Scope Undergraduate instruction is a vital element in the preparation of ourNation's future scientists and engineers, teachers, leaders in businessand government and technically literate citizens. Students in undergraduatescience, engineering and mathematics courses_majors and non-majors alike_musthave laboratory and/or field experiences with suitable, up-to-date equipmentin order to become involved in the work that is at the heart of scientificprogress and understanding. The goal of NSF's Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement program (ILI)is to improve the quality of the undergraduate curriculum by supportingprojects to develop new or improved instrument-based undergraduate laboratorycourses in science, mathematics or engineering. (Whenever the word ``laboratory''is used in this document, it is intended to include all laboratory-likeactivities for undergraduates that involve active student participation,whether conducted in a laboratory, in the field, in an observatory, orin some other suitable instructional setting.) ILI provides matching supportfor the instrumentation necessary to implement undergraduate instructionalimprovements at U.S. two-year and four-year colleges and universities.ILI proposals are evaluated and funded collaboratively by NSF's educationand research directorates. In this way, ILI is fully integrated into theongoing research and education activities of the Foundation. The specific objectives of ILI are to encourage and support the: andbullet; Introduction of modern instruments to improve the education ofundergraduate students in science, mathematics and engineering courses,laboratories, and field work; andbullet; Interfacing of computers with scientific instrumentation and otherappropriate uses of current technology in science, mathematics and engineeringinstruction; andbullet; Development of new ways for using instrumentation to extend instructionalcapabilities; and andbullet; Establishment of equipment-sharing capability via consortia orcenters. The strategy underlying the highly competitive nature of the Instrumentationand Laboratory Improvement program is to produce projects that will: andbullet; Set standards for instrumentation and its instructional use againstwhich other institutions can measure their own performance; standards whichthey will strive to equal or exceed; andbullet; Yield products such as laboratory manuals, scholarly publications,etc., thus serving a common good as well as bringing local improvement.The Program supports well-focused projects which will result in a clearimprovement in the quality of undergraduate education. This may be doneby providing for: andbullet; Acquisition of new, often state-of-the-art instructional scientificequipment; andbullet; Upgrading of obsolete or unreliable equipment with current modelsthat significantly improve instructional capabilities. Because the objective of the program is to improve the quality of instruction,projects based primarily on financial need or increased enrollments arenot appropriate. Projects are expected to involve activities which go wellbeyond the basic level of support that the institution itself must providein order to maintain a viable teaching program. ILI seeks proposals that request funds for instuctional scientific equipment.A maximum of $100,000 may be requested from NSF; grantee institutions mustprovide an equal or greater matching contribution. (See the requirementsfor matching funds below.) The minimum grant request to ILI is $5,000 inNSF funds.Grants in support of ILI activities routinely are made for a period of30 months. It is expected that the requested equipent will be acquiredduring this time.Presentation of the results of successful projects at professional meetingsor in appropriate journals is highly encouraged in order that institutionsother than the grantees also may benefit from ILI projects.Although the categories of awards just described are expected to includethe majority of projects supported through ILI, additional ideas and mechanismswill be considered by NSF.B. Eligibility Criteria and Limitations<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Eligible Institutions</ITAG>Proposals to the Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement program willbe accepted from:a. All two-year colleges, four-year colleges, and universities in the UnitedStates or its territories;b. Any formally organized consortium of institutions which has an establishedcentral office and an approved fiscal management capability. Proposalsfrom informal consortia of institutions are not eligible.Proposals from a consortium should be submitted only in those instanceswhen several institutions propose to make joint use of a single major piece(or an assemblage of closely related pieces) of equipment.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Eligible Fields</ITAG>The Foundation will consider proposals for support of projects in:andbullet; Any field of science, mathematics and engineering ordinarily supportedby the National Science Foundation, including the mathematical, physicaland biological sciences, the social sciences, computer science, and engineering.andbullet; Interdisciplinary fields composed of overlapping areas of twoor more eligible sciences.andbullet; Multiple disciplines_as distinct from interdisciplinary fields.Multidisciplinary proposals should be submitted only in instances whereseveral departments propose to make joint use of a single major piece ofequipment, or an assemblage of closely related pieces of equipment. Departmentsare advised not to combine individual proposals in order to submit themin the multidisciplinary category; each department should submit its ownproposal unless equipment is to be shared.Specifically excluded from ILI support are:andbullet; Projects addressed to clinical fields associated with the sciences,such as medicine, nursing, clinical psychology and physical education,and those which primarily involve social work, home economics, or the artsand humanities <T3>EXCEPT THAT</T3> projects involving fundamental scientific, mathematical,or engineering concepts within technical, professional or pre-professionalprograms are fully eligible. (The degree to which these latter projectsare competitive will depend upon the quality and currency of the sciencewhich is to be taught.)<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Eligible Departments and Individuals</ITAG>andbullet; All science, mathematics and engineering departments in an eligibleinstitution may participate in the ILI competition. ILI no longer imposesthe constraint of ``one proposal per department'' that previously applied.andbullet; NSF's College Science Instrumentation Program.andbullet; Each principal investigator may submit only one ILI proposal perclosing date. While one or more coprincipal investigators may be named,one specific individual must be identified on the cover sheet as <T3>the </T3>principal investigator.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Eligible Activities</ITAG>Although ILI proposals are encouraged for the improvement of formal coursesand laboratories traditionally associated with undergraduate instructionfor science, mathematics or engineering majors, in particular, creativeimprovements to introductory-level courses are needed. Examples of otherequally welcome activities include:andbullet; Projects aimed at acquainting nonscience majors with the principlesand methods of science, mathematics and engineering, or with the impactof science and technology on society;andbullet; Projects concerned with the undergraduate science education ofprospective teachers that emphasize science content or teaching methodsespecially relevant to the sciences;andbullet; Projects that involve fundamental scientific, mathematical orengineering concepts within technical, professional or pre-professionalprograms;andbullet; Projects to improve undergraduate honors programs, student researchand independent study. (See also the program announcements for ResearchExperiences for Undergraduates, NSF 88-28, and Research in UndergraduateInstitutions, NSF 85-59).Projects involving women, minorities, and/or disabled persons as part ofthe staff or as target audiences are especially encouraged, particularlyif they represent models for increasing the numbers of qualified youngpeople in these groups who may decide to choose careers in mathematics,science, and engineering.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Eligible Equipment</ITAG>The types of equipment eligible for inclusion in an ILI proposal are listedunder the section ``Detailed Budget''.The primary use of each of the equipment items to be acquired must be tobenefit of undergraduate science, mathematics and/or engineering instruction.Items may serve additional purposes in the department at those times whenthey are not being used for undergraduate instruction, but these ancillaryuses neither form nor augment the justification required for ILI funding.<ITAG tagnum="81">6. Ineligible Items</ITAG>Neither NSF funds nor institutional matching funds may be used to purchaseany of the ineligible items listed below:andbullet; Teaching Aids (e.g., films, slides, projectors, ``drill and practice''software), word-processing equipment, library reference materials, or expendables(e.g., glassware, chemicals);andbullet; Faculty research instrumentation;andbullet; Laboratory furnishings or general utility items such as officeequipment, benches, tables, desks, chairs, storage cases, routine suppliesand general consumables;andbullet; Maintenance or service contracts_even when these are for equipmentprocured through the ILI program;andbullet; Salaries, honoraria, consulting fees, travel, etc.;andbullet; Institutional indirect costs or overhead;andbullet; Costs of installation, building or laboratory modification, orconstruction; and,andbullet; A flat percentage inflation allowance.<ITAG tagnum="81">7. Eligible Project Size</ITAG>As noted previously, no proposal may request more than $100,000 from NSF;project costs in excess of $200,000 must be funded by overmatching. Proposalsrequesting less than $5,000 from NSF (for a total minimum project costof $10,000) are not eligible.C. Requirements for Matching FundsProspective ILI grantees must agree to provide matching funds in an amountequal to or greater than the funds provided by the Foundation. The proposalbudget must detail all expenditures for the project as a whole_that is,for the combined total of requested NSF funds and the institution's funds.Matching funds must be from non-Federal sources. Funds from an ILI grant,or the institutional matching contribution to it, may not be counted asan institutional contribution to another Federally supported project. Ifa grantee receives a gift of equipment from non-Federal sources that isidentical or equivalent to items listed in the project's approved budget,the cash value of such gifts may be counted as institutional matching funds.So also may specifically negotiated ``deep discounts'' from vendors.An institution may obligate its matching funds or receive gifts to be countedtoward matching at any time following the closing date under which theawarded proposal was submitted, but before the grant expiration date specifiedin the grant document. This normally provides a period of nearly threeyears during which the institution must fulfill the agreement to matchNSF funds. To count as matching, these funds must be used specificallyfor the equipment listed in the project's approved budget (or its equivalent).<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Preparation and Submission of Proposals</ITAG>A. General InformationThis announcement sets forth basic information needed to initiate planningfor proposal submission. Proposers must also consult the publication Grantsfor Research and Education in Science and Engineering (GRESE) (NSF 83-57rev. 11/87), for additional guidance. This publication is available fromthe Forms and Publications Unit, National Science Foundation, 1800 G StreetNW., Washington, DC 20550; (202/357-7452). ILI proposers must use the formscontained in the program announcement, not those in GRESE.Except as modified by the guidelines set forth in this announcement, standardNSF guidelines on proposal preparation, submission, evaluation, NSF awards(general information and highlights), declinations and withdrawals containedin GRESE are applicable.More comprehensive information is contained in the NSF Grant Policy Manual,Revised, (NSF 77-47) available for purchase at $12.00 from the Superintendentof Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402. The GrantPolicy Manual ordinarily is not needed in the process of preparing an ILIproposal.In the event that the submitting organization has never been the recipientof an NSF award, however, it is recommended that appropriate administrativeofficials become familiar with the NSF policies and procedures containedin the NSF Grant Policy Manual, Revised, which are applicable to most NSFawards. (If a proposal from such an institution is recommended for an award,the NSF Division of Grants and Contracts will request certain organizational,management, and financial information. These requirements are containedin Chapter III of the Manual.)B. Proposal PreparationA successful proposal must outline the way in which the planned projectwill improve the present program of undergraduate science, mathematicsor engineering instruction. Each proposal should demonstrate that:andbullet; The plan is a logical step to take at this time toward developingthe academic program in question;andbullet; Informed, realistic planning already has taken place;andbullet; The faculty are competent to carry out the project; andandbullet; Provision of the requested equipment will make possible full implementationof the improvements proposed.The equipment requested must be appropriate for the project's objectives.Since the Foundation aims to support projects with maximum potential forcontinuing impact, each proposal should show how the equipment fits intothe department's current holdings and give a clear outline of the institution'splans for the extended care and maintenance of the equipment.C. Proposal FormatA proposal to ILI consists of the following parts:<ITAG tagnum="15">1. Cover Sheet</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">2. Project Summary Form</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">3. Detailed Budget (Equipment List)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">4. Narrative (Limited to 12 double-spaced pages)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">5. Appendices</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">1. Cover Sheet</ITAG>The first page of the proposal will be the cover sheet prepared in theform found in the ILI announcement and guidelines. The announcement (NSF88-90) is available from Forms and Publications Unit, National ScienceFoundation, 1800 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20550; (202/357-7452). Thisform should be duplicated and completed. It must bear the signatures ofthe proposed principal investigator and of an administrative official whois empowered to commit the proposing organization to the conduct and prudentmanagement of the project if NSF agrees to support it.It is important that the cover sheet be completed with the full informationrequested. Most of the items are self-explanatory. Note that:andbullet; Social security numbers are used by the Foundation to monitorand facilitate the receipt and processing of numerous proposals, as wellas to maintain award data. The number is solicited pursuant to the generalauthority of the Foundation under the NSF Act of 1950, as amended. However,submission of social security numbers is voluntary and refusal to disclosea social security number will not affect any proposal's eligibility foran award.andbullet; If funds for this project are being requested from another Federalagency or another NSF program, this must be indicated in the upper righthand section of the cover sheet. If they are not being so requested atthe time of proposal submission, but are requested subsequently (priorto the Foundation's anticipated ILI announcement date), a letter so statingshould be sent at that time to the ILI office. This letter should identifythe proposal by its NSF number.  andbullet; Only one copy of form 1225, Information about Prinicipal Investigators,which provides data on sex, ethnic origin, and handicap is to be submitted.It should be attached to the signature copy of the proposal cover sheet.While providing the requested data is voluntary, SUBMITTING <T3>THIS FORM </T3>IS REQUIRED BY NSF. OMISSION OF THIS FORM WILL CAUSECONSIDERABLE DELAY IN PROCESSING THE PROPOSAL. Any individual not wishingto submit the information should check the box provided for this purpose.Data will be treated as confidential, and will be maintained in securedata files in accordance with the Privacy Act of 1974. The informationcontained in this form will be available only to the NSF staff and willnot be used in the external merit review process. All analyses conductedon the data will report aggregate statistical findings only and will notidentify individuals.  <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Project Summary Form  </ITAG>The second page of the proposal will be the project summary form, whichshould follow the cover sheet. The information provided on this form isused by the program staff for a variety of purposes, including the properassignment of proposals to reviewers. Name of institution and project titlemust be written exactly as given on the cover sheet. Please enter the datarequested in the boxes according to the instructions on the back of theform. The information is needed in the indicated format to provide directinput to the NSF data collection system.  The Summary of Proposed Work should be a concise description of the project(not of the prosposal), limited to 22 pica or 18 elite lines. It shouldbe single spaced. The summary should tell briefly the aim of the project,the major instruments which will be purchased, in what applications theywill be used, and why the project is significant. Considerable care shouldbe taken when writing the Summary. The Summary is the reviewers' firstimpression of the project's merit. If the project is supported, the Summarywill be published by the Foundation to inform the general public aboutits programs. Accordingly, it should be written so that a scientificallyliterate lay person can understand the use of Federal funds in supportof the project.  <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Detailed Budget  </ITAG>The third page of the proposal will be the budget prepared according, tothe format found in the program announcement. This is a complete, detailedlist of anticipicated equipment acquisitions showing list and discountedunit prices and discounted totals. The budget must be limited to the followingcategories, with a subtotal shown for each:  <ITAG tagnum="15">a. Scientific Equipment  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">b. Computing Tools  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">c. Construction of Equipment  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">d. Safety Equipment  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">e. Maintenance Equipment  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">f. Shipping Costs  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">g. Required taxes  </ITAG>Guidelines for the assignment of eligible items to the seven budget categoriesfollow. Each item or functional unit of equipment must have a minimum unitacquisition cost of $500 (list) and a life expectancy of more than twoyears. (The specifics of a functional unit are discussed in note (ii),immediately following the seven budget categories.) Note that these guidelinesand restrictions apply to equipment purchased with institutional matchingfunds as well as to that brought with NSF funds.  a. Scientific Equipment_to be used in any phase of undergraduate science,mathematics and/or engineering education.  b. Computing Tools_computers, peripherals, software or equipment that providesremote access to central computing systems. The equipment must be for usein specific curricular improvments; for example, interfacing with scientificinstruments to assist student data acquisition and interpretation, or teachingcomputer science. Software essential to the scientific and educationalobjectives of the project is permitted. Each software package must be itemized,justified, and the cost indicated. Software ordered in conjunction withnew computing equipment is regarded as part of a functional unit and, accordingly,need not cost $500 in order to be eligible.  c. Equipment Fabrication_including materials and labor. Sufficient jutificationmust accompany requests for equipment construction funds, such as a detailedexplanation of the advantages of the proposed unts over commercially availableitems. Requests for equipment fabrication must be supported by drawings,diagrams, parts lists and estimates for labor charges, as appropriate.Any use of project funds (NSF of institutional matching monies) for themodification or construction of laboratories or other buildings, or forthe installation of equipment, is specifically prohibited.  d. Safety Equipment_such as fire control devices, fume hoods, etc., maybe purchased under this program where necessary for the safe utilizationof the equipment requested in the above categories.  e. Maintenance Equipment_unique items specifically required for calibration,repair and maintenance of the scientific equipment itemized in the categoriesa., b., and c. above. If such items are part of a ``package'' offered bythe vendor at a comprehensive price, they may be folded into the basicitem of equipment.  f. Shipping Costs_reasonable estimates should be used, as opposed to aflat percentage.  g. State Taxes_required taxes may be included if the institution cannotbe exempted from paying them.  Following the total amount of project costs, list the actual dollar amountrequested from NSF. The amount requested from the National Science Foundationmay not exceed 50% of the total budget, or $100,000, and may not be lessthan $5,000. <ITAG tagnum="81">Please note:</ITAG>(i) It is important that reviewers be able to recognize the function ofrequested equipment. Therefore, the detailed budget should list all individualitems by a descriptive name, and the probable brand, model, and price.(Such selections may be changed after an award.) Each category should besubdivided by function or by course so as to correspond as closely as possibleto the narrative which is to follow. Each item should be lettered to beconsistent with the categories above, and to facilitate reference to andfrom the justification presented in the narrative.(ii) Budget items may be either single items meeting the minimum list costrequirement ($500), or part(s) of a functional unit where the sum of thecomponents meets the minimum cost requirement. A functional unit is anassemblage of instruments, modules, and components which together performa specific task and which, once assembled, ordinarily will be kept togetheras a unit. Examples of functional units would be an oscilloscope with appropriateprobes, or a recording infrared spectrophotometer with a demountable cellassembly and appropriate windows, or a computer and software needed forit to achieve the curricular goals for which it is being purchased. A combinationof independent instruments needed for some specific experiment or for asingle laboratory station would not meet the definition of functional unit.Each component of a functional unit must be itemized and the cost indicated;the subtotal for the entire unit should be entered as the unit cost (atleast $500).(iii) Many equipment manufacturers routinely offer educational or institutionaldiscounts. In preparing the ILI budget, manufacturers or distributors shouldbe contacted in order to obtain discounted prices. On the budget page,the list price should be shown, the standard educational discount notedand subtracted, and the discounted price used to compute the total costof the project.If the proposer is able to negotiate on an individual basis a special discountnot routinely available to educational institutions, the usual discountedselling price should be listed in the project's budget. The amount by whichthe special discount exceeds the standard educational discount may be countedas matching funds.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Narrative</ITAG>The narrative presents most of the information that determines whetheror not a grant will be awarded. Proposals should be written to respondto criteria to be used by reviewers in judging the merit of the proposal.(See Proposal Evaluation)The narrative must focus on one coherent project which would improve undergraduateinstruction in a definite way. The narrative must show how the requestedequipment is necessary for the project, and how the various pieces of equipmentwill be used together to implement it. A proposal seeking support for severalunrelated projects or for a list of equipment that is to be used in unrelatedways is not appropriate.The narrative section must not exceed 12 double-spaced pages. Pages mustbe numbered. Reviewers will not be responsible for reading additional narrativepages. Information applicable in more than one place may be referred toby page and paragraph. Appended information should be restricted to thoseappendices required in Section 5 below and to tabular presentations ofitems required to supplement the narrative. The use of tabular form forreporting details in encouraged. Such information should be cross-referencedto the appropriate portions of the narrative.The narrative should conform to the following outline:<ITAG tagnum="15">a. The Present Situation</ITAG>This section should first present information about the institution andthe department, and then should discuss the perceived deficiency that isto be addressed. It should open with a discussion of the institutionalcontext: a brief description of the institution, the students it serves,the department, and the intended student clientele for the project beingproposed. It also should discuss the curriculum of which the courses whichwill be served by the project are a part. (It cannot be assumed that thereviewers are acquainted with the institution and its science, mathematicsor engineering programs.) Catalog descriptions of specific courses affectedshould be included in Appendix IV.Second, this section should briefly describe the ongoing support from theinstitution to the department in order to answer the question: ``Does thedepartment have adequate resources and equipment to provide a sound programinto which the present project will fit?'' A list of major departmentalequipment holdings should be included as Appendix IV.Finally, this section should present the curricular deficiency which theproject would remedy. It should answer the question: ``What is currentlymissing from the curriculum or is not being done effectively?''b. The Development PlanThis section should answer the question: ``How is the course and/or curriculumto be improved by this project?'' It should contain a detailed descriptionof the specific developments intended. Specific experiments, student projects,or course work that would be conducted with the new equipment must be presentedin terms of the scientific principles or phenomena to be taught, and interms of the teaching methods to be employed. This portion of the narrativemust enable a group of colleagues to judge the suitability of the plannedchange for the intended student audience, in the academic setting discribed.Both the scientific and pedagogical aspects of the proposed project willbe weighed to assess the relative impact on science, mathematics or engineeringeducation that would be realized through the funding of this project.c. Equipment<ITAG tagnum="81">(1) The Equipment Request</ITAG>This section should answer the question: ``Is each item of equipment requestedactually needed to implement this development, is it the right piece ofequipment for the job, and is the request appropriate for the department?''It should consist of some brief indication as to just how each major equipmentitem requested will be used to effect what instructional development. Itshould also include a discussion of why the particular equipment was chosenand what alternatives were considered and rejected, and why. Effort shouldnot be expended in telling reviewers what functions a given piece of equipmentcan perform. The crucial thing is for the proposer to describe just howthe requested equipment is to be used in the instructional plan being proposed.It is the purpose of this part of the proposal to establish the precisecorrelation between the subject-matter developments described in the previoussections and the items of equipment being requested. In the event of agrant, any items regarded as ineligible, not germane or inadequately justifiedwill be deleted from the authorized list of purchases.Logical groupings of items should be made to minimize repetition, witheach entry cross-referenced to the item numbers given in the budget (equipmentlist). Special arguments may be needed to explain requests for apparatusof a quality or cost not usually encountered in undergraduate instruction,equipment which is to be fabricated rather than purchased as a unit, orpurchases which might appear to be at variance with the academic settingin which the project would operate. Such statements must be keyed to developmentsdesired in undergraduate instruction. Therefore, proposers are cautionedagainst providing arguments based on enhancements of graduate-level courses,improvement of faculty research capabilities, or other activities outsidethe scope of ILI. (cf. Research in Undergraduate Institutions Program Announcement,NSF 85-59.)<ITAG tagnum="81">(2) The Equipment on Hand for the Project</ITAG>This section should answer the question: ``Has there been a thorough surveyof the current equipment inventory and does the proposal plan to make fulluse of it?'' It should consist of a list indicating major equipment onhand that will be available for the project, but that is not included inthis request.<ITAG tagnum="81">(3) Equipment Maintenance</ITAG>This section should answer the question: ``Is a reasonable plan presentedto ensure a maximum usable lifetime for the equipment?'' Each proposalshould briefly but clearly outline the institution's plan for extendedcare and maintenance of the equipment.d. Faculty ExpertiseThis section should answer the question: ``Does the department presentlyhave personnel with the expertise needed to complete the project successfully,or is there a firm commitment to make an appropriate hire?'' It shouldcontain enough information about the present faculty of the academic unitseeking support to convince reviewers that the technical expertise to carryout the proposed project will be present. Special attention should be givento the individual named to direct the project. Since the effective accomplishmentof the project's goals depends in large measure on the principal investigator'sknowledge of the discipline, the curriculum, and the equipment, this personmust teach in the academic unit receiving support. A summary of experiencemust indicate that the principal investigator is an appropriate personto direct this particular project.5. AppendicesMaterial that is supplementary to the text of the proposal should be includedin the appendices, and may be single spaced. Each appendix should be printedon colored paper to make it easily distinguishable from the body of theproposal. The following seven appendices, if relevant to the project, arerequired. Their omission can delay processing or impede evaluation.I. Curriculum vitae of the principal investigator (include a list of significantpublications), plus a one-page resumeandCx.174;1 for each faculty associatewho will particpate in the project.II. Statement of current and pending support. All current and pending externally-fundedsupport to the principal investigator and co-principal investigator (ifany), including this proposed project, must be listed on the form foundon page 22. This information is needed to assure that the project leaderswill have time to carry out the project and that there is no duplicationof support.III. Statement of results of prior support. If either the prospective principalinvestigator or the co-principal investigator received support from NSF'sCollege Science Instrumentation Program in 1985, 1986 or 1987, the proposalmust include an Appendix III entitled ``Results from Prior NSF Support''.This appendix must describe the earlier CSIP project and its outcomes insufficient detail to permit a reviewer to reach an informed conclusionregarding the value of the results achieved. The following informationmust be included in this summary statement:andbullet; The NSF award number, amount, and period of support; andbullet; Title of the project;andbullet; A summary of the results of the completed work. (To facilitatereview, this summary should not exceed_for ILI_three double-spaced pages);and andbullet; A list of publications and/or formal presentations acknowledgingthe NSF award (copies of such papers are not to be submitted with the proposal).Appendices IV through VII need provide no more information than shouldbe readily available to a department. Please limit each to a maximum oftwo pages.IV. A list of all major equipment held by the department, whether relevantto the proposed project or not, including model, date of purchase, andapproximate cost. Where this equipment list is too extensive to includein two pages, list only the most expensive and most relevant items. Minoritems of equipment may be listed, if so desired, by categories (e.g., ``12pH meters of various models'').V. A catalog description of each course directly affected by this project,the frequency of offering, approximate enrollment, and whether or not requiredof majors.VI. (Only for projects which are intended for majors.) Summarize the numberof majors graduated each year for the past five years. Provide an estimateof the number of graduates who went on to graduate or professional schools,and the number who went directly into the workforce. Where the informationis available, list graduate schools attended and organizations which hiredsubstantial numbers of graduates.VII. (Only for projects which include a student research component.) Alist of recent talks and papers involving undergraduate students in thedepartment. Identify student authors with an asterisk.Other appropriate appendices might include schematic diagrams of equipment,detailed description of specialized equipment, examples of experiments,etc. It is important that appendices be brief and easy to read. Voluminousappendices cannot be read by reviewers in the time available for proposalevaluation. It is inappropriate to include institutional catalogues, departmentalcurricula, whole laboratory manuals, or other general material.D. Proposal SubmissionProposals must be received in the Foundation by 5:00 p.m. on November 21,1988 to insure inclusion in the competitive review process establishedfor this Program.<ITAG tagnum="81">Materials required:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Fifteen legible copies of the complete proposal; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">One copy of the NSF form, 1225 attached to the signature copy of theproposal only;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Three sets of extra forms, each stapled into a unit and containing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">One copy of the Cover Sheet,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">One copy of the Budget (Equipment List), and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">One copy of the Project Summary Form.</ITAG>These materials should be submitted to: Proposal Processing Unit for Instrumentationand Laboratory Improvement Program, Room 223, National Science Foundation,1800 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20550.The following requirements also must be met:andbullet; All materials submitted to the Foundation must be contained ina single package. Secure packaging is mandatory. The Foundation cannotbe responsible for the processing of proposals damaged in transit;andbullet; Each copy of the proposal should be on standard size paper ofregular weight. It should be stapled only in the upper left corner. Allpages must be numbered. The duplicating process should ensure legibilityfor at least 5 years; andandbullet; One copy must be signed both by the principal investigator andby an administrative official who has been designated as an AuthorizedInstitutional Representative.<ITAG tagnum="81">Do Not:</ITAG>andbullet; Staple the sets of extra cover sheets, project summary forms,and equipment budgets to a proposal; andbullet; Put covers on the proposals; orandbullet; Send separate ``information'' copies or several packages containingparts of a single proposal.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Proposal Evaluation and Award Selection</ITAG>NSF evaluates proposals on the basis of four general criteria:1. Performance competence_This criterion relates to the capability of theinvestigator(s), the technical soundness of the proposed approach, theadequacy of the institutional resources available, and the proposer's recentresearch/science, mathematics or engineering education performance.2. Intrinsic merit_This criterion is used to assess the quality, currency,and significance of the scientific/technical content and related instructionalactivity of the project within the context of undergraduate science, mathematics,and engineering education.3. Utility or relevance of the project_This criterion is used to assessthe impact the project will have at the proposing institution, and theappropriateness of the project in the local context.4. Effect on the infrastructure of science, mathematics and/or engineering_Thiscriterion relates to the potential of the proposed project to contributeto better understanding or to improvement of the quality, distribution,or effectiveness of the Nation's scientific/mathematics/engineering research,education, and human resources base.See page 9 of GRESE for an additional discussion of these criteria.ILI grants are awarded on a competitive basis. In selecting proposals tobe supported, the Foundation is assisted by merit reviewers who are mathematicians,scientists or engineers, drawn primarily from the academic community, andalso from research organizations and professional associations.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Announcement and Administration of Awards</ITAG>andbullet; Decisions will be announced individually through written noticesto the institution and to the principal investigator. Before such noticeis dispatched, the Foundation can give no information concerning the probabilitythat any particular proposal will be supported or declined. Proposers areurged to refrain from making premature inquiries.andbullet; Grants are administered in accordance with the terms and conditionsdescribed in this announcement, the GRESE, and NSF F.L. 200, Grant GeneralConditions, copies of which may be requested from the NSF Forms and PublicationsUnit. More comprehensive information is contained in the NSF Grant PolicyManual (Revised) available through the Superintendent of Documents, GovernmentPrinting Office, Washington, DC 20402.The Foundation strongly encourages publication of research results andinstructional experiments developed. The awardee, however, is wholly responsiblefor the conduct of the project and for preparation of the results for publication.The Foundation does not assume responsibility for project results or theirinterpretation.Within 90 days after the expiration of a grant, the principal investigatoris required to submit a Final Project Report (NSF Form 98A). Final expenditureinformation is supplied by the grantees through the Federal Cash TransactionReport (SF 272), normally submitted by the grantee's financial officer.Annual reports of progress are not required of ILI grantees.If a Principal Investigator (PI) leaves a project before its completion,the grantee institution is expected to explain the circumstances in a letterto the ILI Program Officer named in the grant letter, and to nominate asuitable replacement. This letter should include the nominee's curriculumvitae, and must be signed by both the nominee and by an official authorizedto act for the institution in such matters. The appointment of a new PIis not effective until confirmed by the NSF.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Check List</ITAG>The following checklist of steps in completing an ILI proposal is providedfor the convenience of the proposal writer.A. EligibilityDetermined forandbullet; Departmentandbullet; Field and/or Projectandbullet; EquipmentB. Forms Completedandbullet; Cover Sheet, Project Director's signature on one copy, AuthorizedOrganizational Representative's signature on same copy.andbullet; Form 1225 (Information about Principal and Co/Principal Investigators),submit only one copy, attached to signature copy. Submission of the <T3>form</T3> is required.andbullet; Project Summary Form (Project Summary single-spaced)andbullet; Budget (Equipment List) completed, using the required format.Must contain no item with a unit list cost of under $500 (unless it ispart of a functional unit)Equipment items numbered and categorized Subtotals for categories indicated.Total cost for project indicated. Arithmetic checked for accuracy NSF requestindicated (it may not exceed 50% of total project cost, nor be more than$100,000, nor be less than $5,000)The Principal Investigator must have submitted NSF form 98A, Final Report,for all completed NSF-funded projects.C. Narrative Completedandbullet; All points covered(a) Present situation(b) Development plan(c) Equipment (d) Personnelandbullet; Does not exceed 12 double-spaced, numbered pages D. AppendicesI. Curriculum vitaeII. Statement of current and pending supportIII. Statement of prior support resultsIV. List of departmental equipmentV. Catalog description of courses affectedVI. Information on past graduates (needed if majors are to be affected)VII. Student research papers and talks (needed if the project featuresa student research component)VIII. Other necessary information, if any E. Format Checkedandbullet; Sections in proper orderandbullet; Correct nubmer of copies of proposal and forms includedF. Submissionandbullet; All materials forwarded in a single packageandbullet; Materials submitted in time to reach NSF on or before November21, 1988<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Other Programs</ITAG>The NSF Guide to Programs (NSF 87-57) briefly describes all Foundationprograms, most of which are open to all institutions. It is available atmost institutions or may be obtained at no cost by contacting the Formsand Publications Unit, Room 232, NSF, Washington, DC 20550 (202/357-7861).The ILI Staff often has occasion to provide informal guidance to prospectiveproposers. The following contain the essence of what we most often suggestto inquirers:<T3>What makes a good proposal? </T3>A good proposal starts with a goodidea, and, all other things equal, the better the idea the more likelya proposal is to result in an award. The best proposals are those to whichthe reviewers respond, ``Of course. I wish I had thought of that!'' Whilerelatively few proposals are this striking and original, most begin witha good idea. Translating a good idea into a good ILI proposal requirescareful planning and careful writing. It helps to pay close attention topoints like these:andbullet; Consider first what curricular improvement the project will makeand what science the students will do, and then ask yourself what instrumentationwill be needed. The two clearly interact, but focussing first on the curriculumhelps insure that the instrumentation will take its proper place as themeans for carrying out a significant curricular improvement.andbullet; Read the Guidelines carefully and include the information theyrequest. The Guidelines ask that proposers follow a particular format forthe proposal. More importantly, they are intended as a guide to help writea proposal which will give reviewers and staff enough information to understandfully the quality of the proposed project. The Guidelines ask questionsand raise points which should be addressed in every ILI proposal, whateverits form.andbullet; Ensure that the proposal outlines a project possessing two features:First, it is an excellent way to teach which requires the requested equipmentand, second, it is a clear improvement in the way the students who willuse the equipment are to be taught. The keys here are both excellence andimprovement. Projects which propose to strengthen a program by doing largelywhat everyone else already is doing, or projects which propose to add aninstrument to a program which already is adequately equipped without makingany significant improvement in what is to be taught, are less persuasivethan those which provide both an excellent idea and significant improvement.andbullet; Be explicit about how the equipment will be used to make the curricularimprovement. The narrative must contain specifics. Reviewers want detailsof experiments and applications, both to show that planning has been doneand to help them understand why the particular application you proposeis better than others they see. Providing much detail in the short narrativeILI permits is difficult, but careful writing will allow you to give thereviewers enough for them to gain a sense of exactly what you plan to do,and why that plan is a good one. Remember that the reviewers already knowwhat a particular instrument will do; what they want to read about is theproposer's explicit plan for applying that capability in a way that willsolve a significant difficulty in teaching science, mathematics or engineeringto undergraduates.andbullet; Explain why the instruments chosen are particularly suitable forthe project (and why others_especially less expensive alternatives_wouldnot be equally useful). It often is a good idea to explain briefly whatrange of alternatives were considered and rejected: what simpler instrumentsare not adequate, and perhaps what more sophisticated ones exceed the currentneeds. Reviewers usually are willing to accept a carefully-argued choice.andbullet; Describe why the project proposed is a good way to teach the subject(physics or biology or whatever) to the students who are to be affectedon your campus, and ideally to students in other institutions. (It is quitedesirable, though by no means necessary, that what is done in your ILIproject be of potential interest to faculty and students at other institutions.)andbullet; Mention what work has been done in preparation for the project,and specifically whether attempts have been made to try the proposed workon a small scale, or with less suitable equipment which may already beon hand or available through borrowing. Evidence of preliminary work showsthe reviewers that careful planning has been done, and it may give themsome added confidence that the project is likely to be successful.andbullet; If possible, have someone not connnected with the proposal reada draft and ask questions or suggest clarifications. It's easy to get tooclose to a piece of work and to lose perspective!andbullet; If the proposal is successful, rejoice, make the best possibleuse of the equipment, and then let other scientists who may be interestedin your results learn about them through presentations of publications.If unsuccessful, consider the reviews and NSF staff comments objectively,consult the staff if necessary and, if the feedback does not preclude it,submit a revised or new proposal the next year. Many awards made in CSIP'ssecond and third years were to proposals that were revised thoughtfullyand resubmitted after having been declined initially.The Foundation welcomes proposals on behalf of all qualified scientistsand engineers and strongly encourages women, minorities and disabled personsto compete fully in any of the educational, research and research-relatedprograms described in this document.Facilitation Awards for Handicapped Scientists and Engineers (FAH) providefunding for special assistance or equipment to enable persons with disabilities(investigators and other staff, including student research assistants)to wortk on an NSF project. See the FAH program announcement, or contactthe FAH Coordinator in the Directorate for Scientific, Technological, andInternational Affairs.In accordance with Federal statutes and regulations and NSF policies, noperson on grounds of race, color, age, sex, national origin or disabilityshall be excluded from participating in, denied the benefits of, or besubject to discrimination under any program or activity receiving financialassistance from the National Science Foundation.NSF has TDD (Telephonic Device for the Deaf) capability which enables individualswith hearing impairments to communicate with the Division of Personneland Management for information relating to NSF programs, employment, orfor general information. This number is (202) 375-7492.The Foundation provides awards for research and education in science, mathematicsand engineering. The awardee is wholly responsible for the conduct of suchwork and the preparation of the result for publication. The Fundation,therefore, does not assume the responsibility for such findings or theirinterpretation.Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Numbers:<ITAG tagnum="16">47.041 Engineering</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">47.049 Mathematical and Physical Sciences </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">47.050 Geosciences</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">47.051 Biological, Behavioral and Social Sciences </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">47.053 Scientific, Technological and International Affairs</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">47.070 Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">47.071 Science and Engineering Education</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Animal Welfare</ITAG>If any of the equipment listed in a ILI proposal is likely to be employedin conducting experiments using non-human vertebrate animals or in maintainingsuch animals in captivity, the ``Animal Welfare'' block on the cover sheetmust be checked. In such proposals, the narrative must contain an assurancethat the proposing institution complies with the relevant guidelines issuedby the National Institutes of Health in the <T3>Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals </T3>(NIH Publication85-23, Revised 1985). The particular attention of proposers is directedto ``U.S. Government Principles for the Utilization and Care of VertebrateAnimals Used in Testing, Research and Training,'' to be found in the Appendixof that Guide. Individuals desiring a copy of these Guidelines can obtainone from the Division of Research Services, Building 31, Room 4B59, NationalInstitutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892. (NSF doesnot maintain a supply of this document).The Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement Program (ILI) is an integralpart of NSF's overall plan to strengthen U.S. undergraduate education.In fiscal year 1989, this support extends to instructional instrumentation,research opportunities for undergraduate students, faculty enhancement,and curriculum development in undergraduate calculus and engineering. ILIwill be coordinated by the Office of Undergraduate Science, Engineering,and Mathematics Education (USEME) but proposals will be reviewed collaborativelyand funded throughout NSF.The magnitude of the fiscal year 1989 ILI Program will depend on the qualityof proposals the Foundation receives and the availability of funds.<ITAG tagnum="84">Inquiries</ITAG>Copies of the program announcement and guidelines for the Instrumentationand Laboratory Improvement Program are available from the Forms and PublicationsUnit, National Science Foundation, 1800 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20550;(202/357-7452), request publication NSF 88-90. The program announcementcontains all information and forms needed for submission of proposals.Questions of a general nature not addressed in this publication may bedirected to the NSF staff by contacting:<ITAG tagnum="15">Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement Program, Office of UndergraduateScience, Engineering, and Mathematics Education, Directorate for Scienceand Engineering Education, Room 639, National Science Foundation, Washington,DC 20550.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Richard Quinn,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrative Officer, USEME.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="34">September 19, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-21685 Filed 9-21-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7555-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>