<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881031-0018 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-31-88.f2.A1017</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">8 CFR Part 245a</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[INS No. 1022R-88]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Adjustment of Status for Certain Aliens</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Immigration and Naturalization Service, Justice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Interim rule with request for comments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Section 201 of the Immigration Reform and Control Actof 1986 (IRCA) provides for the legalization of certain aliens who havebeen residing illegally in the United States since before January 1, 1982.This section directs the Attorney General to adjust the status of a temporaryresident alien to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residenceif the alien meets certain requirements. This rule addresses the adjustmentof status of temporary resident aliens to that of aliens lawfully admittedfor permanent residence.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Interim rule is effective November 7, 1988. Comments mustbe received on or before November 30, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Written comments should be mailed in triplicate toAssistant Commissioner, Legalization, Immigration and Naturalization Service,425 ``I'' Street NW., Washington DC 20536 or delivered to Room 5250 atthe same address.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Raymond B. Penn, Assistant Commissioner,Legalization, (202) 786-3658.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On November 6, 1986, the Presidentsigned into law the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, Pub. L.99-603 (``IRCA''). This legislation, the most comprehensive reform of ourimmigration laws since the enactment of the Immigration and NationalityAct (``INA'') in 1952, reflected a resolve to strengthen law enforcementto control illegal immigration. It also reflected the Nation's concernsfor certain aliens who had resided illegally in the United States. Thetheme of this legislation was focused upon regaining control of our Nation'sborders and eliminating the illegal alien problem in this country throughthe firm yet fair enforcement of our Nation's laws.The Immigration and Naturalization Service took a number of steps to ensurethe new legislation would be implemented effectively, efficiently and fairly.Service officials engaged in continuing dialogue with members of the publicand representatives of interested organizations on how the legalizationprovisions of ``IRCA'' would be implemented. On January 20, 1987, the Servicepublished in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>a notice making available to the public the preliminaryworking draft regulation (52 FR 2115). As a result of this notice 164 commentswere seriously considered by the Service and were included in the proposedrule published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on March 19, 1987 (52 FR 8752).In response to the proposed rule, 549 written comments were received. Afterreview and consideration of all comments, the Immigration and NaturalizationService published implementing regulations for the temporary resident phaseof the Legalization Program at 52 FR 1620, May 1, 1987, and amending regulationsat 52 FR 43843, November 17, 1987, 53 FR 9274, March 21, 1988, 53 FR 9862,March 28, 1988, and at 53 FR 23382, June 22, 1988.The temporary resident phase of the legalization program began on May 5,1987 and ended on May 4, 1988. The temporary resident phase of the legalizationprogram was the first step for illegal aliens to become full and activemembers of the American society. The temporary resident phase of the programproved to be an overwhelming success with more than 1,700,000 applicantstaking advantage of the opportunity to come out of the shadows.In order to complete the process of becoming a lawful permanent residentof the United States, individuals who gained lawful temporary residentstatus during phase I of the legalization program are required to makeapplication for such permanent resident status. Following the same opennessas during the first phase of the program, the Immigration and NaturalizationService published a notice of availability of the preliminary working draftof the regulations in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>(53 FR 18096) on May 20, 1988.The preliminary working draft addressed how the Service would implementthe lawful permanent resident phase of the legalization program. More than170 copies of the preliminary working draft were made available to requestors.As a result of availability of the preliminary working draft, 135 individualsand interested organizations submitted written comments. All comments werereviewed, given serious consideration, and utilized in preparing the proposedrule.The Immigration and Naturalization Service published a notice of proposedrulemaking on the implementation of the adjustment status phase of IRCAin the <T4>Federal Register </T4> (53 FR 29804) on August 8, 1988. Eighty-sixcomments, representing the views and concerns of 183 individuals, attorneysstate agencies, special interest groups, educational and other interestedorganizations and associations were reviewed and considered in preparingthe final rule. The Service appreciates the time and significant effortput forth by all concerned parties.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of the Interim Rule</ITAG>The provisions of the proposed rule which received a significant numberof comments will be discussed separately. This interim rule amends 8 CFRPart 245a.3 created under the provisions of the May 1, 1987 final rulepublished in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>at 52 FR 16205. This interim rule includes allchanges made from the proposed rule which include the requirements forcertain temporary resident aliens, who are otherwise eligible, to adjusttheir status to that of aliens lawfully admited for permanent residentsof the United States and the procedures to be used during this process.Under the provisions of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986,a temporary resident alien who has resided in the United States for a periodof eighteen (18) months may make application for permanent resident statusduring the twelve month period beginning on the day after the temporaryresidence period has been completed. Since the beginning date of the applicationperiod falls on a weekend, the Service will, for the mutual convenienceof all concerned, begin accepting applications on November 7, 1988, thefirst workday after November 6, 1988. The Service realizes that applicationscould be received at Regional Processing Facilities prior to November 7,1988 or prior to the date an alien would be considered eligible to filean application. Therefore, as a convenience to the public, the Servicewill hold such applications up to 60 days prior to the alien's eligibilitydate. In these instances, the application will be considered as ``filed''on the applicant's eligibility date.Numerous comments were received addressing concerns with the processingmethod outlined by the Service in the proposed rule. The commentors statedthat by utilizing a direct mail approach the Service would likely losethe consistency of decisions which have come forth during the temporaryresident phase of the program; many applications may get lost in the mail;the applicant's due process rights may be violated if the adjudicativedecision is rendered at an INS field or legalization office without benefitof ``the record''; and the Service should allow filing of applicationsat legalization and other field offices.The following summarizes the processing method that was proposed by theService for the processing of applications for permanent residence duringthis phase of the legalization program: The Service proposed utilizinga processing method that features direct mail of applications to four RegionalProcessing Facilities (RPFs) located at Williston, Vermont (Eastern); Lincoln,Nebraska (Northern); Dallas, Texas (Southern); and Laguna Niguel, California(Western). After preliminary processing of applications at the RegionalProcessing Facilities, applicants will be interviewed at selected Serviceoffices (including district offices, suboffices, and legalization offices)throughout the country. The adjustment of temporary resident aliens topermanent residence will consist of five major segments: Pre-submissionof applications; Regional Processing Facility processing (pre-interview);INS field and legalization office processing; Regional Processing Facilityprocessing (post-interview); and Immigration Card Facility (ICF) processing.In the pre-submission of applications segment the Service will distributeinformation and forms for the adjustment to permanent resident phase ofthe legalization program. An extensive publicity and outreach campaignconducted by the Service helped produce the largest legalization programin world history. In response to the proposed rule commentors urged theService to continue these publicity and outreach efforts for phase II ofthe legalization program. The Service is confident that awareness of thelegalization program is high. In testimony before the Subcommittee on Immigrationand Refugee Affairs, Committee on the Judiciary United States Senate, theGovernment Accounting Office reported that a market research study foundthat 92 percent of undocumented Hispanics were aware that the legalizationprogram exists (over 84% of the legalization phase I applicants were Hispanic).The publicity and outreach campaign for Phase II will be more selectivesince the Service knows who the temporary residents are and where theyreside. This being the case, local level publicity and outreach methodsshould be very effective and will be used in conjunction with nationalefforts.In the Regional Processing Facility (RPF) processing (pre-interview) segment,all pre-interview processing tasks (e.g., data entry, fee receipting, applicationreview, scheduling of interviews, etc.) will take place. If during thereview of the application at the Regional Processing Facility it is determinedthat the applicant has met all eligibility requirements (continuous residence,English language/U.S. history and government, etc.) and there was no indicationof fraud in the Phase I, the application may be approved. In this situation,the applicant would be notified of such approval by the RPF and would onlybe scheduled for processing at the INS field or legalization office foran Alien legalization office for an Alien Registration Receipt Card (I-551).In the INS field and legalization office segment, the applicants will beinterviewed as well as processed for an Alien Registration Receipt Card(I-551). The interview may include an English language/U.S. history andgovernment examination for those applicants who wish to satisfy the standardsfor section 312 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.In the RPF processing (post-interview) segment, appeal processing and otherpost-interview administrative procedures will occur.In the final segment, the Immigration Card Facility processing segment,Alien Registration Receipt Card (I-551) production will be completed andthe card will be mailed to the address specified by the alien as his orher place of residence.The Service considers direct mail of applications to a regional facilityas a viable and cost effective way of doing its business. The Service hashad substantial experience in the direct mail realm and has enjoyed considerablesuccess with the direct mail of adjudicative casework to the Regional ServiceCenters. This process has achieved reduced processing time, consistencyof processing, and has been extremely cost effective. With regard to thedue process question, it must be understood that the record will be reviewedin totality prior to the final adjudicative decision. If the final decisionis adverse to the applicant, the individual will have the right to submitan appeal through the administrative appeal procedures that have been established.The Service has and will continue to ensure that all applicants will beafforded the rights that they are entitled to. Upon consideration of thecomments received the Service will maintain its position of the processingmethod to be utilized; however, the Service will clearly state that theentire record of proceedings will be reviewed prior to issuing a finaladverse decision at an INS field office.Section 245a.1(h) is being amended to permit intending residents to fulfillemployment duties abroad without having their absence from the United Statesaffect their ability to meet applicable residence requirements for adjustmentfrom temporary resident to permanent resident status. The Service receivedcomments suggesting expansion of the definition. These comments were consideredand the definition will be changed as proposed to allow the Service theflexibility to permit brief and casual absences from the United Statesthat reflect an intention on the part of the alien to ajust to permanentresidence. Section 245a.3(b)(2) will also be amended to reflect this change.New andSection; 245a.1(r) is being added to define the term ``in good-standing''as used in referring to qualified designated entities (QDEs) under 8 CFR245a.3(b)(5). Numerous comments were received concerning this definition.Several commentors suggested that the Service should extend the cooperativeagreements with QDEs while others suggested that the Service should not.The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA) in section 201 providesfor filing of applications for temporary resident status with either theAttorney General or with a qualified designated entity. The statute doesnot provide for a like situation for the filing of applications for permanentresidence. Consequently, the Service will neither extend nor expand QDEcooperative agreements. Other commentors suggested revisions to the definition.The Service considered these comments and will retain the definition appearingin the proposed rule.New andSection; 245a.1(s) is being added to define the term ``satisfactorilypursuing'' as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)(II) of the Act. Numerouscomments were received on this section. In general, most commentors supportedthe Service's proposal of the various options an applicant could pursuein order to meet the definition. The Service is genuinely concerned thattemporary residents enter the mainstream of American society in a fairand equitable manner within the statutory framework provided by the Congress.Comments received on andSection; 245a.1(s)(1) recommended the Service returnto the preliminary working draft figure of a minimum 60 hour course insteadof the 100 hour course in the proposed rule. Several commentors were concernedthat the 100 hour course requirement would financially strain course providersby placing additional demands on teacher and classroom resources. In addition,temporary residents would have to pay more for such courses as the costswould have to be passed on. The Service, therefore, will return to thestandard recommended by the study it commissioned and will stipulated aminimum 60 hour course length. Several commentors suggested that completionof 30 hours of a course of study was not responsive to the needs of thelegalized alien community and that the Service should consider increasingthe minimum attendence time to ensure that students have made true effortand progress to achieve the goals specified by Congress. After seriousconsideration the Service will modify the minimum requirement by increasingthe minimum attendance time to 40 hours of a 60 hour course of study.Commentors generally supported andSection; 245a.1(s)(2), with the State ofNew York Department of Education suggesting that the general equivalencydiploma (GED) be gained in the English language. The Service feels thissuggestion has merit and consequently will accept a GED gained in a languageother than English only if the GED English proficiency test has been passed.Commentors considered proposed andSection; 245a.1(s)(3) unclear and vague.The meaning of the ``period of one year'' and the lack of specificity regardingthe course content were concerns. The Service will rewrite this sectionto quality the period of one year as one ``academic'' year as opposed toa calendar year, and will establish that the curriculum experienced bythe individual include at least 40 hours of instruction in English andU.S. government.Comments similar to those received on andSection; 245a.1(s)(3) were receivedon andSection; 245a.1(s)(4). Commentors were concerned about the adequacyand quality of courses provided by entities not normally associated witheducation. The Service believes that the certification process providedfor will address these concerns and is confident that this section willnot provide a means for individuals to avoid fulfilling the ``satisfactorilypursuing'' requirement.The Service will also change proposed andSection; 245a.1(s)(5) in responseto several worthwhile suggestions. Commentors expressed concern that thereexists a wide variety of proficiency among temporary resident aliens andit is not really possible to measure equivalency to a 40 hour enrollmentin a designated course. One commentor also questioned the need for a ``statementof intent'' to pursue further education if the test is to serve as an optionalequivalency to a course of study. The Service feels the test option isneeded for three reasons: First, to help ease the strain on course providerresources; second, to offer an alternative to temporary resident alienswho have the knowledge and do not need to attend a time-consuming course;and to minimize the length of the Phase II interviews. Consequently, andSection;245a.1(s)(5) is being rewritten to set the standard that the proficiencytest indicate that the applicant possesses the ability to read and understandminimal functional English within the context of the history and governmentof the United States. The results<ITAG tagnum="54">must be accompanied by an attestation by the applicant that they hadcompleted at least 40 hours of home study prior to being tested. </ITAG>Homestudy may be any combination of studies that will allow the applicant topass a proficiency test established by the Service. The Service also concursthat a statement of intent is not necessary and that provision has beendeleted.  New andSection;245a.1(t) is being added to define the term ``minimal understandingof ordinary English'' as used in section 245A(B)(1)(D)(i) of the Act. Thecomments received in response to the preliminary working draft were mostfavorable and the Service therefore did not change the definition in itsproposed rule. Comments received in response to the proposed rule werestill generally favorable; however, commenters questioned the inclusionof the term ``written communication''. The statute provides that applicantsmeet a basic citizenship skill requirement similar to section 312 requirementsof the Immigration and Nationality Act. Indeed, the passing of a ``section312'' type examination at the time of interview for permanent residencewill serve to relieve the individual of the basic citizenship skill requirementat the time of application to petition for naturalization. The Servicefeels that the definition as written is appropriate and consistent withCongressional intent that temporary resident aliens acquire an understandingof English.  New andSection;245a.1(u) is being added to define the use of a curriculumin a course of study recognized by the Attorney General. As with commentsreceived in response to the preliminary working draft, commentors urgedthe Service to allow for the use of texts similar to the Federal CitizenshipText series (1987 edition). The Service agrees, but will establish a conditionthat the similar texts be used in addition to but not in lieu of the FederalCitizenship Text series. The Service realizes that there may be trainingmaterials, besides the Federal Textbook series that may achieve the goalsestablished under this section. The Service is willing to consider anysuch material for use in this program. The definition is also changed toreflect the 60 hour course length requirement. Finally, the definitionis changed to identify that what is to be taught should be words and phrasesin ordinary, everyday usage. This change was made in response to commentors'suggestions for clarification of what is to be taught.  Section 245a.3(a) is being amended to provide for the acceptance of applicationsat Regional Processing Facilities. A wide range of comments were receivedconcerning this section. Commentors were concerned that temporary residentsmay not be able to determine when they are eligible to apply for permanentresidence. The statute directs that a temporary resident alien can applyfor permanent residence during a one-year period beginning on the firstday of the nineteenth month after the date of granting of temporary residence.Temporary resident aliens will be able to determine when they can applyby checking the date indicated on the fee receipt Form I-689, which wasproduced as a result of their application for temporary residence. Theservice plans to publicize the above information through outreach efforts(e.g., toll-free information number, informational forums, etc.). The Servicewill also be mailing notices to temporary resident aliens reminding themto file applications for permanent residence. In the proposed rule's supplementaryinformation section the Service stated its intention, as a convenienceto the public, to hold applications received at Regional Processing Facilitiesup to 60 days prior to the alien's eligibility date. This 60 day perioddid not appear in andSection;245a.3(a) in the proposed rule as intended.It is therefore added at this time.  Section 245a.3(b)(2) is being amended in two respects. In response to commentors'suggestions the service will expand this section to assist individualsin returning to the United States in compliance with the 30/90 day rule.Individuals will now have the opportunity to establish that absences exceeding30/90 days were due to emergency reasons or circumstances beyond the alien'scontrol. This section is also changed by replacing the word ``or'' with``and'' where it appears after the term ``(30) days,'' for clarificationpurposes.  Section 245a.3(b)(3) is being amended to correct an error by changing theparagraph reference from ``(f)'' to ``(g)''.  Section 245a.3(b)(4)(ii) is being amended to correct an error by addingthe correct paragraph reference (b)(4)(i). This section is also amendedin response to comments that the ages of 16 and 65 be calculated from aspecific point in time. Several comments were received concerning the Service'sproposals to waive the basic citizenship requirements of the Act for applicantsunder the age of 16, applicants age 65 and older, and applicants physicallyunable to comply. Most of the commentors supported the Service's exerciseof discretion in this matter. Four commentors requested clarification ofthe term ``physically unable'' and recommended that the service exemptpersons with a developmental or learning disability from these requirements.The service has given these comments serious consideration. However, toextend the exemption to persons with developmental or learning disabilities,on a blanket basis would be inconsistent with the criteria and precedenceestablished in OI 312.1(1)(2)(iii) of the Act, as amended, which holdsthat an exemption from the ability to speak and understand, as well asread and write English, requires a physical disability of a nature whichrenders the applicant unable to acquire all four citizenship skills. Theservice is amending andSection;245a.3(b)(4)(ii) to conform with this provision. Two commentors suggested that the upper age parameter for a waiver be reducedfrom age 65 to age 50 to be consistent with naturalization requirements.Section 245A(b)(1)(D)(ii) of the Act provides an exception for elderlyindividuals. The statute specifically states that the Attorney Generalmay waiver all or part of the basic citizenship skills requirements inthe case of an alien who is 65 years of age or older. Therefore, the upperage limit will remain at 65. However, the service will allow individualsover 50 years of age and who have been living in the United States forat least twenty years to also be exempt from the requirements of section245A(b)(1)(D)(i) of IRCA. Evidence must be submitted at the time of applicationfor permanent residence pursuant to requirements contained in andSection;245a.2(d)(3)of this chapter to establish the twenty year qualification. This is consistentwith the requirements found in 312 of the INA. Four commentors recommendedthat the requirements be waived for applicants under the age of 18 or 19.The Statute does not provide an exception for youthful applicants. However,the Service believes that it is fair and reasonable to waive the basiccitizenship requirements for applicants under the age of 16.     Two commentors requested clarification of who is eligible for the waiverand one commentor requested clarification as to when the waiver would takeeffect. Section 245a(b)(4)(ii) is being amended to resolve these two points.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(iii) is being added to address the examinationfor basic citizenship skills. Over 40 comments were received concerningthis section. In general, commentors felt that the Federal CitizenshipTexts were too difficult for the temporary resident aliens. The Serviceintends to continue to operate a generous and liberal legalization programas the Congress intended. Consequently, the test questions will be selectedfrom a list of 100 standardized questions developed by the Service insteadof the review questions provided at the end of each chapter of the FederalCitizenship texts. Commentors also suggested the Service allow for a 6month retest period even if an applicant's 12 month period of eligibilityexpires before the 6 month retest period ends. The Service concurs andwill provide for an unrestricted 6 month retest period.New andSection;245a.3(a)(4)(iv) is being added to address the providing ofa ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' to satisfy the basic citizenshipskills requirements. The wording of this section differs from that foundin the proposed rule in that, for clarification purposes, the Service enumeratesthe various forms of evidence an applicant can submit to establish satisfactorypursuit. Several commentors suggested that applicants must be enrolledand attending a recognized course of study at the time of application forpermanent residence. The Service cannot agree since it is probable thatcertain applicants have already attended a recognized course of study.To require applicants to be enrolled and attending a recognized courseof study at the time of application would not be reasonable. The Service,therefore, will not change its position on this issue from that statedin the proposed rule.New andSection;245a.3(b)(4)(v) is being added to set the time period afterwhich the Service will accept enrollment in a recognized course of studyand issuance of Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit. The Service has setthis time period as May 1, 1987 as it is the date the regulations for PhaseI of legalization were published in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>Section 245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter is being amended to allow for thecertification of educational programs by district directors locally asthe need arises, as well as the certification of national programs by theOutreach Program of INS. This section is also being amended to clarifythe meaning of qualified designated entities as used in this section. Severalcommentors suggested the Service accept any course providers who have beenalready certified by State Education Agencies responsible for funding ofState Legalization Impact Assistance Grants (SLIAG). The statute placesthe responsibility for recognizing acceptable courses of study with theAttorney General. The Service, therefore, will not implement this suggestionbut will certainly consider the fact that certain course providers havealready been certified by State Education Agencies when these course providerspetition to the Service for certification.New andSection;245a.3(b)(6) is being added to provide for a ``notice of participation''to be submitted to the district director by institutions of learning orqualified designated entities in good-standing andSection;245a.3(b)(5)(i)(A)-(C).Commentors suggested that the Service modify the language to allow greaterflexibility in the submission of a ``notice of participation''. The Serviceagrees and will provide that notices can also be submitted within thirty(30) days after the creation of the course of study. Concerning the compilationof lists of courses, certain commentors urged the Service to develop thelists at a national level. While the Service agrees in concept it is impracticalas such a list would contain hundreds of courses. The Service will, however,provide that the Director of the Outreach Program maintain lists of coursesrecognized on the national level and will instruct district directors todisseminate district lists as widely as possible.New andSection;245a.3(b)(7) is being added to explain the fee structure forcourses. Commentors expressed concern that excessive fees not be charged.The Service agrees with these comments and in response will provide thatdistrict directors coordinate efforts with State Departments of Educationto assist in establishing standard fee schedules. In order to further protectindividuals the Service will provide that once a fee is established, anychange in fee without prior approval of the district director may resultin the decertification of a course provider.New andSection;245a.3(b)(8) is being added to provide information on theFederal Textbooks on Citizenship. This section addresses the availabilityof the Federal Textbooks for interested parties.New andSection;245a.3(b)(9) is being added to address the maintenance ofstudent records by course providers. One commentor suggested for clarificationpurposes that direction be provided in the recording of an individual'sname. Consequently, the Service will provide the name of an individualbe copied exactly as it appears on the I-688A (Employment AuthorizationCard) or I-688 (Temporary Resident Card).New andSection;245a.3(b)(10) is being added to address the issuance of theCertificate of Satisfactory Pursuit (I-699). Several commentors suggestedqualifications in the proposed rule concerning this section. One commentorsuggested that the appropriate state agency responsible for SLIAG fundingbe notified of all decertifications by the district director. The Serviceagrees and will provide for this notification. Other commentors suggestedthat the Service accept certificates from course providers who are citedat some point in time after the certificates are submitted for deficienciesor decertified for reasons unrelated to fraud. The Service concurs andwill accept such certificates.New andSection;245a.3(b)(11) is being added to provide for the ``designatedofficial'' who will have the authority to sign certificates of satisfactorypursuit. Commentors recommended that the Service change the requirementthat the name, title, and sample signature of each designated officialbe attached to and submitted with each certificate. It was stated thatsuch a practice was burdensome and seemed unnecessary and that a file ofsuch information could be kept by the district director. The Service agreesand will implement this recommendation.New andSection;245a.3(b)(12) is being added to provide for the on-site monitoringof courses of study recognized by the Attorney General. Many <ITAG tagnum="54">comments were received which suggested limiting the scope of INS on-sitemonitoring or delegating the monitoring in whole or in part to other agenciesor organizations such as State Departments of Education. The monitoringof course providers is necessary both to ensure that the providers areconducting adequate courses and to ensure that the applicants' needs areadequately served. The Service wishes to work in concert with the variousstate and local agencies to ensure course instruction is proper and meetsthe intent of the legislation that applicants achieve a basic understandingof citizenship skills. The Service does not intend to closely monitor establishedbona-fide educational providers but instead will direct most efforts towardproviders who are entering into course instruction for the first time.Commentors also suggested that, as in andSection;245a.3(b)(10), the appropriateState agency be notified of any decertification taken pursuant to thissection. The Service will provide for such notice.</ITAG>New andSection;245a.3(b)(13) is being added as guidance for selection ofteachers who provide instruction in courses of study recognized by theAttorney General as defined at andSection;245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter. Severalcommentors agreed with the Service's position that the implementation ofa set of standards is necessary because courses vary from providers whohave had extensive experience in educational services for limited Englishspeakers to new programs with untested skills.Section 245a.3(c)(2) is being amended to conform with the statute as itrelates to general inadmissibility. The wording of the section will bechanged to describe a class of ineligible aliens who are inadmissible tothe United States as immigrants except those aliens who are subject tothe grounds of exclusion not to be applied for IRCA applicants: 212(a)(14);(20); (21); (25); and (32).Section 245a.3(d)(1) is amended to provide for the filing of an applicationfor adjustment of status to that of a permanent resident alien by directmailing of the application to the Regional Processing Facility. Commentorsexpressed concern over mailing applications to the Regional ProcessingFacility. The Service feels direct mail is a less costly way to operatethe permanent resident application phase of the Legalization Program andin many instances, will be more convenient to the alien public in thatapplications can be submitted without taking time off work and other activities.Large scale direct mail application operations are utilized by this andother government agencies, and the Service is confident that the directmail method will operate successfully. The Service realizes however, thatlocal district practices (e.g., drop boxes) may be already in operationfor direct mail to Regional Service Centers, or may be added at legalizationoffices as a convenience to the public. If drop-box service is made availableby the district director, the alien public may certainly avail itself ofthis alternative way to submit applications.Section 245a.3(d)(2) is amended to provide for the district director orRegional Processing Facility director's use of discretion to temporarilyretain documents for forensic examination. Commentors agreed with the Servicethat the submission of original documents is generally not required. TheService will reserve the right to request original documentation as necessary.Original documentation can either be requested by the director, RegionalProcessing Facility, or the district director.Some commentors suggested the Service specify the exact documentation requiredto support the I-698 application. While the Service appreciates this concernit is not possible to exactly specify what documentation may be requiredas the documentary needs will vary from case to case.New andSection;245a.3(d)(4) is being added to provide for the submissionof medical examination results on Form I-693 only for those applicantswho applied for temporary residence and submitted an I-693 which did notreflect that a serologic test was performed to determine the presence orabsence of antibody against HIV, the etiologic agent of acquired immuno-deficiencysyndrome (AIDS). As of December 1, 1987, the Immigration and NaturalizationService required serologic testing for HIV infection as part of the medicalexamination process for aliens applying for lawful resident status underthe provisions of IRCA. Commentors suggested that applicants who filedprior to December 1, 1987 and who submitted an I-693 reflecting that aserologic test for HIV was performed should not be required to submit anotherI-693. The Service agrees and this section will be worded accordingly.It was also recommended that those applicants who are HIV positive be advisedof the opportunity to apply for a waiver of this 212(a)(6) exclusion ground.This recommendation will also be included.New andSection;245a.3(d)(5) is being added to provide for the extension ofthe validity of the temporary resident card (I-688) during the pendencyof an application for permanent residence made under this chapter. Commentorsagreed but suggested the time period be changed to one (1) year. The Serviceagrees and this section will be worded accordingly.New andSection; 245a.3(d)(6) is being added to provide for the adjudicationof an application for permanent residence based on the existing record.Commentors were concerned that an applicant may not be afforded due processrights if the entire record was not reviewed prior to the issuance of adenial. The Service will assure applicants of their due process rightsand to affirm this point, will provide for the application to be adjudicatedbased on the existing record rather than denied for lack of prosecutionif the applicant does not respond to two requests for additional informationand/or documentation.Section 245a.3(e) is amended to provide for interviews taking place atother than Service Legalization Offices. Commentors were concerned thatinsufficient interview opportunities would be available for applicants.The Service would like to assure the public that all eligible applicantswill be able to complete the legalization process in a timely fashion.Applicants should realize, however, that the legalization program is temporaryin nature and it is costly to the Service to reschedule interviews andprovide numerous interview opportunities. It is in the mutual interestof all concerned that interview opportunities are kept thus helping toensure a successful completion of the permanent resident phase of the legalizationprogram.Concerning andSection; 245a.3(f)(1) commentors questioned how INS could requireapplicants to demonstrate basic citizenship skills when INA section 212(a)(25)is automatically waived. The regulations reflect IRCA requirements thatan alien demonstrate that he or she (1) meets the requirements of section312 of the INA or (2) is satisfactorily pursuing a course of study. Theregulations do not exclude any applicant from eligibility because he orshe cannot read. The Congress intended that legalization applicants befamiliarized with American society and the basic citizenship skill requirementis indicative of this intent. The Service must implement the statute aswritten.Concerning andSection; 245a.3(f)(3) one commentor suggested the Service regulatea waiver for aliens excludable under paragraphs 212(a)(10) of the INA.The statute specifically states that waivers cannot be regulated for thisground of exclusion. The Service, therefore, will make no change in thissection.Numerous comments were received concerning andSection; 245a.3(f)(4). Commentorssuggested the Service articulate in this rule the policy of the Serviceconcerning the operation of the special rule for determination of publiccharge and the determination of financial responsibility. The Service concursand will amend this portion to include this policy guidance which in effectincorporates a two-tiered evaluation for determining whether the applicantis likely to become a public charge.Section 245a.3(h) is amended to provide for the retention by a temporaryresident alien of the temporary resident card (I-688) in the case of anadverse decision. Commentors agreed with this provision.One commentor also suggested that applicants be afforded the opportunityto explain discrepancies or rebut any adverse information found betweeninformation submitted with the adjustment application and information previouslyfurnished to the Service. In addition, commentors sought assurance thatwork authorization would be granted until a final decision had been renderedon an appeal or until the end of the appeal period if no appeal had beenfiled. Finally, the Department of Health and Human Services requested clarificationas to whether an alien would still be considered an ``eligible, legalizedalien'' for the purposes of the administration of SLIAG funding when theappeal period had ended. Such an alien would no longer be considered aneligible legalized alien. The Service agrees with the aforementioned suggestionsand will incorporate them in this section.Section 245a.3(i) is amended to provide for the submission of a brief tosupport an appeal after the thirty (30) day period allowing for receiptof an appeal has passed. This section is also amended to provide for reviewof the Record of Processing (ROP) after an appeal has been properly filed.Several commentors suggested longer periods be allowed for submission ofappeals. The Service believes the time periods provided are sufficientfor a party to submit an appeal and any supporting briefs. Consequently,the Service will not change the appeal periods.Section 245a.3(k) is amended to provide for certification to the AdministrationAppeals Unit of decisions of appealed cases subsequently remanded backto either the Regional Processing Facility director of the district director.This section is also amended to provide for certification by district directors.Comments in response to the preliminary working draft were generally insupport of the section as written. In response to the proposed rule, commentorsrecommended that an additional 30 days be allowed for the submission ofa brief when a decision has been certified to the AAU for considerationof ``usually complex or novel'' issues. The Service feels that time providedfor the submission of a brief (andSection; 245a.3(i)) is sufficient and willnot change this section.Section 245a.3(1) is amended to reflect the fact that the adjustment dateshall be the date of filing of the application for permanent residenceor the applicant's eligibility date, whichever is later. Several commentorsobjected to the Service proposing to have the adjustment date the dateof approval of the application for permanent residence. Various valid reasonswere cited. These include precedence for rollback afforded to refugeesand asylees, consistency with the temporary resident phase of the legalizationprogram, and delays in the adjustment date caused by slow processing.New andSection; 245a.3(m) is being added to address confidentiality duringthe permanent residence plans of the Legalization Program. Commentors expressedtheir concern about confidentiality. The Service desires to reinforce theconfidentiality provisions of IRCA and therefore is adding this new section.Several commentors objected to the inclusion of andSection; 245a.3(n)(4),stating that this provision contravenes the statute concerning the useof information supplied by applicants. The Service supports the provisionas written, however; the language found in the statute (section 245A(a)(1)(C))is indicative of Congressional intent that information supplied to theService by legalization applicants assist in the determination of applicationsfor benefits for relatives of applicants and to support applications fornaturalization.New andSection; 245a.3(n) is being added to provide for the rescission ofadjustment of status under section 245a pursuant to the guidelines setforth in section 246 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Commissioner of Immigration andNaturalization certifies that this rule does not have a significant adverseeconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. This rule isnot a major rule within the meaning of section 1(b) of E.O. 12291, nordoes this rule have federalism implications warranting the preparationof a Federal Assessment in accordance with E.O. 12612.The Information Collection Requirements contained in this regulation havebeen cleared by the Office of Management and Budget under the provisionsof the Paperwork Reduction Act. OMB control numbers for these collectionsare contained in 8 CFR 299.5<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 8 CFR Part 245a</ITAG>Aliens, Temporary resident status, Permanent resident status.Accordingly, Chapter I of Title 8 of the Code of Federal Regulations isamended as follows:1. The authority citation for Part 245a is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 99-603, 100 Stat. 3359, 8 U.S.C. 1101 noteand Pub. L. 100-204, 101 Stat. 1331.</ITAG>2. The heading for Part 245a is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 245a_ADJUSTMENT OF STATUS TO THAT OF PERSONS ADMITTED FOR LAWFULTEMPORARY OR PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS UNDER SECTION 245A OF THE IMMIGRATIONAND NATIONALITY ACT, AS AMENDED BY PUB. L. 99-603, THE IMMIGRATION REFORMAND CONTROL ACT OF 1986, AND PUB. L. 100-204, SECTION 902</ITAG>3. In andSection; 245a.1, paragraph (h) is revised and paragraphs (r), (s),(t), and (u) are added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(h) The term ``brief and casual absences'' as used in section 245a(b)(3)(A)of the Act permits temporary trips abroad as long as the alien establishesa continuing intention to adjust to lawful permanent resident status. However,such absences must comply with andSection; 245a.3(b)(2) of this chapter inorder for the alien to maintain continuous residence as specified in theAct.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(r) A qualified designated entity in good-standing with the Service meansthose designated entities whose cooperative agreements were not suspendedor terminated by the Service or those whose agreements were not allowedto lapse by the Service prior to January 30, 1989 (the expiration dateof the INS cooperative agreements for all designated entities), or thosewhose agreements were not terminated for cause by the Service subsequentto January 30, 1989.(s) ``Satisfactorily pursuing,'' as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)(II)of the Act, means:(1) An applicant for permanent resident status has attended a recognizedprogram for at least 40 hours of a minimum 60-hour course as appropriatefor his or her ability level, and is demonstrating progress according tothe performance standards of the English/citizenship course prescribedby the recognized program in which he or she is enrolled (as long as enrollmentoccurred on or after May 1, 1987, course standards include attainment ofparticular functional skills related to communicative ability, subjectmatter knowledge, and English language competency, and attainment of theseskills is measured either by successful completion of learning objectivesappropriate to the applicant's ability level, or attainment of a determinedscore on a test or tests, or both of these); or(2) An applicant presents a high school diploma or general equivalencydiploma (GED) from a school in the United States. A GED gained in a languageother than English is acceptable only if the GED English proficiency testhas been passed; or(3) An applicant has attended for a period of one academic year, a staterecognized, accredited learning institution in the United States and thatinstitution certifies such attendance (as long as the curriculum includedat least 40 hours of instruction in English and U.S. government); or(4) An applicant has attended courses conducted by employers, social, community,or private groups certified (retroactively if necessary, as long as enrollmentoccurred on or after May 1, 1987) by the district director or the Directorof the Outreach Program under andSection; 245a.3(b)(5)(i)(D); or(5) An applicant attests to the fact that they have completed at least40 hours of home study and passes a proficiency test for legalization,such test being given by qualified administrators (e.g., State Departmentsof Education and their designated educational agencies) and indicatingthat the applicant is able to read and understand minimal functional Englishwithin the context of the history and government of the United States.(t) Minimal understanding of ordinary English as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)of the Act means an applicant can satisfy basic survival needs and routinesocial demands. The person can handle jobs that involve following simpleoral and very basic written communication.(u) ``Curriculum'' means a defined course for an instructional program.Minimally, the curriculum prescribes what is to be taught, how the courseis to be taught, with what materials, and when and where. The curriculummust:(1) Teach words and phrases in ordinary, everyday usage;(2) Include the content of the Federal Citizenship Text series as the basisfor curriculum development (other texts with similar content may be usedin addition to, but not in lieu of, the Federal Citizenship Text series);(3) Be designed to provide at least 60 hours of instruction per class level;(4) Be relevant and educationally appropriate for the program focus andthe intended audience; and(5) Be available for examination and review by INS as requested.4. Section 245a.3 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for adjustment from temporary to permanent resident status.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Application period for permanent residence. </T3>An alien who has residedin the United States for a period of eighteen (18) months after the grantingof temporary resident status may make application for permanent residentstatus during the twelve month period beginning on the day after the requisiteeighteen months' temporary residence has been completed. The date of adjustmentto lawful temporary resident status is the date indicated on the fee receipt,Form I-689. The eligibility period for lawful permanent residence undersection 245A(b)(1) of the Act will begin on November 7, 1988. Applicationsreceived at the Regional Processing Facilities not more than 60 days priorto the beginning of an alien's twelve month application period will beheld by the Service and processed but will not be considered properly fileduntil the beginning of the eligibility period.(b) <T3>Eligibility.</T3> Any alien physically present in the United Stateswho has been lawfully admitted for temporary resident status under section245A(a) of the Act, such status not having been revoked or terminated,may apply for adjustment of status to that of an alien lawfully admittedfor permanent residence if the alien:(1) Applies for such adjustment during the one-year period beginning withthe nineteenth month that begins after the date the alien was granted suchtemporary resident status;(2) Establishes continuous residence in the United States since the datethe alien was granted such temporary residence status. An alien shall beregarded as having resided continuously in the United States for the purposesof this part if, at the time of applying for adjustment from temporaryto permanent resident status, no single absence from the United Stateshas exceeded thirty (30) days, and the aggregate of all absences has notexceeded ninety (90) days between the date lawful temporary resident statuswas granted and the date permanent resident status was applied for, unlessthe alien can establish that due to emergent reasons or circumstances beyondhis or her control, the return to the United States could not be accomplishedwithin the time period(s) allowed. A single absence from the United Statesof more than 30 days, and aggregate absences of more than 90 days duringthe period for which continuous residence is required for adjustment topermanent residence, shall break the continuity of such residence, unlessthe temporary resident can establish to the satisfaction of the districtdirector that he or she did not, in fact, abandon his or her residencein the United States during such period;(3) Is admissible to the United States as an immigrant, except as otherwiseprovided in paragraph (g) of this section; and has not been convicted ofany felony, or three or more misdemeanors; and (4)(i)(A) Can demonstrate that the alien either meets the requirementsof section 312 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended (relatingto minimal understanding of ordinary English and a knowledge and understandingof the history and government of the United States); or, (B) Is satisfactorily pursuing a course of study recognized by the AttorneyGeneral to achieve such an understanding of English and such a knowledgeand understanding of the history and government of the United States.(ii) The requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section must be metby each applicant, except for those individuals who are under the age of16 and those individuals who are 65 years of age or older as of the dateof application for permanent residence under this part; or individualsover 50 years of age who have resided in the United States for a least20 years and submit evidence establishing the 20-year qualification requirement.Such evidence must be submitted pursuant to the requirements containedin andSection; 245a.2(d)(3) of this chapter. These requirements shall alsobe waived for those who are physically unable to comply.(iii) (A) Literacy and basic citizenship skills may be demonstrated forpurposes of complying with paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section by speakingand understanding English during the course of the interview and processingfor permanent resident status. An applicant's ability to read and writeEnglish shall be tested by excerpts from one or more parts of the FederalTextbooks on Citizenship at the elementary literacy level. The test ofan applicant's knowledge and understanding of the history and form of governmentof the United States shall be given in the English language. The scopeof the testing shall be limited to subject matter covered in the revised(1987) Federal Textbooks on Citizenship or other approved training material.The test questions shall be selected from a list of 100 standardized questionsdeveloped by the Service. In choosing the subject matter and in phrasingquestions, due consideration shall be given to the extent of the applicant'seducation, background, age, length of residence in the United States, opportunitiesavailable and efforts made to acquire the requisite knowledge, and anyother elements or factors relevant to an appraisal of the adequacy of hisor her knowkedge and understanding.(B) An applicant who fails to pass the English literacy or educationaltests at the time of the interview, shall be afforded a second opportunityafter six (6) months (or earlier, at the request of the applicant) to passthe tests or submit a ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'', Form I-699.The second interview shall be conducted prior to the denial of the applicationfor permanent residence and shall be based solely on the failure to passthe literacy requirements. An applicant whose 12-month period of eligibilityexpires prior to the end of the six-month re-test period, shall still beaccorded the entire six months within which to be re-tested.(iv) To satisfy the English language and basic citizenship skills requirementsunder the ``satisfactorily pursuing'' standard as defined at andSection;245a.1(s) of this chapter the applicant must submit evidence of such satisfactorypursuit in the form of a ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' issuedby the designated school or program official attesting to the applicant'ssatisfactory pursuit of the course of study as defined at andSection; 245a.1(s)(1) and (4) of this chapter; or a high school diploma or General EquivalencyDiploma (GED) under andSection; 245a.1(s)(2) of this chapter; or certificationon letterhead stationery from a state recognized, accredited learning institutionunder andSection; 245a.1(s)(3) of this chapter; or evidence of having passeda proficiency test under andSection; 245a.1(s)(5) of this chapter. Such applicantsshall not then be required to demonstrate that they meet the requirementsof andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(i)(A) of this chapter in order to be grantedlawful permanent residence provided they are otherwise eligible. Evidenceof ``Satisfactory Pursuit'' may be submitted either at the time of filingForm I-698, or at the time of the interview. An applicant need not necessarilybe enrolled in a recognized course of study at the time of applicationfor permanent residency.(v) Enrollment in a recognized course of study as defined in andSection;245a.3(b)(5) and issuance of a ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit''must occur subsequent to May 1, 1987.(5)(i) A course of study in the English language and in the history andgovernment of the United States shall satisfy the requirement of paragraph(b)(4)(i) of this section if it is sponsored or conducted by: (A) An established public or private institution of learning recognizedas such by a qualified state certifying agency;(B) An institution of learning approved to issue Forms I-20 in accordancewith andSection; 214.3 of this chapter; (C) A qualified designated entity within the meaning of section 245A(c)(2)of the Act, in good-standing with the Service; or (D) Is certified by the district director in whose jurisdiction the programis conducted, or is certified by the Director of the Outreach Program nationally,and (ii) The course materials for such instruction include textbooks publishedunder the authority of section 346 of the Act.(6) <T3>Notice of participation.</T3> All courses of study recognized underandSection; 245a.3(b)(5)(i)(A)_(C) which are already conducting or will conductEnglish and U.S. history and government courses for temporary residentsmust submit a Notice of Participation either to the district director inwhose jurisdiction a local program is conducted or to the Director of theOutreach Program for national programs. The Notice of Participation shallbe in the form of a letter typed on the letterhead of the course provider(if available) and contain the following information:(i) The name(s) of the school(s)/program(s).(ii) The complete addresses and telephone numbers of sites where courseswill be offered, and class schedules.(iii) The complete names of persons who are in charge of conducting Englishand U.S. history and goverment courses of study.(iv) A statement that the course of study will issue ``Certificates ofSatisfactory Pursuit'' to temporary resident enrollees according to INSregulations.(v) A list of designated officials of the recognized course of study authorizedto sign ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'', and samples of theiroriginal signatures.(vi) A statement that if a course provider charges a fee to temporary residentenrollees, the fee will not be excessive.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The Notice of Participation must also include evidence of recognitionunder 8 CFR 245a.3(b)(5)(i) (A), (B), or (C) (e.g., Certification froma qualified state certifying agency; evidence of INS approval for attendanceby nonimmigrant students, such as the school code number; or by providingthe INS identification number from the QDE cooperative agreement). TheNotice of Participation shall be submitted to the district director withinthirty (30) days after publication of this interim rule in the<T4> Federal Register</T4> or within thirty (30) days after the creationof the course of study. Acceptance of ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit''may be delayed if the course provider fails to submit the Notice of Participationwithin the requisite timeframe. Each district director shall compile andmaintain lists of recognized courses within his or her district. The Directorof the Outreach Program shall compile and maintain lists of courses recognizedon the national level. (7)<T3> Fee structure.</T3> No maximum fee standard will be imposed by theAttorney General. However, if it is believed that a fee charged is excessive,this factor alone will justify non-certification of the course providerby INS as provided in andSection; 245a.3(b) (10) and/or (12) of this section.Once fees are established, any change in fee without prior approval ofthe District Director may justify de-certification. District directors will coordinate efforts with State Departments of Educationto assist in establishing standard fee schedules. (8) The Citizenship textbooks to be used by applicants for lawful permanentresidence under section 245A of the Act shall be distributed by the Serviceto appropriate representatives of public schools. These textbooks may otherwisebe purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, Government PrintingOffice, Washington, DC 20402, and are also available at certain publicinstitutions. (9)<T3> Maintenance of Student Records.</T3> Course providers conducting coursesof study recognized under andSection; 245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter shallmaintain for each student, for a period of three years from the student'senrollment, the following information and documents: (i) Name (as copied exactly from the I-688A or I-688); (ii) A-number (90 million series); (iii) Date of enrollment; (iv) Attendance records; (v) Assessment records; (vi) Photocopy of signed ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' issuedto the student. (10)<T3> Issuance of ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' (I-699).</T3>(i) Each recognized course of study shall prepare a standardized certificatethat is signed by the designated official. The Certificate shall be issuedto an applicant who has attended a recognized course of study for at least40 hours of a minimum of 60-hour course as appropriate for his or her abilitylevel, and is demonstrating progress according to the performance standardsof the English and U.S. history and government course prescribed. Suchstandards shall conform with the provisions of andSection; 245a.1(s) of thischapter. (ii) The district director shall reject a Certificate if it is determinedthat the certificate is fraudulent or was fraudulently issued. (iii) The district director shall reject a Certificate if it is determinedthat the course provider is not complying with INS regulations. In thecase of non-compliance, the district director will advise the course providerin writing of the specific deficiencies and give the provider thirty (30)days within which to correct such deficiencies. (iv) District directors will accept Certificates from course providersonce it is determined that the deficiencies have been satisfactorily corrected.(v) Course providers which engage in fraudulent activities or fail to conformwith INS regulations will be removed from the list of INS approved programs.INS will not accept Certificates from these providers. (vi) Certificates may be accepted if a program is cited for deficienciesor decertified at a later date and no fraud was involved. (vii) The appropriate State agency responsible for SLIAG funding shallbe notified of all decertifications by the district director. (11)<T3> Designated official.</T3> (i) The designated official is the authorizedperson from each recognized course of study whose signature appears onall ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' issued by that course; (ii) The designated official must be a regularly employed member of theschool administration whose office is located at the school and whose compensationdoes not come from commissions for recruitment of foreign students. (iii)(A) The head of the school system or school, the director of the QualifiedDesignated Entity, the head of a program approved by the Attorney General,or the president or owner of other institutions recognized by the AttorneyGeneral must specify a ``designated official''. Such designated officialmay not delegate this designation to any other person. Each school or institutionmay have up to three (3) designated officials at any one time. In a multi-campusinstitution, each campus may have up to three (3) designated officialsat any one time; (B) Each designated official shall have read and otherwise be familiarwith the ``Requirements and Guidelines for Courses of Study Recognizedby the Attorney General''. The signature of a designated official shallaffirm the official's compliance with INS regulations; (C) The name, title, and sample signature of each designated official foreach recognized course of study shall be on file with the district directorin whose jurisdiction the program is conducted. (12)<T3> Monitoring by INS.</T3> (i) INS Outreach personnel in conjunctionwith the district director shall monitor the course providers in each districtin order to: (A) Assure that the program is a course of study recognized by the AttorneyGeneral under the provisions of andSection; 245a.3(b)(5). (B) Verify the existence of curriculum as defined in andSection; 245a.1(u)on file for each level of instruction provided in English language andU.S. history and government classes.(C) Assure that ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' are being issuedin accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(10).(D) Assure that records are maintained on each temporary resident enrolleein accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(9).(E) Assure that fees (if any) assessed by the course provider are in compliancein accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(7).(ii) If INS has reason to believe that the service is not being providedto the applicant, INS will issue a 24-hour minimum notice to the serviceprovider before any site visit is conducted.(iii) If it is determined that a course provided is not performing accordingto the standards established in either andSection; 245a.3(b)(10) or (12)of this chapter, the district director shall institute decertificationproceedings. Notice of Intent to Decertify shall be provided to the courseprovider. The course provider has 30 days within which to correct performanceaccording to standards established. If after the 30 days, the districtdirector is not satisfied that the basis for decertification has been overcome,the course provider will be decertified. The appropriate State agency shallbe notified in accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(10)(vii) of this chapter.A copy of the notice of decertification shall be sent to the State agency.(13) Courses of study recognized by the Attorney General as defined atandSection; 245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter shall provide certain standardsfor the selection of teachers. Since some programs may be in locationswhere selection of qualified staff is limited, or where budget constraintsrestrict options, the following list of qualities for teacher selectionis provided as guidance. Teacher selections should include as many of thefollowing qualities as possible:(i) Specific training in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages(TESOL);(ii) Experience as a classroom teacher with adults;(iii) Cultural sensitivity and openness;(iv) Familiarity with competency-based education;(v) Knowledge of curriculum and materials adaptation;(vi) And knowledge of a second language.(c) <T3>Ineligible aliens. </T3>(1) An alien who has been convicted of a felony,or three or more misdemeanors in the United States.(2) An alien who is inadmissible to the United States as an immigrant,except as provided in andSection; 245a.3(g)(1).(3) An alien who was previously granted temporary resident status pursuantto section 245A(a) of the Act who has not filed an application for permanentresident status under section 245A(b)(1) of the Act during the one yearperiod which began with the nineteenth month that begins after the datethe alien was granted such temporary status.(4) An alien who was not previously granted temporary resident status undersection 245A(a) of the Act.(d) <T3>Filing the application. </T3>The provisions of Part 211 of this chapterrelating to the documentary requirements for immigrants shall not applyto an applicant under this part.(1) The application must be filed on Form I-698. The application will bemailed to the designated Regional Processing Facility having jurisdictionover the applicant's residence. Form I-698 must be accompanied by the correctfee and documents specified in the instructions.(2) The submission of original documents is not required at the time offiling Form I-698. Copies certified as true and complete by a qualifieddesignated entity in good-standing, an attorney, or by an alien's representativein the format prescribed andSection; 204.2(j)(1) or (2) of this chapter maybe submitted with Form I-698. Original documents must be presented whenrequested by the Service. Official government records, employment or employment-relatedrecords maintained by employers, unions, or collective bargaining organizations,medical records, school records maintained by a school or school boardor other records maintained by a party other than the applicant which aresubmitted in evidence must be certified as true and complete by such partiesand must bear their seal or signature or the signature and title of personsauthorized to act in their behalf. At the discretion of the district directorand/or the Regional Processing Facility director, original documents maybe kept for forensic examination.(3) A separate application (I-698) must be filed by each eligible applicant.All fees required by andSection; 103.7(b)(1) of this chapter must be submittedin the exact amount in the form of a money order, cashier's check or certifiedbank check. No personal checks or currency will be accepted. Fees willnot be waived or refunded under any circumstances.(4) Applicants who filed for temporary resident status prior to December1, 1987, are required to submit the results of a serologic test for HIVvirus on Form I-693, ``Medical Examination of Aliens Seeking Adjustmentof Status, (Pub. L. 99-603)'', completed by a designated civil surgeon,unless the serologic test for HIV was performed and the results were submittedon Form I-693 when the applicant filed for temporary resident status. Applicantswho did submit an I-693 reflecting a serologic test for HIV was performedprior to December 1, 1987 must submit evidence of this fact when filingthe I-698 application in order to be relieved from the requirement of submittinganother I-693. Applicants having to submit I-693s pursuant to this sectionare not required to have a complete medical examination. All HIV-positiveapplicants shall be advised that a waiver is available and shall be providedthe opportunity to apply for the waiver.(5) If necessary, the validity of an alien's temporary resident card (I-688)will be extended in increments of one (1) year until such time as the decisionon an alien's properly filed application for permanent residence becomesfinal.(6) An application deficient in any way shall be returned to the applicantwith request for correction, additional information, and/or documentation.If response to this request is not received within 60 days, a second andfinal request for correction, additional information, and/or documentationshall be made. If the second request is not complied with within 60 days,the application will be adjudicated on the basis of the existing record.(e) <T3>Interview. </T3>Each applicant, regardless of age, must appear at theappropriate Service office and must be fingerprinted for the purpose ofissuance of Form I-551. Each applicant shall be interviewed by an immigrationofficer, except that the interview may be waived for a child under 14,or when it is impractical because of the health or advanced age of theapplicant. An applicant failing to appear for the scheduled interview may,for good cause, be afforded another interview.(f) <T3>Applicability of exclusion grounds.</T3>_(1) <T3>Grounds of exclusion not to be applied. </T3>The following paragraphsof section 212(a) of the Act shall not apply to applicants for adjustmentof status from temporary resident to permanent resident status: (14) workersentering without labor certification; (20) immigrants not in possessionof valid entry documents; (21) visas issued without compliance of section203; (25) illiterates; and (32) graduates of non-accredited medical schools.(2) <T3>Waiver of grounds of excludability. </T3>Except as provided in paragraph(f)(4) of this section, the Service may waive any provision of section212(a) of the Act only in the case of individual aliens for humanitarianpurposes, to assure family unity, or when the granting of such a waiveris otherwise in the public interest. In any case where a provision of section212(a) of the Act has been waived in connection with an alien's applicationfor lawful temporary resident status under section 245A(a) of the Act,no additional waiver of the same ground of excludability will be requiredwhen the alien applies for permanent resident status under section 245A(b)(1)of the Act. In the event that the alien becomes excludable under any provisionof section 212(a) of the Act subsequent to the date temporary residencewas granted, a waiver of the ground of excludability, if available, willbe required before permanent resident status may be granted.(3) <T3>Grounds of exclusion that may not be waived. </T3>Notwithstanding anyother provisions of the Act the following provisions of section 212(a)of the Act may not be waived by the Attorney General under paragraph (g)(2)of this section:(i) Paragraphs (9) and (10) (criminals);(ii) Paragraph (15) (public charge) insofar as it relates to an applicationfor adjustment to permanent residence by an alien other than an alien whois eligible for benefits under Title XVI of the Social Security Act orsection 212 of Pub.L. 93-66 for the month in which such alien is grantedlawful temporary residence status under subsection (a);(iii) Paragraph (23) (narcotics), except for a single offense of simplepossession of thirty grams or less of marijuana;(iv) Paragraphs (27) (prejudicial to the public interest), (28) (communists),and (29) (subversive);(v) Paragraph (33) (participated in Nazi persecution).(4) <T3>Determination of ``Likely to become a public charge'' and Special Rule.</T3>Prior to use of the special rule for determination of public chargeparagraph (f)(4)(iii) of this section, an alien must first be determinedto be excludable under 212(a)(15) of the Act. If the applicant is determinedto be ``likely to become a public charge,'' he or she may still be admissibleunder the terms of the Special Rule.(i) In determining whether an alien is ``likely to become a public charge''financial responsibility of the alien is to be established by examiningthe totality of the alien's circumstances at the time of his or her applicationfor legalization. The existence or absence of a particular factor shouldnever be the sole criteria for determining if an alien is likely to becomea public charge. The determination of financial responsibility should bea prospective evaluation based on the alien's age, health, income, andvocation.(ii) The Special Rule for determination of public charge paragraph (f)(4)(iii)of this section is to be applied only after an initial determination thatthe alien is inadmissible under the provisions of section 212(a)(15) ofthe Act.(iii) <T3>Special Rule. </T3>An alien who has a consistent employment historywhich shows the ability to support himself or herself and his or her familyeven though his or her income may be below the poverty level is not excludableunder paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this section. The alien's employment historyneed not be continuous in that it is uninterrupted. It should be continuousin the sense that the alien shall be regularly attached to the workforce,has an income over a substantial period of the applicable time, and hasdemonstrated the capacity to exist on his or her income and maintain hisor her family without recourse to public cash assistance. The Special Ruleis prospective in that the Service shall determine, based on the alien'shistory, whether he or she is likely to become a public charge. Past acceptanceof public cash assistance within a history of consistent employment willenter into this decision. The weight given in considering applicabilityof the public charge provisions will depend on many factors but the lengthof time an applicant has received public cash assistance will constitutea significant factor. It is not necessary to file a waiver in order toapply the Special Rule for Determination of Public Charge.(5) <T3>Public cash assistance and criminal history verification. </T3>Declarationsby an applicant that he or she has not been the recipient of public cashassistance and/or has not had a criminal record are subject to a verificationof facts by the Service. The <ITAG tagnum="54">applicant must agree to fully cooperate in the verification process.Failure to assist the Service in verifying information necessary for properadjudication may result in denial of the application.</ITAG>(g) <T3>Departure. </T3>An applicant for adjustment to lawful permanent residentstatus under section 245A(b)(1) of the Act who was granted lawful temporaryresident status under section 245A(a) of the Act, shall be permitted toreturn to the United States after such brief and casual trips abroad, aslong as the alien reflects a continuing intention to adjust to lawful permanentresident status. However, such absences from the United States must notexeed the periods of time specified in andSection; 245a.3(b)(2) of this chapterin order for the alien to maintain continuous residence as specified inthe Act.(h) <T3>Decision. </T3>The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision,and, if the application is denied, of the reason therefor. Applicationsfor permanent residence under this chapter will not be denied at localINS offices (districts, suboffices, and legalization offices) until theentire record of proceeding has been reviewed. An application will notbe denied if the denial is based on adverse information not previouslyfurnished to the Service by the alien without providing the alien an opportunityto rebut the adverse information and to present evidence in his or herbehalf. If inconsistencies are found between information submitted withthe adjustment application and information previously furnished to theService, the applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to explain discrepanciesor rebut any adverse information. A party affected under this part by anadverse decision is entitled to file an appeal on Form I-694. If an applicationis denied, work authorization will be granted until a final decision hasbeen rendered on an appeal or until the end of the appeal period if noappeal is filed. An applicant whose appeal period has ended is no longerconsidered to be an Eligible Legalized Alien for the purposes of the administrationof State Legalization Impact Assistance Grants (SLIAG) funding. An alienwhose application is denied will not be required to surrender his or hertemporary resident card (I-688) until such time as the appeal period hastolled, or until expiration date of the I-688, whichever date is later.After exhaustion of an appeal, an applicant who believes that the groundsfor denial have been overcome may submit another application with fee,provided that the application is submitted within his or her one-year eligibilityperiod.(i) <T3>Appeal process. </T3>An adverse decision under this part may be appealedto the Associate Commissioner, Examinations (Administrative Appeals Unit)the appellate authority designated in andSection; 103.1(f)(2). Any appealshall be submitted to the Regional Processing Facility with the requiredfee within thirty (30) days after service of the Notice of Denial in accordancewith the procedures of andSection; 103.3(a) of this chapter. An appeal receivedafter the thirty (30) day period has tolled will not be accepted. The thirty(30) day period for submitting an appeal begins three days after the noticeof denial is mailed. If a review of the Record of Proceeding (ROP) is requestedby the alien or his or her legal representative and an appeal has beenproperly filed, an additional thirty (30) days will be allowed for thisreview from the time the Record of Proceeding is photocopied and mailed.A brief may be submitted with the appeal form or submitted up to thirty(30) calendar days from the date of receipt of the appeal form at the RegionalProcessing Facility. Briefs filed after submission of the appeal shouldbe mailed directly to the Regional Processing Facility. For good causeshown, the time within which a brief supporting an appeal may be submittedmay be extended by the Director of the Regional Processing Facility.(j) <T3>Motions. </T3>The Regional Processing Facility director may reopenand reconsider any adverse decision sua sponte. When an appeal to the AssociateCommissioner, Examinations (Administrative Appeals Unit) has been filed,the INS director of the Regional Processing Facility may issue a new decisionthat will grant the benefit which has been requested. The director's newdecision must be served on the appealing party within forty-five (45) daysof receipt of any <ITAG tagnum="54">briefs and/or new evidence, or upon expiration of the time allowedfor the submission of any briefs. </ITAG>(k) <T3>Certifications. </T3>The Regional Processing Facility director or districtdirector may, in accordance with andSection; 103.4 of this chapter, certifya decision to the Associate Commissioner, Examinations (AdministrativeAppeals Unit) when the case involves an unusually complex or novel questionof law or fact. The decision on an appealed case subsequently remandedback to either the Regional Processing Facility director or the districtdirector will be certified to the Administrative Appeals Unit. (l) <T3>Date of adjustment to permanent residence. </T3>The status of an alienwhose application for permanent resident status is approved shall be adjustedto that of a lawful permanent resident as of the date of filing of theapplication for permanent residence or the eligibility date, whicheveris later. (m) <T3>Limitation on access to information and confidentiality. </T3>(1) Noperson other than a sworn officer or employee of the Department of Justiceor bureau of agency thereof, will be permitted to examine individual applications.For purposes of this part, any individual employed under contract by theService to work in connection with the Legalization Program shall be consideredan ``employee of the Department of Justice or bureau or agency thereof''.(2) No information furnished pursuant to an application for permanent residentstatus under this section shall be used for any purpose except: (i) Tomake a determination on the application; or, (ii) for the enforcement ofthe provisions encompassed in section 245A(c)(6) of the Act, except asprovided in paragraph (m)(3) of this section. (3) If a determination is made by the Service that the alien has, in connectionwith his or her application, engaged in fraud or willful misrepresentationor concealment of a material fact, knowingly provided a false writing ordocument in making his or her application, knowingly made a false statementor representation, or engaged in any other activity prohibited by section245A(c)(6) of the Act, the Service shall refer the matter to the UnitedStates Attorney for prosecution of the alien or of any person who createdor supplied a false writing or document for use in an application for adjustmentof status under this part. (4) Information contained in granted legalization files may be used bythe Service at a later date to make a decision on an immigrant visa petitionor other status filed by the applicant under section 204(a), or for naturalizationapplications submitted by the applicant. (n) <T3>Rescission. </T3>Rescission of adjustment of status under 245a shalloccur under the guidelines established in section 246 of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: October 12, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Richard E. Norton, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4"><T3>Associate Commissioner. </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-25026 Filed 10-28-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>