<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88106-0022 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-06-88.f2.A1021</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 563</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 87-1297]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Capital Forbearance</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: December 22, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (``Board''), as theoperating head of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (``FSLIC''or ``Corporation''), is adopting regulations to implement section 404 ofthe Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987, which provides that the Boardshall establish a program of capital forbearance for well-managed, viableFederal associations and FSLIC-insured institutions if certain requirementsare met. The regulation sets forth the requirements that institutions mustmeet to obtain forbearance under this program, the procedures for requestingforbearance, the procedures under which an applicant's Principal SupervisoryAgent (``PSA'') will consider such requests, the effect of forbearance,and the termination of a grant of forbearance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>January 1, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Michael P. Scott, 202-778-2516,Policy Analyst, or Kevin O'Connell, 202-778-2615, Supervision, Office ofRegulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision, Federal Home Loan Bank System;Catherine McFadden, 202-377-6639, Attorney, or Jerome L. Edelstein, 202-377-7057,Acting Deputy Director, Regulations and Legislation Division, Office ofGeneral Counsel; C. Dawn Causey, 202-653-2624, Attorney, or Marianne E.Roche, 202-653-2609, Deputy Director, Office of Enforcement; Richard Brown,202-377-6795, Economist, or Joseph A. McKenzie, 202-377-6763, Director,Policy Analysis Division, Office of Policy and Economic Research, FederalHome Loan Bank Board, 1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Section 404 of the Competitive EqualityBanking Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552 (``CEBA''), providesthat the Board, as operating head of the FSLIC, adopt capital recoveryregulations for regulating and supervising troubled but well-managed andviable Federal associations and insured institutions in a manner that willmaximize the long-term viability of the thrift industry at the lowest costto the Corporation. CEBA describes certain circumstances under which the Board is to extendcapital forbearance. The Board is to consider whether a well-managed institution'sweak capital condition is primarily the result of losses on loans or participationsin loans and whether: (1) The value of the collateral for such loans hasbeen adversely affected by economic conditions in an economically depressedregion; or (2) the institution is a minority institution having 50 percentor more of its loan assets as minority loans and 50 percent or more ofits originated loans as construction or permanent loans for one-to-fourfamily residences. In addition, the Board is to determine whether an institution'sweak capital condition is the result of imprudent operating practices.Furthermore, when granting capital forbearance, the Board must approvea capital recovery plan submitted by the institution, and the institutionmust adhere to that plan and submit regular and complete reports on itsprogress in meeting the goals set forth in the plan. Generally, CEBA requires that the capital recovery regulations apply toinstitutions with regulatory capital of at least 0.5 percent. CEBA alsoprovides the Board with discretionary authority to extend capital forbearanceto institutions with regulatory capital of less than 0.5 percent. In makingcapital forbearance available to such an institution, the Board is to determinewhether the institution satisfies the same capital forbearance requirementsthat pertain to institutions with regulatory capital of 0.5 percent ormore and, in addition, whether the institution has reasonable and demonstrableprospects for returning to a satisfactory capital level. Pursuant to section 416 of CEBA, capital forbearance authority under thestatute expires when the financing corporation established under section302 completes all net new borrowing authority. On October 5, 1987, the Board proposed a capital forbearance regulationto implement its statutory authority under CEBA. <T3>See</T3> 52 FR 39098 (Oct. 20, 1987). Public hearings on the proposalwere held on November 3 and 4, 1987, and written comments were solicitedby the Board. The comment period ended on November 19, 1987. The Board invited commenters and participants in the hearing to addressall aspects of the proposal and, in addition, specifically solicited commentwith regard to several issues including: (1) The method of identifyingeconomically depressed regions; (2) the advisability of defining more specificallythe statutory standards that an institution must meet in order to qualifyfor forbearance and how such standards should be defined; (3) whether forbearanceshould be terminated when economic conditions in the relevant geographicalregion improve; and (4) whether a process should be established for reviewor appeal of forbearance determinations made by PSAs. The Board received a total of 31 comments in response to the proposal includingwritten comments and comments expressed at the public hearings. Eighteenexpressed general support for the proposal; two expressed opposition; andeleven indicated no position about the proposal generally. Many of thecommenters suggested various modifications to the proposal.Of the comments received, fifteen came from thrift institutions, elevenfrom trade organizations, which for the most part were national and statethrift organizations, four from law firms that represent thrift institutions,and one from a government agency. Although the comment period expired on November 19, the Board consideredlate-filed comments in an effort to maximize public participation in therulemaking. After carefully considering the issues raised by the commenters,the Board has determined to adopt the proposal with certain modificationsand clarifications. <ITAG tagnum="84">A. Appeal/Review Process </ITAG>Many commenters urged the Board to adopt a process for review or appealof the PSA's decision on a forbearance application. These commenters includedfive thrifts, eight trade groups, and four law firms. Five of these commentersalso suggested adoption of more specific standards for PSAs to apply inpassing on forbearance applications. Three commenters expressed the viewthat more specific guidelines were necessary but did not address the questionof a review or appeal procedure. Virtually all of the commenters advocating an appeal or review processfelt that one was necessary to assure fair and uniform application of theregulation. As one commenter said, ``while one alternative might be toplace limitations on the PSA's authority, we believe that a flexible approach,consistent with the Bank Board's intentions can be effected by providingan appeals process.'' One commenter argued that a review of PSA forbearance decisions is essentialprior to the appointment of a conservator or receiver for the institution.The institution ``just wants somebody to review what the PSA has done ** * the 11:59 review before a final determination is reached,'' the commentertold the Board. Commenters supporting adoption of guidelines without addressing the needfor a review or appeals procedure felt, as one commenter said, that this``would ensure that all affected institutions are treated fairly and ina uniform manner.'' The Board has reviewed all of the comments and weighed all of the argumentsmade on behalf of adoption of a review or appeal procedure. However, aftergiving the matter due consideration, the Board does not believe that anappeal or review procedure is necessary or appropriate. As the Board indicated in the preamble to the proposed regulation, it doesnot anticipate that a denial of a request for capital forbearance necessarilywill be followed by supervisory or enforcement action or the appointmentof a conservator or receiver. Rather, the Board expects that an institutiondenied forbearance will be subject to the same treatment as it would havehad it not filed a request for forbearance. <T3>See </T3>52 FR 39898, 39103 (1987). In other words, while an institution granted forbearance will not, absenttermination of forbearance, be subjected to adverse actions based on theinsured institution's inadequate capital, denial of the application doesnot and will not automatically trigger adverse action. Consequently, denialby the PSA does not adversely affect the institution, which will continueto be regulated and supervised in the same manner as if it had not filedan application for forbearance. In response to the commenter who was concerned that the PSA's denial offorbearance would sound the death knell for an institution, the Board emphasizesthat denial of an institution's capital forbearance application does notautomatically result in the appointment of a conservator or receiver. Thedenial decision only means that the PSA has determined that the institutiondoes not meet the prescribed factors for forbearance under the regulation.Appointment of a conservator or receiver, as appropriate, for a Federalassociation or insured institution is made by the Board. 12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(6),1729(c) (1982). The Board does, however, believe that to promote uniformity of forbearancedecisions by different PSAs, while preserving the flexibility of PSAs toaddress the unique circumstances of each institution applying for forbearance,it is appropriate to develop guidelines that PSAs should consider in makingthe determinations governing whether a grant of forbearance to a particularinstitution is appropriate. Consequently, pursuant to the Board's direction,the Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision (``ORPOS'')is developing guidelines for the implementation of the capital forbearanceregulation. All aspects of the regulation will be considered in the developmentof these guidelines, and the views of those commenting on the proposedcapital forbearance regulation will be considered with respect to specificfactors. <ITAG tagnum="84">B. ``Economically Depressed Region'' </ITAG>1. Method of Designation Commenters expressed a diversity of opinion on the method of designatingeconomically depressed regions. One commenter supported the method set forth in the proposed regulation,that each PSA determine economically depressed regions on a case-by-casebasis. The commenter explained that, because of his knowledge of the localeconomies in his district, the PSA could identify such regions more accuratelythan could the Board. Eight commenters supported designation by the Board or the PSA of economicallydepressed regions coupled with flexibility to recognize other areas thatapplicants demonstrate are economically depressed. Three of these commentersexplained that the PSA, because of his knowledge of the local economiesin his district, would provide the most accurate determinations. Anothercommenter believed that identification of economically depressed regionswill free the PSAs from the burden of analyzing data submitted by all institutionswithin such regions. Two of the commenters believed that identificationwould remove the burden from institutions of proving that they operatein an economically depressed region. One commenter noted that small institutionsmay not have the economic resources and expertise to make findings as towhat constitutes an economically depressed region. Three commenters suggested that the Board identify a list of economicallydepressed regions. Two commenters explained that this method of designationwould lessen the burden on institutions and supervisory staff, and believedit would provide a measure of uniformity to the determinations that islacking if left to the discretion of each PSA. The Board has carefully considered these comments, particularly the emphasisthat several commenters placed on the expertise of PSAs to make such determinations,the need to reduce the burden on institutions of demonstrating that a particularregion is economically depressed, and the need to take steps to assureuniformity among decisions of various PSAs.The Board believes that these concerns can be alleviated without identifyingand constantly updating pre-established lists of economically depressedregions. As a result the Board is adopting in its final regulation revisedprocedures to help address these concerns. First, an institution applyingfor capital forbearance will identify in its application the region orregions in which it has suffered losses due to loans with declining collateralvalues. At this stage, the applicant need not present evidence that suchregion or regions are economically depressed within the meaning of theregulation. Rather, this determination may be made by the PSA upon considerationof the factors set forth in the regulation and other appropriate factors.In the event that the identified region is in a Federal Home Loan BankDistrict (``Bank District'') other than that to which the application isdirected, the PSA to whom the application has been directed will consultthe PSA of the Bank District in which the identified region is located.The latter PSA will make the determination as to whether the region iseconomically depressed. Only if the appropriate PSA is unable to determinethe issue will it be necessary for the applicant to submit documentationin support of its request. The PSA to whom the application was directed,following consultation with the PSA of the Bank District in which the regionis located, must make the request for such additional information withinthe time frames set forth in the application guidelines adopted by theBoard on October 2, 1987, 52 FR 39064 (Oct. 20, 1987), <T3>to be codified at </T3>12 CFR 571.12. The PSA in the Bank Districtwhere the region is located will then determine whether the region is economicallydepressed based on the evidence submitted.\1\<NOTE/> The Board believes that this method of identifying economicallydepressed regions reduces the burden on institutions seeking forbearanceand promotes uniformity by assuring that different PSAs will not reachdifferent conclusions on the same facts regarding whether a particularregion is economically depressed.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ In this regard, the Board expects that if a PSA wouldreject an application, whether or not the identified region is economicallydepressed (for example, the institution's capital condition has been impairedby imprudent operating practices or its capital plan is unacceptable),no additional evidence on the question of whether the region is economicallydepressed would be requested because it would be irrelevant to the determination.2. Form and Type of Documentation Two commenters requested that the Board and the PSAs consider a broad rangeof data in identifying economically depressed regions. One added that theBoard should do so only so long as such data were relevant and credibleand that the Board should allow the PSA to determine the weight to be accorded to each type of information submitted. The other commenter explainedthat economic data are scarcer in areas outside Metropolitan StatisticalAreas (``MSAs'') and the accuracy of the factors used to identify economicproblems varies according to the type of economic problem. The Board wishes to emphasize that if a PSA requests that an institutionsubmit evidence that it is operating in an economically depressed region,the regulation provides significant flexibility with respect to the formand type of data that the institution may submit to the PSA, so long asthe data is relevant and reliable. The factors set forth in the regulationare examples and do not constitute a definitive list. 3. ``Geographical Region'' Five commenters responded to the Board's request for comment on the definitionof ``geographical region.'' The proposal had suggested that regions beidentified based on political boundaries. One commenter requested clarificationof the term ``established political boundaries'' and suggested that, ata minimum, it should include counties. Three commenters suggested that``geographical region'' be identified by the institution seeking forbearance,without the requirement that it be identified on the basis of ``establishedpolitical boundaries.'' One commenter suggested that the PSA determinethe appropriate geographical region because of his familiarity with theeconomic affairs of his district. After considering these suggestions, and in light of the approach thatthe Board is adopting to identify economically depressed regions, the finalregulation provides that any geographical region identified by the applicantcan be recognized as economically depressed if such recognition is appropriate.The Board believes this approach will enable applicants to identify theregion most pertinent to demonstrating their case for forbearance. <ITAG tagnum="84">C. ``Well-Managed'' and ``Imprudent Operating Practices'' Tests </ITAG>CEBA requires that the Board adopt regulations to provide forbearance towell-managed and viable institutions whose weak capital condition is notthe result of imprudent operating practices. One commenter suggested that Congress did not intend that a well-managedtest be separate from the imprudent operating practices test. The commentersupported this position by directing attention to the statutory enumerationof five specific imprudent operating practices, while the term ``well-managed''is not similarly defined or clarified. The Board, however, interprets the statutory language and legislative historyas evidence that Congress intended that institutions that are not well-managedbe disqualified from capital forbearance. The introductory statutory languageto section 404 instructs the Board to promulgate regulations to permit``troubled but well-managed'' institutions to apply for capital forbearance.Likewise, Congress reiterated the statement that well-managed institutionswith capital below 0.5 percent may be granted forbearance. Also, a statementmade by Senator Garn in a colloquy with Senator Proxmire during the Senatedebate on CEBA stressed that the capital forbearance provisions were notintended to provide a safe harbor for:<ITAG tagnum="20">[the] small minority of the industry, [which] has operated in an unsafeand unsound condition_often engaging in fraudulent and reckless investmentstrategies, self dealing, conflicts of interest and a whole host of otherwiserepugnant business practices in violation of statutes, regulations, ethics,their fiduciary duties and plain decent business standards.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">133 Cong. Rec. S11209-10 (daily ed. August 4, 1987) (statement bySenator Garn during colloquy with Senator Proxmire). Because the Board believes that Congress intended that only well-managedinstitutions be granted forbearance and that it is possible that an institutionmay not be well-managed, even if imprudent operating practices did notcontribute to its impaired capital, the well-managed test is retained.Two commenters suggested that the well-managed test is unduly subjectiveand several commenters requested clarification of the factors to be consideredin applying the well-managed test and the imprudent operating practicestest. These factors will be described in the memorandum being preparedby ORPOS setting forth guidelines for the implementation of the capitalforbearance program. Another commenter asked the Board to clarify that institutions that arelocated outside economically depressed regions not be judged <T3>per se </T3>imprudent because they have lent in economically depressedregions; rather, that the underwriting of such loans, loss experience,and economic conditions in the area at the time the loan was made or acquiredby the institution be examined in determining whether management engagedin ``imprudent operating practices.'' The Board concurs with this comment.One commenter was concerned as to how the well-managed and imprudent operatingpractices tests would be applied. This commenter believed that Congressintended that institutions not engaged in fraud, self-dealing, or otherbusiness practices violative of law and ethics be eligible, not excluded,from forbearance if their capital losses resulted from ``bad'' businessdecisions. This commenter asked the Board to clarify that imprudent operatingpractices criteria (such as ``speculative'' practices, payment of ``excessive''dividends, ``substandard'' underwriting practices) and well-managed criteria(such as management's record of operating the institution, its abilityto operate the institution in changing economic conditions, and abilityto develop and implement a capital plan) be viewed in the context of management'sintent to violate Board rules and policies, rather than viewing errorsin management's business decisions as imprudent operating practices oras an indication that the institution is not well-managed. With respectto imprudent operating practices, the Board intends that only those businessdecisions that constitute imprudent operating practices be considered indisqualifying an institution from capital forbearance. With respect toa well-managed determination, the Board does not intend that the well-managedtest be used to judge business decisions on the basis of hindsight; however,it does intend that the PSA determine that an institution's managementis capable of overseeing its capital recovery. To the extent that an institution'smanagement has a history of ``bad'' business decisions, this is a relevantconsideration for the PSA to weigh in determining whether the institutionqualifies for capital forbearance. According to the Joint Explanatory Statementof the Conference Committee:<ITAG tagnum="21">The capital recovery program is not intended to restrict any authorityof the Bank Board to correct any fraud, criminal activity, imprudent operatingpractices or managerial incompetence.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">H. Rep. No. 100-261, 100th Cong., lst Sess. 165 (1987). Therefore, given Congressional intent, the Board believes that it is notprecluded from considering managerial incompetence in making the forbearancedetermination. <ITAG tagnum="84">D. Capital Plan </ITAG>Several commenters addressed various aspects of the proposed regulationconcerning the capital plan to be submitted by forbearance applicants.Three commenters specifically addressed the preamble discussion of planssubmitted by institutions whose capital is less than 0.5 percent. The preambleto the proposed regulation stated that such institutions should not rely``on generalized hopes or expectations of economic improvements and otheruncertain future events.'' One commenter said that the regulation shouldnot be read as permitting unrealistic future economic scenarios, but thatreasonable positive economic assumptions be allowed. Two other commenterslikewise suggested that institutions be allowed to project reasonable recoveryrates for the local economy. Several commenters misunderstood the ``demonstrable'' portion of the ``reasonableand demonstrable'' standard, fearing that the standard may be interpretedto mean that an institution may not base its capital plan on predictionsof economic improvement. With respect to the proposal's requirement that the ``reasonable and demonstrableprospects'' standard apply to institutions with regulatory capital below0.5 percent, one commenter was concerned that this implies that institutionswith regulatory capital greater than 0.5 percent would not be requiredto have reasonable prospects of meeting capital goals within the requiredtime frame. This commenter believed that all forbearance applicants shouldbe required to meet this standard. Moreover, two commenters urged the Boardto impose rigorous review standards on capital plans submitted by all applicants.Both suggested that the business plans demonstrate that an institutionhas a genuine and reasonable prospect of returning to financial healthin the near term. One commenter also suggested that if the assumptionsunderlying a business plan are unrealistic or the business plan projectionsare unrealistic, such application should be rejected. Another commenterurged the Board to impose minimal operating restrictions on an institutionas part of the capital plan. In response to these comments, the Board notes that the ``reasonable anddemonstrable'' test, as interpreted by the Board in its proposed regulation,requires that the capital plan ``not rely upon unrealistic predictionsof economic improvements or other uncertain future events.'' The Boardbelieves that adoption of this standard, which clearly contemplates relianceon realistic projections concerning future occurrences, addresses the concernsof several of the commenters. To the extent that preamble language accompanyingthe proposed regulation suggested that the Board was proposing a standardother than that contained in the regulatory language itself, the preamblelanguage was insufficiently precise. Consequently, the Board is adoptingin the final regulation the standard set forth in the proposed regulatorylanguage. The Board also emphasizes that while CEBA specifically applies the ``reasonableand demonstrable'' standard to institutions with capital under 0.5 percent,in evaluating a forbearance application PSAs must consider the applicant'sprospects for recovery in granting or denying the application and determinewhether the goals set forth in the applicant's capital plan are reasonablyachievable. Of necessity, this determination must be made on a case-by-casebasis; however, as noted previously, ORPOS is in the process of developingguidelines for the implementation of the capital forbearance program.Three commenters addressed the content of the capital plan. Two commentersasked that the regulation state that revised business plans may be acceptableas capital plans and urged the Board to discourage use of new, boilerplate,computer-generated business plans. Instead, they suggested that capitalplans be generated by management with an emphasis on quality, not quantity.Another commenter stated that requiring sophisticated business plans wouldunfairly burden small institutions and urged that concise, well-consideredplans, without reams of computer printouts, be considered. The Board agrees fully with these commenters and emphasizes that the acceptabilityof a plan must be based on its quality and achievability. The Board encouragesmanagement-generated plans and, in fact, expects an institution's managementto have a significant involvement in the preparation of the capital planand not to rely entirely on outside consultants. Further, each capitalplan of necessity will be individualized because it will be developed byeach institution to reflect its unique situation. Moreover, the precisecontent of the capital plan is initially to be devised by the applicant,although the PSA may request additional information and provide for restrictionsor requirements before approving the plan. With respect to the grounds for terminating forbearance, one commenterrequested clarification of an institution's failure to comply with itscapital plan. For example, if an institution does all that it is able underits capital plan, but unfavorable market conditions preclude it from takingcertain actions set forth in the plan, such as issuance of subordinateddebt, the commenter was uncertain as to whether the applicant would beviewed as in compliance with the plan under such circumstances. As statedin the proposal, institutions must submit regular reports describing andexplaining any deviations from the schedule, methods, operations, or goalsset forth in the plan. This would include, for instance, failure or inabilityto issue subordinated debt. The PSA is to evaluate the information submittedto aid him in determining whether modification of the plan or terminationof forbearance is appropriate. Seven commenters discussed the capital instruments program, which is providedfor in section 405 of CEBA, and its interrelationship with the capitalforbearance program. Six commenters urged that the capital forbearanceregulation be revised to include the sale of capital instruments pursuantto section 405 as an important tool in helping institutions meet theircapital requirements. A capital instruments program pursuant to section 405 is being developedby the Corporation. The Board will permit the inclusion of capital instrumentsas part of a capital plan. However, PSA approval of forbearance in suchcase does not, in any respect, commit the Corporation to purchase the capitalinstruments provided in the plan. A decision by the Corporation not topurchase the instruments could lead to a reevaluation of the plan and thegrant of forbearance by the PSA. One commenter thought that five years was too short a time in which torequire an institution to increase its capital to minimum required levelspursuant to its plan. This commenter suggested that the purchase of capitalinstruments as provided for by section 405 of CEBA would help alleviatehis concerns. In addition to providing for capital instruments, the Board,in response to these concerns, is extending the capital recovery periodto January 1, 1995. This is consistent with the time period provided inthe forbearance policy statements of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation(``FDIC'') and the Comptroller of the Currency. <T3>See </T3>52 FR 28182 (July 13, 1987); Comptroller of the Currency BankingIssuance BC-212 (July 7, 1987). As an alternative, this commenter suggested that the Board expressly deemacceptable any capital plan indicating that the institution will have break-evenprofit levels by the end of the five-year time frame. This suggestion departedfrom the proposal which required that an acceptable capital plan must providefor the institution to meet its minimum capital requirement. The Boardrejects this suggestion on the basis that capital forbearance was providedby Congress to permit institutions to regain appropriate capital levels,not to achieve break-even profit levels. <ITAG tagnum="84">E. Federal Savings Banks Insured by the FDIC </ITAG>Three commenters asked that the Board explicitly state that Federal savingsbanks insured by the FDIC are eligible to apply for forbearance under section404. The FDIC, however, took the position that such institutions shouldnot be covered by the Board's capital forbearance program. The Board believes that CEBA's language requires that such institutionsbe eligible to apply under the Board's capital forbearance program. Section404(a) of CEBA, which amends the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (``HOLA''),provides that the Board ``shall prescribe capital recovery regulationsfor regulating and supervising troubled but well-managed and viable <T3>associations * * *'' </T3>(emphasis added). The HOLA defines ``association''as including a ``Federal savings bank chartered by the Board under section1464 of this title * * *.'' 12 U.S.C. 1462(d) (1982). FDIC-insured Federalsavings banks are chartered pursuant to paragraph (o) of section 1464.<T3>Id.</T3>. 1464(o)(1), (3). Moreover, Congress has given the Board the authority to provide for the``organization, incorporation, operation, examination, and regulation''of such institutions. <T3>Id. </T3> 1464(o)(1). Decisions to close these FDIC-insured institutionsand appoint the FDIC as receiver are made by the Federal Home Loan BankBoard. 12 U.S.C. 1821(c) (1982). Consequently, the Board believes thatCongress intended that its forbearance policy apply to these FDIC-insuredinstitutions. The Board also notes, however, that the FDIC deems an FDIC-insured institutionto be operating in an unsafe and unsound condition if its capital levelfalls below three percent, unless the FDIC is party to an agreement betweenthe institution and the Board to increase the institution's capital ratioto a level deemed appropriate by the FDIC. 12 CFR 325.4(c) (1987). Absentsuch agreement, the FDIC contends that it is empowered by statute to terminateinsurance coverage if the institution is ``engaging in unsafe or unsoundpractices in conducting the business of such bank, or is in an unsafe orunsound condition to continue operations as an [FDIC] insured bank.'' 12U.S.C. 1818(a). The statute provides that this finding be made by the FDICBoard of Directors. <T3>Id. </T3>In providing forbearance for FDIC-insured Federal associations,Congress did not amend the statutory provision providing for terminationby the FDIC of insurance coverage. Thus, if forbearance were granted bythe Bank Board, the institution could still face termination of insuranceby the FDIC due to capital inadequacy and, if insurance coverage were terminated,this likely would provide grounds for the PSA to terminate forbearance.Consequently, to reconcile the authority of both the Board and the FDICwith regard to FDIC-insured Federal savings banks, the final regulationprovides that FDIC-insured institutions may apply for forbearance and thatsuch forbearance may be granted upon the concurrence of the PSA and theFDIC.<ITAG tagnum="84">F. Termination of Forbearance </ITAG>Six commenters addressing the issue believed that forbearance should notbe terminated on the grounds that economic conditions in the relevant designatedeconomically depressed region have improved. As one commenter said, ``itwould be unrealistic to assume that there would be no delay between improvementin local economic conditions and the recovery of capital deficiencies causedby the formerly depressed economy.'' The Board agrees and is not providingin the regulation that recovery of a depressed economy alone will triggertermination of forbearance. One commenter suggested that the regulation provide that prior to terminationby the PSA of a grant of forbearance the institution be given an opportunityto address and rebut the PSA's reasons for termination. As stated in thepreamble to the proposed regulation the Board prefers that, when circumstancesallow, the PSA provide the institution with an opportunity to address thereasons for termination before finally terminating forbearance. <ITAG tagnum="84">G. Policy Statement Impact </ITAG>The preamble to the proposal states that, when effective, the proposedregulation will supersede the Board policy statement on capital forbearance,but that the policy statement will continue to govern applications filedon or before December 31, 1987. One commenter asked whether institutionsthat have timely filed an application pursuant to the policy statementwill be afforded the same benefits, such as participation in the section405 capital instruments program, as institutions granted capital forbearanceunder the final regulation. The commenter suggested the final rule be clarifiedto permit the PSA, upon request, to deem the approval of an applicationunder the policy statement to be an effective approval under the capitalforbearance regulation. The Board agrees with this suggestion. Where anapplication granted under the capital forbearance policy statement meetsthe requirements of today's final rule, and upon written request by theinstitution, the PSA may deem the grant of forbearance as a grant underthe final rule. If the application does not meet the requirements of thefinal regulation, the PSA may ask the applicant to provide any additionalinformation the PSA believes is necessary for the application to meet therequirements of the final rule. In the event that an applicant does requestthat a forbearance application that was approved under the policy statementbe approved under the regulation, the timetable for such determinationwill be that governing forbearance requests made initially under this proposaland set forth in andSection; 563.47(i)(3)(i). <ITAG tagnum="84">H. Effect of Forbearance </ITAG>The proposed regulation stated that following a grant of forbearance aninstitution would not be subject to supervisory or enforcement action toenforce its minimum capital requirement or termination of insurance orplacement in conservatorship or receivership on the basis of inadequatecapital. One commenter suggested that, where forbearance has been granted, the Boardshould also forbear from removing existing management, merging the institutionout of existence, or instituting any fundamental change in corporate structure.The forbearance provisions of CEBA were adopted by Congress to providea mechanism whereby institutions with weak capital condition related toeconomic conditions would, with improving economic conditions, developadequate capital. Consequently, the Board is establishing a program offorbearance from adverse actions against institutions based solely on inadequatecapital. As stated in the preamble to the proposed regulation, however,such institutions may suffer from problems other than inadequate capitalthat may need to be addressed by supervisory or enforcement actions. Forbearancedoes not apply to such problems, and the Board and the Corporation willnot refrain from taking any appropriate action against a participatinginstitution for matters other than inadequate capital. Likewise, CEBA provides that Federal associations and insured institutions,if meeting the requirements of the statute and this regulation, may beallowed to continue to operate and be eligible for capital forbearance.The statute does not provide for forbearance against members of managementof such institutions, and the Board and Corporation may, in certain instances,find it appropriate to grant forbearance or continue a grant of forbearanceto a Federal association or insured institution even though it may be necessaryto take action against members of management. The Board believes such anapproach is the most consistent with the direction of Congress that a programof forbearance be established ``in a manner which will maximize the long-termviability of the thrift industry at the lowest cost to the Corporation.''<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Miscellaneous Issues </ITAG>Several miscellaneous comments were raised by one commenter each. One commenterasked that the program being proposed encompass institutions with weakcapital conditions caused by other than economic conditions. As discussed,however, Congress has explicitly linked the grant of forbearance in CEBAto institutions adversely affected by economic conditions. Another commenter asked that the Board specifically state that institutionswith negative regulatory capital be permitted to apply for forbearance.The Board notes that CEBA requires adoption of a forbearance program forinstitutions with regulatory capital of 0.5 percent or more. CEBA leavesit to the discretion of the Board, however, to apply those regulationsto institutions with regulatory capital of less than 0.5 percent. The Board'sproposed regulations did not distinguish between institutions above andbelow the 0.5 percent threshold, except to the extent required by CEBA,which provides that institutions with less than 0.5 regulatory capitalhave ``reasonable and demonstrable'' prospects of returning to satisfactorycapital levels. Consequently, at this time the Board is not precludingany Federal association or insured institution from applying for forbearance.Depending on the Board's experience under this regulation, however, theBoard may reevaluate this position in the future. <ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Final Capital Forbearance Regulation </ITAG>To a large extent, the final capital forbearance regulation being adoptedtoday reflects the proposed regulation adopted by the Board on October5, 1987. An explanation of those provisions can be found in the preambleto the notice of proposed rulemaking. See 52 FR 39098 (Oct. 20, 1987).The following modifications and clarifications, however, have been made.A. Definitions The Board has added two definitions to the regulation and modified oneother definition. The definition of ``economically depressed region'' has been changed tostate that any geographical region, whether or not it has established politicalboundaries or is an MSA, can be recognized as economically depressed ifsuch a designation is warranted by a consideration of factors set forthin the regulation and any other relevant data submitted by the applicant.The Board believes this change will enable applicants to identify the geographicalarea most pertinent to demonstrating their case for forbearance. The definitionalso has been changed to state that determinations about whether a particularregion is economically depressed are to be made by the PSA of the BankDistrict in which the region is located, even if the forbearance applicationis filed with the PSA of another Bank District. The Board also has defined ``weak capital condition'' to mean that an institution'sregulatory capital does not meet its regulatory capital requirement ascalculated in accordance with andSection;andSection; 561.13 and 563.13, andany special requirement imposed under andSection; 563.14, or other capitallevel imposed by the Board or Corporation. This definition is necessaryto clarify the level at which institutions may apply for forbearance andto determine the level at which forbearance, once granted, is terminatedbecause the institution has satisfied its capital plan and met its goals.The Board also has added definitions of ``minority,'' ``minority insuredinstitution,'' and ``minority loan'' that incorporate by reference relevantstatutory definitions set forth in CEBA. B. The Capital Plan The Board has made one change in the provision of the regulation relatingto requirements that must be met for a capital plan to be deemed acceptable.The proposed regulation had required that an institution seeking forbearancebe given five years to bring its capital up to required minimum levels.For the reason previously discussed, this period has been extended untilJanuary 1, 1995. A corresponding change has been made in connection withthe requirements that must be met by institutions with regulatory capitalunder 0.5 percent. C. Termination of Capital Forbearance The Board has added two grounds for termination of a grant of capital forbearance.The first provides that forbearance may be terminated if it was grantedby the PSA based on an assumption about the occurrence of future eventsthat subsequently do not occur. Alternatively, in appropriate circumstances,the PSA may seek modification of the capital plan, or permit the grantof forbearance to continue without any change to the plan. Second, a provision has been added to require a grant of forbearance tobe terminated when an institution satisfies its capital requirement. Oncethat standard is met, the Board believes there is no reason to continuethe grant of forbearance. D. Procedures As discussed in connection with other comments, the Board has made severalchanges to the procedures involved in the consideration of requests forforbearance. The proposed rule had required that an applicant for forbearance includein its application, among other things, a showing that the region or regionsin which its collateral with declining values is located are economicallydepressed. For the reasons discussed in response to the comments, the finalregulation states that the applicant must supply such information onlyupon the request of the PSA. Thus, institutions need not undertake theburden of compiling such information where the PSA already has determined,or already has the facts available, to show whether such region is economicallydepressed. The final regulation also provides that determinations aboutwhether a particular region is economically depressed are to be made bythe PSA of the Bank District in which the region is located, even if theforbearance application is filed with the PSA of another Bank District.The Board also added a provision to paragraph (c) which states that FDIC-insuredFederal associations can be granted forbearance with the concurrence ofthe FDIC. E. Waiver of Loans-to-one-Borrower Limitation The Board is clarifying the existing waiver provision of the loans-to-one-borrowerregulation at 12 CFR 563.9-3(b)(4)(1987) to give the Board and the PSAor their designee the authority to grant flexibility to insured institutionsto engage in loan restructurings and facilitate disposition of real estateowned. This waiver enables the Board or the PSA, in accordance with guidelinesapproved by the Board, to waive the aggregate loans-to-one-borrower limitsin connection with resolving or managing institutions of supervisory concernwhich have deficit or deteriorating regulatory capital. Resolution or managementof such cases would include assisted or non-assisted acquisitions approvedby the Board or PSA and the daily supervisory oversight of the PSA oversuch institutions. Any institution of supervisory concern with deficitor deteriorating regulatory capital is eligible to apply for this waiver,including those institutions that have been granted capital forbearanceunder section 563.47 of this rule. The PSA has the discretion to tailorthe terms of the granting of the waiver on a case-by-case basis. However, with respect to the commercial loans-to-one-borrower limitation,12 CFR 563.9-3(b)(2) (1987), the Board emphasizes that any waiver of thislimitation cannot exceed any statutory investment restriction. For example,Federal associations cannot exceed the limitation imposed by section 5(c)of the Home Owners Loan Act of 1933. 12 U.S.C. 1464(c)(1)(R) (1982) (whichincludes limitations on commercial loans to one borrower and on aggregatecommercial loans). Likewise, this waiver does not permit state-charteredinstitutions to exceed any investment restriction imposed by state law.This modified waiver of the loans-to-one-borrower regulation supersedesBoard Resolution 86-578 that was adopted on June 9, 1986, and granted adifferent waiver authority to the PSAs.F. Effect of Forbearance Although the Board is making no changes in the regulatory language regardingthe effect of a grant of forbearance, it wishes to reiterate and clarifylanguage contained in the preamble to the proposed regulation regardingthis issue. A grant of forbearance pursuant to this regulation operates prospectivelyonly. Any existing agreements with, or orders against, the institutionand all regulations that address, relate to, include a reference to, orotherwise concern regulatory capital are not changed or voided by an institution'scapital forbearance status. The institution may request a modificationor termination of any capital-related order or agreement or a waiver ormodified application of any capital-related regulation, in connection with,or subsequent to, qualifying for forbearance. For instance, an institutionnot meeting its minimum capital requirement may not make equity risk investmentswithout approval of its PSA. 12 CFR 563.9-8(c)(2)(iii) (1987). The grantof forbearance alone would not constitute approval to make such investmentsunless such investments were expressly included in the capital plan orthe PSA otherwise expressly gives such approval. Modification or termination of some of these actions, such as cease-and-desistorders, may be carried out only by the Board, not the PSA. This may ormay not be done in conjunction with the granting of forbearance. <ITAG tagnum="84">Effective Date  </ITAG>The Board is adopting this regulation effective January 1, 1988. Whilethe Administrative Procedure Act (``APA'') requires publication of a substantiveregulation not less than thirty days before its effective date, this delayedeffective date does not apply to rules that grant or recognize an exemptionor relieve a restriction. 12 U.S.C. 553(d)(1) (1982). Because this regulationprovides a process whereby the Board may exempt Federal associations andinsured institutions from capital requirements, the Board is causing therule to become effective prior to the passage of thirty days from publication.Moreover, the APA's delayed effective date requirement may be waived for``good cause'' such as where Congress has prescribed an effective date.<T3>Cf. Philadelphia Citizens in Action v. Schweiker, </T3>669 F.2d 877,888 (3d Cir. 1982) (relating to notice and comment procedures). The provisionsof CEBA require finalization of this regulation no later than January 7,1988. The Board finds that the statutorily prescribed effective date constitutes``good cause'' for dispensing with the APA delayed effective date requirement.While the Board believes it could adopt the regulation effective immediately,an effective date of January 1, 1988, has been chosen because the Board'sforbearance policy statement, 52 FR 6876 (March 5, 1987), lapses on December31, 1987. Consequently, the January 1, 1988, effective date eliminatesan overlap between the policy statement and the regulation and any lapseof time between the expiration of the policy statement and the effectivenessof this rule. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 604,the Board is providing the following regulatory flexibility analysis: 1. <T3>Need for and objectives of the rule. </T3>These elements are incorporatedabove in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>. 2. <T3>Issues raised by comments and agency assessment and response. </T3>These elements are incorporated above in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>. 3. <T3>Significant alternatives minimizing small-entity impact and agencyresponse. </T3>All institutions, regardless of size, would be permittedto obtain capital forbearance as long as they are well-managed, viableinstitutions meeting the various requirements set forth in section 404of CEBA as implemented by this rule. Such institutions would be permittedto operate and not be subject to supervisory action as a result of failureto comply with capital requirements as long as they remain in compliancewith their capital plan. In response to several commenters who suggested that small institutionsmay lack the resources and expertise to demonstrate that a particular regionis economically depressed, the Board is not requiring that institutionsmake such a showing in their application for forbearance. Further, onlyif a PSA is unable to determine that a particular region is economicallydepressed based on the factors included in the regulation and others thatthe PSA determines are pertinent, would an institution be required to makesuch showing. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 563 </ITAG>Accounting, Bank deposit insurance, Investments, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Savings and loan associations. Accordingly, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board hereby amends Part 563, SubchapterD, Chapter V, Title 12, Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER D_FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 563_OPERATIONS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 563 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 1, 47 Stat. 725, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1421 <T3>et seq.</T3>); sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5B, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec.4, 80 Stat. 824, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425b); sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, asamended (12 U.S.C. 1437); sec. 2, 48 Stat. 128, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1462);sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs. 401-407, 48 Stat.1255-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1730); sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1730a); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>2. Amend andSection; 563.9-3 by revising paragraph (b)(4) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.9-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Loans to one borrower. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) <T3>Limitations_</T3>(1) <T3>Aggregate loans </T3>* * * (4) <T3>Waiver. </T3>In accordance with guidelines approved by the Board, theBoard or the PSA or the designee of either may waive the application ofthe limitations in this paragraph (b) to any loan in connection with theresolution or management of an insured institution that is of supervisoryconcern and has deficit or deteriorating regulatory capital. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. Amend Part 563 by adding a new andSection; 563.47 to read as follows:  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.47</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Capital forbearance.   </ITAG>(a) <T3>Purpose. </T3>This section implements section 404 of the CompetitiveEquality Banking Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552, whichrequires that the Board and the Corporation adopt regulations for regulatingand supervising troubled but well-managed and viable insured institutionsso as to maximize the long-term viability of the thrift industry at thelowest cost to the Corporation by permitting qualifying institutions tocontinue to operate and be eligible for capital forbearance. This sectionsets forth the procedures and the conditions under which an insured institutionmay qualify for capital forbearance. This section provides that institutionsgranted capital forbearance will not be subject to supervisory or enforcementaction to enforce minimum capital requirements or to terminate insurancenor will they be placed in conservatorship or receivership based on inadequateregulatory capital. This section also indicates the circumstances underwhich capital forbearance may be terminated.   (b) <T3>Definitions. </T3>When used in this section:   (1) <T3>``Economically depressed region'' </T3>means any geographical region,identified by an applicant for forbearance, that has suffered severe economicconditions, as determined by the Principal Supervisory Agent of the FederalHome Loan Bank District in which the region is located. The Principal SupervisoryAgent's determination may be based on consideration of any or all of thefollowing factors and any other data that are presented by an institutionin support of a claim that a region is economically depressed:   (i) The economic base of the region is largely dependent on one particularemployer or industry, and that employer or industry is experiencing decline;  (ii) Unemployment in the region has increased;   (iii) Real estate values have declined in the region as evidenced by asampling of recognized indices or surveys measuring such values in thatregion;   (iv) Personal income levels in the region have declined; or   (v) Substandard loan ratios of insured institutions in the region haveincreased.   (2) <T3>``Minority,'' </T3>and <T3>``minority loan'' </T3>have the meanings set forth in 12 U.S.C. 1467a(d)and 12 U.S.C. 1730i(d); and <T3>``minority insured institution'' </T3>has the meanings set forth for``minority institution'' and ``minority association'' in 12 U.S.C. 1467a(d)and 12 U.S.C. 1730i(d).   (3) <T3>``Principal Supervisory Agent'' </T3>has the same meaning as set forthin andSection; 541.18 of this chapter.   (4) <T3>``Reasonable and demonstrable prospects'' </T3>means that the planto meet specified capital levels sets forth in detail a precise and readilyattainable schedule for increasing regulatory capital through realisticallyachievable methods and does not rely upon unrealistic predictions of economicimprovements or other uncertain future events.   (5) <T3>``Weak capital condition'' </T3>means that the insured institutionhas regulatory capital that does not meet its regulatory capital requirementas calculated in accordance with andSection;andSection; 561.13, 563.13, and563.14 of this title, or other capital level imposed by the Board or Corporation.  (c) <T3>Qualifying for capital forbearance. </T3>The Principal SupervisoryAgent may permit insured institutions to continue to operate and obtaincapital forbearance, except as provided in paragraphs (f) and (g) of thissection, if   (1) The insured institution, at the time it submits its request for forbearance,has a weak capital condition;   (2) The insured institution's weak capital condition is primarily the resultof losses recognized on, the nonperforming status of, or the failure ofborrowers to otherwise remain in compliance with the repayment terms ofloans or participations in loans that are:   (i) secured by collateral whose value is determined, in the discretionof the Principal Supervisory Agent, to have been adversely affected byeconomic conditions in an economically depressed region; or   (ii) Made by a minority insured institution that has   (A) 50 percent or more of its loans qualifying as minority loans or participationsin minority loans; and   (B) 50 percent or more of its originated loans secured by one-to-four familyresidences;   (3) The insured institution submits and the Principal Supervisory Agentapproves a capital plan that meets the requirements of paragraph (d) ofthis section for increasing the insured institution's regulatory capitalto the required level;   (4) The insured institution, if its regulatory capital as calculated inaccordance with andSection; 561.13 at the time it requests forbearance isless than 0.5 percent, demonstrates and the Principal Supervisory Agentdetermines, in his discretion, that the institution has evidenced in itsplan reasonable and demonstrable prospects for achieving its required levelof regulatory capital thereafter, but not later than January 1, 1995; and(5) In the case of a Federal association whose deposits are insured bythe Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (``FDIC''), the FDIC concursin the PSA's determination. (d) <T3>The capital plan. </T3>The plan referred to in paragraph (c)(3) ofthis section should contain a detailed description of the steps the insuredinstitution will take to meet its minimum capital requirements, includingcapital infusions, mergers, and operating changes to increase regulatorycapital or decrease asset size; address the insured institution's operationsduring the time it has capital forbearance, including lending and investmentstrategies, asset-liability growth, dividend levels, and compensation ofdirectors and officers; and include forecasts and pro forma financial statementsand set forth a reasonable time frame for achieving its minimum capitalrequirement that is not later than January 1, 1995. The Principal SupervisoryAgent may require that the plan include other restrictions or requirementsbefore approving the plan. (e) <T3>Reporting. </T3>Any insured institution determined by the PrincipalSupervisory Agent to qualify for capital forbearance shall submit thoroughand complete reports on such insured institution's progress in meetingthe goals set forth in its capital plan. Such reports must provide thePrincipal Supervisory Agent with a detailed ongoing evaluation of capitalrecovery progress and explain any deviations from the schedule, methods,operations, or goals set forth in the plan. These reports shall be submittedas frequently as required by the Principal Supervisory Agent, but not lessoften than semiannually. (f) <T3>Management and operating practices. </T3>The Principal SupervisoryAgent must review the past and present management structure and operatingpractices of any insured institution that has submitted a request for capitalforbearance and shall not approve that request if the Principal SupervisoryAgent determines that the institution is not well-managed or that the institution'sweak capital condition is the result of imprudent operating practices.(1) In determining whether an insured institution is not well-managed,the Principal Supervisory Agent may consider, among other things, the management's_ (i) Record of operating the insured institution, including those operatingpractices not reviewed under paragraph (f)(2) of this section; (ii) Compliance with laws, regulations, directives, orders, and agreements;(iii) Timely recognition and correction of regulatory violations, unsafeor unsound practices, or other weaknesses identified through the examinationor supervisory process; (iv) Ability to operate the insured institution in changing economic conditions;and (v) Ability to develop and implement the capital plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">These factors may be considered with regard to service by any memberof management at other insured institutions, commercial banks, or otherfinancial institutions. The Principal Supervisory Agent also may take intoaccount whether management has taken actions solely to qualify for capitalforbearance. (2) In determining whether the insured institution's weak capital conditionis the result of imprudent operating practices, the Principal SupervisoryAgent shall review the circumstances resulting in the institution's weakcapital condition and determine whether they involve imprudent operatingpractices including, but not limited to: (i) Practices that were speculative at the time they were undertaken; (ii) Insider abuse and conflicts of interest; (iii) The payment of excessive dividends; (iv) Substandard underwriting of loans and investments; (v) Unsafe or unsound practices within the meaning of 12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(2),1730(e); (vi) Excessive operating expenses; and (vii) Actions taken solely to qualify for capital forbearance. (3) Any determinations made pursuant to this paragraph (f) are solely forpurposes of determining whether an insured institution qualifies for capitalforbearance and are not binding or in any way dispositive of any pendingor future supervisory, enforcement, or other legal actions. (g) <T3>Termination of capital forbearance status. </T3>(1) The Principal SupervisoryAgent may determine that an institution does not qualify for capital forbearanceor no longer qualifies for capital forbearance status, if: (i) The institution fails to comply with its capital plan; (ii) Forbearance was granted contingent upon the occurrence of events thatdo not subsequently occur; (iii) The institution undergoes a change in control or a material changein management that was not approved by the Principal Supervisory Agent;(iv) The institution engages in practices inconsistent with achieving itsminimum capital requirement;(v) Information is discovered that was not made available to the PrincipalSupervisory Agent at the time the institution qualified for capital forbearanceand that indicates that forbearance should not have been granted; (vi) The institution's regulatory capital at the time of requesting forbearancewas reported to be at least 0.5 percent, but is later found to have beenbelow 0.5 percent; (vii) The institution engages in abusive, unsafe or unsound, or other imprudentpractices; (viii) The institution violates an agreement with, or order issued by,the Board or Corporation; or (ix) The institution fails to submit the reports required by paragraph(e) of this section. (2) The Principal Supervisory Agent shall terminate a grant of forbearancewhen an institution is no longer operating in a weak capital condition.(3) The Principal Supervisory Agent shall notify an insured institutionin writing if it no longer qualifies for capital forbearance stating thereasons for the termination. Such termination shall take effect upon receiptof such notification by the insured institution. (4) Except if termination is contemplated for the reason set forth in paragraph(g)(2) of this section, as an alternative to denying or terminating capitalforbearance, the Principal Supervisory Agent may permit the insured institutionto revise its plan, and if such revision is approved by the Principal SupervisoryAgent, capital forbearance may be granted or continued. (5) Any action by the Principal Supervisory Agent to terminate capitalforbearance is deemed to be final action of the Board or Corporation. (h) <T3>Status of supervisory, enforcement, and other actions during capitalforbearance participation. </T3>(1) While an insured institution qualifiesfor capital forbearance, the Board and the Corporation shall not issuea capital directive pursuant to 12 CFR 563.14-1, institute supervisoryor enforcement action to enforce the institution's capital requirement,or take action to terminate the institution's insurance, or place the insuredinstitution in conservatorship or receivership based on the insured institution'sinadequate capital. (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (h)(1) of this section, the Board and theCorporation will not forbear from taking any appropriate action against_(i) The insured institution for matters other than inadequate capital,or (ii) Any individual or entity other than the institution for any matter,including inadequate capital. (3) All existing supervisory or enforcement actions remain in effect unlesslawfully modified or terminated. (4) All regulations that address, relate to, or include a reference toregulatory capital or net worth remain in effect as before forbearancewas granted, unless lawfully modified as applied to a particular institution.(i) <T3>Procedures. </T3>(1) An insured institution seeking capital forbearancemust submit a written request to the Principal Supervisory Agent. Exceptas provided in paragraph (i)(2) of this section, the request must consistof: (i) A detailed showing, including documentation, by the insured institutionthat it is eligible for capital forbearance because it meets the requirementsof paragraphs (c) (1) through (4) and (f) of this section; and (ii) A plan meeting the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section.(2) The written request for capital forbearance need not include a showingthat the region or regions in which the insured institution's collateralvalue was adversely affected, within the meaning of paragraph (c)(2)(i)of this section, are ``economically depressed'' unless, within the timeframes permitted for requests for additional information under andSection;571.12(c)(1) of this subchapter, the Principal Supervisory Agent to whomthe application was directed, following consultation, where appropriate,with the Principal Supervisory Agent of the Federal Home Loan Bank Districtin which the region is located, requests such a showing. (3)(i) Requests for capital forbearance will be processed in accordancewith andSection; 571.12 of this subchapter unless within thirty days of thereceipt of a properly filed request, the Principal Supervisory Agent notifiesan institution that an examination is necessary in conjunction with itsrequest, in which case the request will not be deemed complete until theexamination is completed. (ii) If the request is denied, the Principal Supervisory Agent shall notifythe institution in writing and state the reasons for the denial. (4) Any action by the Principal Supervisory Agent to grant or deny a requestfor forbearance is deemed to be final action of the Board or Corporation.<ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John F. Ghizzoni, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 87-29866 Filed 12-31-87; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>