<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88603-0098 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-03-88.f2.A1097</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 87-53]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">James B. Rivers, D.M.D.; Revocation of Registration</ITAG>On May 6, 1987, the Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of DiversionControl, Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) issued an Order to ShowCause to James B. Rivers, D.M.D. (Respondent) of 9355 Park West Boulevard,Knoxville, Tennessee 37923 proposing to revoke his DEA Certificate of RegistrationBR0321896 and to deny any pending applications for registration as a practitionerunder 21 U.S.C. 823(f). The Order to Show Cause alleged that Respondent'sregistration with the Drug Enforcement Administration would be inconsistentwith the public interest as that term is used in 21 U.S.C. 823(f) and 824(a)(4).Respondent, through counsel, requested a hearing on the issues raised bythe Order to Show Cause and the matter was docketed before AdministrativeLaw Judge Mary Ellen Bittner. Following prehearing procedures, a hearingwas held in Nashville, Tennessee on November 3, 1987. On February 16, 1988,the Administrative Law Judge issued her opinion and recommended ruling,findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision. Pursuant to 21 CFR 1316.66,Respondent filed exceptions to Judge Bittner's opinion and recommendedruling. On March 21, 1988, Judge Bittner transmitted the record of theseproceedings, including Respondent's exceptions, to the Administrator. TheAdministrator has considered the record in its entirety and pursuant to21 CFR 1316.67 hereby issues his final order in this matter based uponfindings of fact and conclusions of law as hereinafter set forth.The Administrative Law Judge found that Respondent is a practicing oraland maxillofacial surgeon. On May 31, 1983, the Health Related Boards Divisionof the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment (Health Related Boards)received information from the Tennessee State Board of Pharmacy that areapharmacists had reported that individuals of questionable character werepresenting prescriptions written by Respondent for Schedule II controlledsubstances including Demerol, Percodan and Dilaudid. As a result of thisinformation, on January 6, 1984, an investigator with the Health RelatedBoards questioned Respondent regarding these prescriptions. Respondenttold the investigator that approximately two years earlier, he had beguntreating an individual who, in his opinion, had legitimate medical problems,but who was also addicted to some type of narcotic. At the conclusion ofthe interview, the investigator advised Respondent that he may have violatedFederal regulations by maintaining an individual's drug addiction. Respondentthen stated that he would no longer treat the individual and did not anticipateprescribing any medication for him in the future.In July and August 1984, the investigator received information from areapharmacists and from the Tennessee State Board of Pharmacy which indicatedthat Respondent continued to prescribe controlled substances to the individual.Respondent testified at the hearing in this matter that he prescribed controlledsubstances for the individual because the individual was harassing andintimidating Respondent and his family.On April 21, 1985, Respondent retained an attorney to help him terminatethe contact between himself and the individual. Respondent testified thatthe initial attempts by Respondent and his attorney to get the individualto leave Respondent alone were unsuccessful.On October 4, 1985, the investigator with the Health Related Boards, whowas then employed by DEA as an investigator, interviewed Respondent afterdetermining that the DEA number which Respondent was using had been retiredfor approximately ten years. At this meeting, Respondent was advised ofthe procedures for applying for a new DEA Certificate of Registration.In addition, Respondent was told that he was not authorized to prescribe,dispense, administer or otherwise handle controlled substances and thatshould he do so, he would be intentionally violating Federal law. The investigatorfurther advised Respondent that once he obtained a new Certificate of Registration,he could not prescribe controlled substances to a drug addict to maintainhis addiction. Respondent admitted during the course of the interview thathe knew that the individual was a drug addict and that he was maintainingthe individual's addiction. Respondent noted that his attorney had beenaware of the situation between Respondent and the individual for at leastthe previous six months.After the investigator's visit on October 4, 1985, Respondent's attorneyprepared a letter dated October 8, 1985, which Respondent gave to the individual.Among other things, the letter stated that,``Dr. Rivers' DEA number isno longer valid as of October 4, 1985, and he will not write any furtherprescriptions.'' On October 21, 1985, the investigator learned that a localpharmacy received a prescription written by Respondent for another individualfor Tylenol andplusmin;4, a Schedule III narcotic controlled substance.On November 25, 1985, Respondent telephoned the investigator to ask whetherhe should list his retired DEA number when applying for the renewal ofhis state dental license. The investigator once again advised Respondentthat he did not have a valid DEA registration. During this conversation,Respondent told the investigator that he was not prescribing controlledsubstances.On April 30, 1986, Respondent's attorney filed a complaint and obtainedan injunction against the individual. Respondent testified at the hearingthat he had not seen the individual since the injunction was issued. Respondentintroduced evidence at the hearing that in 1986 he advised a county prosecutorand the head of the Knoxville-Knox County Metro Drug Unit of his difficultieswith the individual. In December 1986, and January 1987, another DEA investigator conducteda survey of 14 of the 136 pharmacies in the Knoxville area. The investigationrevealed that Respondent had written at least 11 prescriptions for controlledsubstances subsequent to October 4, 1985, when he was told he was not registeredwith DEA, but before March 11, 1986, when his new DEA Certificate of Registrationwas issued. A compilation of prescriptions found in the pharmacies surveyedrevealed that Respondent had written prescriptions for over 17,000 dosageunits of controlled substances, primarily Schedule II substances, betweenJanuary 30, 1981 and March 21, 1986, all for the previously mentioned individual.These prescriptions were written not only in the individual's name, butalso in names which Respondent admitted that he knew were fictitious.The Administrative Law Judge concluded that Respondent's continued registrationwith DEA is inconsistent with the public interest. Respondent maintainedthe individual's drug addiction for at least five years. He often issuedthe individual prescriptions for controlled substances using fictitiousnames. Respondent continued to write prescriptions for controlled substanceseven after he was told that he was not authorized to do so. Respondent testified that after his October 4, 1985 meeting with the investigator,he thought that his registration was in ``limbo'', and that he could continueto use his DEA number to issue prescriptions. The Administrative Law Judgestated in her opinion that she put no credence in this testimony. JudgeBittner noted that Respondent was not a particularly credible witness sincehe appeared to tailor much of his testimony to support his defenses ratherthan to present an accurate portrait of events. Second, the DEA investigatorwas a credible witness who testified that he specifically told Respondenton October 4, 1985, that he was not registered with DEA and therefore couldnot lawfully prescribe controlled substances. Third, any claim that Respondentdid not understand the investigator's October 4, 1985 warning is contradictedby the statement in the letter written by Respondent's lawyer on October8, 1985, which specifically stated that Respondent's DEA number was nolonger valid and he would not write any further prescriptions for controlledsubstances. Finally, in November 1985, the investigator again told Respondentthat he did not have a valid DEA registration.Respondent contends that he wrote the prescriptions for controlled substancesfor the individual because the individual intimidated him. However, JudgeBittner noted in her opinion, that the purported ``intimidation'' wenton for a substantial period of time before Respondent took meaningful stepsto atempt to eliminate it. The Administrative Law Judge concluded that the evidence presented in thismatter demonstrates that Respondent does not appreciate the enormous responsibilitywhich accompanies DEA registration. Registrants under the Controlled SubstancesAct are required to prevent the diversion of controlled substances intothe illicit market. Respondent's conduct reflects a failure to take adequateaction to protect the public health and safety. Respondent has failed toprovide any satisfactory assurance that a situation such as the one healleges occurred with the individual is unlikely to recur. Judge Bittnernoted that Respondent's failure to stop prescribing controlled substancesas soon as he was advised that he had no authority to so prescribe indicatesa cavalier attitude toward Federal regulation of controlled substances.Consequently, the Administrative Law Judge recommended that Respondent'sDEA Certificate of Registration be revoked.The Administrator adopts the opinion and recommended ruling, findings offact, conclusions of law and decision of the Administrative Law Judge inits entirety. Respondent's registration must be revoked. The Administrator,in reaching this conclusion, carefully considered Respondent's exceptionsto Judge Bittner's opinion. However, nothing in Respondent's exceptionspersuaded the Administrator that Respondent should remain registered withDEA.Accordingly, the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration,pursuant to the authority vested in him by 21 U.S.C. 823 and 824 and 28CFR 0.100(b), hereby orders that DEA Certificate of Registration BR03221896,previously issued to James B. Rivers, D.M.D., be, and it hereby is, revoked,and any pending applications for registration, be, and they hereby are,denied. This order is effective July 5, 1988.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: May 27, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John C. Lawn,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-12510 Filed 6-2-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-09-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>