<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88607-0086 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-07-88.f2.A1085</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7155] et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; Telephone Real Estate Equity Trust et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5669, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-4677, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Telephone Real Estate Equity Trust (the Trust) Located in New York,New York</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Exemption Application No. D-7155]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption</ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through(D) of the Code, shall not apply to (1) certain leases (the Leases) bythe Trust of space in two commercial real properties (the Properties) locatedin Hampton, Virginia (Executive Towers) and Portland, Oregon (Parkside)to the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States (Equitable),Manufacturers Hanover Consumer Services (MHCS), Security Pacific Corporation(SPC), Read Commercial Properties, Inc. (Read), Prudential-Bache Securities,Inc. (Prudential-Bache) and General Electric Company (GE), each of whichis a party in interest or an affiliate of a party in interest with respectto the Trust; (2) the proposed potential amendments, renewals or extensionsof the Leases; and (3) the proposed leasing by the Trust of space in theProperties to any other persons or entities that may be parties in interestwith respect to the Trust (except for fiduciaries with respect to the Properties),\1\<NOTE/> including the amendments, renewals and extensions thereof;provided that the terms and conditions of any leases subject to this exemption,including any amendments, renewals or extensions thereof, are at leastas favorable to the Trust as those which the Trust could obtain in arm's-lengthtransactions with unrelated parties; and provided further that any suchleases, including any amendments, renewals or extensions thereof, are approvedon behalf of the Trust by Eastdil Advisers, Inc.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Fiduciaries as used here include the American Telephoneand Telegraph Company and its affiliates and Eastdil Advisers, Inc. andits affiliates.Effective Date: The effective date of the proposed exemption, if granted,will be May 1, 1984 as to the Executive Towers lease to Equitable; December5, 1986 as to the Parkside lease to Equitable; May 1, 1984 as to the leaseto MHCS; February 29, 1984 as to the lease to SPC; April 1, 1987 as tothe lease to Read; June 22, 1983 as to the lease to Prudential-Bache, andDecember 20, 1982 as to the leases to GE.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Trust The Trust is a group trust which is utilized for the investment on an undividedbasis of certain real estate assets of its participating plans (the Plans).The Plans are employee benefit plans established by the companies resultingfrom the reorganization of American Telephone and Telegraph Company (ATandamp;T)and its subsidiaries, pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization approved bythe U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia in the matter of <T3>U.S. </T3>v. <T3>Western Electric Co., Inc., et. al. </T3>(Civil Action No. 82-0192).The assets of the Plans' predecessor plans were held in the Bell SystemPension Plan Trust (the BSPP) and the Bell System Management Pension PlanTrust (the BSMPP). On January 1, 1984 the trusts for the BSPP and the BSMPPwere merged into the Bell System Trust (the BST). Substantially all ofthe non-real estate assets in the BST were transferred to a new ATandamp;Ttrust. The BST, retaining the real estate assets, was amended and restatedas the Trust. As of January 1, 1986, the Trust covered approximately 1,226,000participants and had net assets of approximately $4.218 billion. To promotediversification, ATandamp;T has utilized the professional services of morethan a hundred independent trustees and investment managers to manage theTrust assets. 2. Eastdil A subsidiary of Eastdil Realty, Inc., Eastdil Advisers, Inc. (Eastdil)is a registered investment advisor under the Investment Advisors Act of1940, as amended. Eastdil's stated purpose is the investment and managementof real estate assets for large pension plans and has more than $1 billionin pension plan assets currently under management. As of December 31, 1986,Eastdil was managing approximately $650 million in real estate assets ofthe Trust. 3. The Properties Executive Towers is a commercial office building located at 2101 ExecutiveDrive in Hampton, Virginia. Eastdil organized a Delaware corporation, ExecutiveTowers, Inc. (ETI), to hold title to Executive Towers on behalf of theTrust, to collect income therefrom and distribute such income to the Trust.All of the officers and directors of ETI are employees of Eastdil. ETIis wholly owned by the Trust and is exempt from Federal income taxationunder section 501(c)(2) of the Code. Parkside is a commercial office building located at 2020 SW Fourth Avenuein Portland, Oregon. It is the sole asset of the Parkside Center Company(the Joint Venture), a joint venture formed to take title to, operate,lease, dispose of and otherwise deal with Parkside. The joint venturersare the Oregon Pacific Investment and Development Company and Parktel I,Inc. (Parktel), a Delaware corporation wholly owned by the Trust and organizedby Eastdil to hold the Trust's interest in the Joint Venture, to collectincome therefrom and to distribute such income to the Trust. All of theofficers and directors of Parktel are employees of Eastdil. Eastdil representsthat Parktel is exempt from Federal income taxation under section 501(c)(2)of the Code. Under the terms of the agreement establishing the Joint Venture,all of the leases of space in Parkside must be satisfactory in form andsubstance to Parktel and Parktel's counsel and all tenants in Parksidemust be satisfactory in all respects to Parktel. All proposed leases mustbe submitted to Parktel at least twenty days prior to the anticipated executionthereof, and Parktel has the right to approve or disapprove such leasesin its sole discretion. 4. The Tenants (a) Equitable is a life insurance company organized and incorporated inNew York with its headquarters in New York City. Equitable is engaged asan investment manager of certain assets of the Trust other than the Properties.Equitable was engaged in this fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Trustprior to the executions of its Leases of space in the Properties. (b) MHCS is engaged in the provision of consumer finance services, themaking of first and second mortgage loans and small consumer loans. OnMay 1, 1984, the parent corporation of MHCS, Manufacturers Hanover Corporation(MHC), purchased 100 percent of the stock of C.I.T., Inc. (CIT), whichwas engaged in substantially the same business as MHCS and which was notaffiliated with MHC or MHCS prior to such stock purchase. Until December31, 1985, a subsidiary of MHC, Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company (MHTC),was a trustee with respect to certain assets of the Trust other than theProperties. (c) SPC is a public corporation which is the parent corporation of SecurityPacific National Bank (SPNB), which served as ancillary trustee with respectto certain assets of the Trust other than the Properties in 1984 and 1985.Two other subsidiaries of SPC were or are tenants in the Properties: theSecurity Pacific Finance Corporation (SPFC), engaged in the provision ofconsumer credit services, and the Security Pacific Finance Management Corporation(SPFMC), engaged in the provision of payroll and leasing services to certainof its affiliates. (d) Read is a Virginia corporation engaged in the management and leasingof real property. Read is wholly owned by Read Consolidated Companies (RCC),a Virginia partnership with ownership interests in various entities engagedin real property development and management, including Read CommercialProperties Atlanta, Inc. (Read Atlanta), a Georgia corporation wholly ownedby Read Interstate Companies, a partnership in which RCC has an 85 percentownership interest. On April 1, 1987, Read Atlanta entered into an agreementwith Eastdil to manage certain commercial real property in Atlanta, Georgiawhich is owned by Artel I, Inc., a title-holding corporation wholly ownedby the Trust.(e) Prudential-Bache is a registered broker-dealer and investment bankingfirm engaged in the sale of securities, insurance products and other financialservices. It is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Prudential Insurance Companyof America (Prudential). Effective January 1, 1984, Prudential enteredinto a group annuity contract with the Trust and a separate investmentmanagement agreement to manage certain assets of the Trust, not includingthe Properties, on a discretionary basis.(f) GE is a public corporation which is the parent corporation of GeneralElectric Financial Services, Inc. (GEFS). In June of 1986 GEFS purchased80 percent of all outstanding stock of Kidder Peabody andamp; Company, Inc.(Kidder Peabody). GEFS subsequently formed a wholly-owned subsidiary, KPG,to hold the Kidder Peabody stock purchased by GEFS. Kidder Peabody is aservice provider with respect to certain of the Plans participating inthe Trust by virtue of Kidder Peabody's rendering of securities brokerageservices to such Plans.5. The Leases(a) On Feburary 2, 1984, ETI entered into a lease (the ET Lease) with Equitableunder which Equitable leased approximately 3,653.05 square feet of spacein Executive Towers out of a total of approximately 130,000 square feetof rentable space. The ET Lease provided for occupancy commencing May 1,1984 with an initial term of three years. The ET Lease was renewed on April30, 1987 for an additional term of five years. The ET Lease provides foran initial base rent subject to automatic annual increases proportionateto increases in the taxes and operating expenses of Executive Towers. Uponthe May 1, 1987 renewal of the ET Lease, the base rent was increased.On December 5, 1986, the Joint Venture entered into a lease (the ParksideLease) with Equitable under which Equitable leased 9,800 square feet inParkside out of a total of 218,810 rentable square feet. The Parkside Leaseprovided for occupancy commencing March 1, 1987 for an initial term endingFebruary 29, 1992. The Parkside Lease provides for a monthly base rentwhich increases incrementally according to a schedule in the Parkside Lease.The rent is also subject to annual increases proportionate to increasesin taxes and operating expenses in accordance with a rider to the ParksideLease. Under the Parkside Lease, Equitable has a right of first refusalto lease adjacent vacant space prior to any lease of such space to a thirdparty. In the Parkside Lease the Joint Venture agreed to reimburse Equitablein an amount not to exceed $34,000 for the monthly rental payments whichEquitable was obliged to make under an existing lease for space in a competingcommercial office building which was to expire April 30, 1987. Eastdil,as a fiduciary of the Trust, represents that this reimbursement agreementwas an inducement for Equitable to enter into the lease, that such tenantinducements are common in the real estate industry and that the terms ofsuch reimbursement agreement were reasonable under the surrounding factsand circumstances.(b) On February 24, 1983, ETI entered into a lease (the CIT Lease) withCIT under which CIT leases 885.50 square feet in Executive Towers, approximately.68 percent of the rentable space in Executive Towers. The CIT Lease providedfor occupancy commencing July 1, 1983 and terminating on June 30, 1988unless sooner amended, terminated or extended as provided in the CIT Lease.As a result of MHC's purchase of the stock of CIT, the CIT Lease was assingedto MHCS as of January 1, 1987. Under the CIT Lease, MHCS pays a base rentsubject to an annual increase equal to MHC's proportionate share of theannual increase in operating expenses and real estate taxes, based on theproportion of the entire rentable square footage in Executive Towers demisedunder the CIT Lease. On March 4, 1987 MHCS notified ETI of the intentionof MHCS to vacate the premises demised by the CIT Lease. MHCS has vacatedthe premises but will continue to pay rent under the CIT Lease until theearlier of the CIT Lease's termination or the lease of the premises byETI to another party.(c) On February 29, 1984, ETI entered into a lease with SPFC (the SP Lease)under which SPFC leased 1009.57 square feet, or approximately .77 percent,of the rentable square footage in Executive Towers. The SP Lease providedfor a base rent subject to an annual increase equal to SPFC's proportionateshare of the annual increase in operating expenses and real estate taxes,based on the proportion of the entire rentable square footage in ExecutiveTowers demised under the SP Lease.The SP Lease was renewed by SPFMC on March 20, 1987 for a term commencingJuly 1, 1987 and terminating on June 30, 1990. Under the renewed SP Lease,SPFDMC leases 1168.24 square feet, or approximately .89 percent, of therentable square footage in Executive Towers. The base rent under the renewedSP Lease is subject to an annual increase equal to SPFC's proportionateshare of the annual increase in operating expenses and real estate taxes.(d) On September 23, 1985, ETI entered into a lease (the Read Lease) withRead under which Read leased 6,189.14 square feet, or approximately 4.7%of the rentable square footage, in Executive Towers. The Read Lease providedfor occupancy commencing on September 23, 1985 and terminating on August31, 1990, unless sooner amended, terminated or extended as provided inthe Read Lease. The Read Lease provides for an annual base rent which willincrease incrementally each year of its five-year term in accordance witha schedule incorporated into the Read Lease. The base rent is also subjectto an annual increase equal to Read's proportionate share of the annualincrease in operating expenses and real estate taxes of Executive Towers,based on the proportion of the entire square footage in Executive Towersdemised under the Read Lease.(e) On June 22, 1983, the Joint Venture entered into a lease (the PB Lease)with Prudential-Bache under which Prudential-Bache leased 11,619 squarefeet, on approximately 5.31 percent of the rentable square footage, inParkside. The PB Lease provided for occupancy commencing September 1, 1983and terminating on September 1, 1988, unless sooner terminated, amendedor extended as provided in the PB Lease. The PB Lease provides for a monthlybase rent which increase in increments according to a schedule incorporatedinto the PB Lease. The base rent is also subject to annual increases equalto Prudential-Bache's proportional share of the annual increases in operatingexpenses and real estate taxes of Parkside, based on the proportion ofthe entire square footage in Parkside demised under the PB Lease. The PBLease gives Prudential-Bache a right of first refusal to lease adjacentvacant space prior to any lease to a third party. The rental rate for anysuch additional space will be the rental rate in effect for Prudential-Bachewith respect to the other space which is the subject of the PB Lease.(f) On December 20, 1982, ETI entered into a lease (the GE Lease andplusmin;1)with GE under which GE leased 1333.97 square feet, or approximately 1.02percent of the rentable square footage, in Executive Towers. The GE Leaseandplusmin;1 provided for occupancy commencing on February 1, 1983 and terminatingon January 31, 1988 unless sooner extended, modified or terminated in accordancewith the lease's terms. In a June 13, 1983 addendum to the GE Lease andplusmin;1,ETI and GE added 666.99 square feet to the space leased under the GE Leaseandplusmin;1. In a second addendum, ETI and GE agreed to renew the GE Leaseandplusmin;1 for an additional term commencing February 1, 1988 and terminatingJanuary 31, 1991. The GE Lease andplusmin;1 provides for an annual base rentwhich is subject to a yearly increase equal to GE's proportionate shareof the annual increase in Executive Towers' real estate taxes and operatingexpenses, based on the proportion of the entire rentable square footagein Executive Towers which is demised under the GE Lease andplusmin;1. (g) On May 12, 1986, ETI entered into an additional, separate lease (theGE Lease andplusmin;2) with GE under which GE leased 7907.79 square feet,or approximately 6.03 percent, of the rentable square footage in ExecutiveTowers. The GE Lease andplusmin;2 provided for occupancy commencing on July1, 1986 and terminating on June 30, 1991, unless sooner extended, modifiedor terminated in accordance with the lease's terms. The GE Lease andplusmin;2provides for an initial annual base rent which increases annually in theamount of five percent of the preceding year's annual rental.(h) Each of the Leases may be terminated by the lessor, either ETI or theJoint Venture, upon the occurrence of an event of default as set forthin each Lease, including the lessee's failure to pay rent when due andany default in the performance or observance of any other covenant or conditionof such Lease which continues afer notice to the lessee for a certain periodspecified in each Lease.6. Eastdil represents that it is independent of the various lessees underthe Leases and not related to such lessees in any way affecting its judgmentas a fiduciary on behalf of the Trust. Eastdil represents that the Leasespertaining to Executive Towers were negotiated by ETI under Eastdil's controland direction and have been at all times subject to the review and approvalof Eastdil, acting in its capacity as an investment manager of the Trust.With respect to the Leases pertaining to Parkside, Eastdil represents thatsuch Leases were negotiated and executed in accordance with the provisionsof the Joint Venture agreement establishing Parktel's right to review andapprove Parkside leases in advance of their execution.Eastdil represents that the Leases were negotiated in arm's-length transactionsand that the Leases are standard commercial office leases, in both formand substance, which are utilized generally for all tenants of ExecutiveTowers and Parkside. Eastdil maintains that the negotiations resultingin the Leases reflect common industry practices and the practices establishedfor similar leases in Executive Towers and Parkside. Eastdil representsthat the terms and conditions of the Leases are as good or better thanthose which ETI and Parktel could obtain in arm's-length transactions withunrelated parties. Eastdil represents that the terms of the Leases arecomparable to those of similar leases in the Properties and in similarcommercial office buildings in the same geographical areas of the Propertiesat the time of the Leases' executions and that the rentals provided underthe Leases are not less than the fair market rental values of the demisedpremises at the times of the Leases' executions.Eastdil represents that it has determined that the Leases constitute transactionswhich are prudent and in the best interests of the Trust and the participantsand beneficiaries of the Plans. Eastdil notes that the Leases are for fixedterms which will not be amended, renewed or extended unless a determinationis made on behalf of the Trust by Eastdil that such amendment, renewalor extension would be in the best interests of the Trust and the Plans.7. Eastdil is requesting that the exemption posed herein be applicableon a prospective basis for any future leases in the Properties which maybe executed with parties in interests (except for fiduciaries with respectto the Properties) with respect to the Trust. Eastdil represents that thisrequest for prospective relief is necessitated by practical business considerationsstemming from the large size of the Trust and the Plans and the large numberof parties in interest who deal with them. Eastdil maintains that ETI andParktel require the ability to negotiate and enter into leases of the Propertiesin the ordinary course of business. Eastdil also represents that the requestedprospective relief for amendments, renewals or extensions of the Leasesor of future leases will provide ETI and Parktel with additional flexibilitywhich will expand the potential value of lease transactions involving theProperties, thereby increasing the investment return to the Trust.8. In summary, Eastdil represents that the past and proposed transactionssatisfy the requirements of section 408(a) of the Act for the followingreasons: (1) Each Lease was negotiated and entered into in arm's-lengthtransactions on behalf of the Trust by ETI and Parktel, under the controland direction of Eastdil, an independent fiduciary of the Trust which isunrelated to the various lessees; (2) Any amendments, renewals or extensionsof the Leases and any executions of future leases in the Properties withparties in interest with respect to the Trust, or their affiliates, includingany amendments, renewals or extensions thereof, will require the approvalof Eastdil; (3) The Leases are, and any future leases subject to this proposedexemption will be, standard commercial office leases which are utilizedgenerally for all tenants of the Properties and which reflect common industrypractices; and (4) The rentals provided under the Leases are and will beno less than the fair market rental values of the demised premises at thetimes of the Leases' executions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Ronald Willett of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Harris Trust and Savings Bank (Harris) Located in Chicago, Illinois</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application Nos. D-7277, D-7278 and D-7279]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a)(1) (A) through (D) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (D) of the Code, shall not apply to the lendingby Harris to Merrill Lynch Canada, Inc. (Merrill Lynch Canada) of securitiesthat are assets of employee benefit plans and trusts for which Harris actsas trustee, co-trustee, investment manager, custodian or agent, providedthe following conditions are met.1. Neither Merrill Lynch Canada nor an affiliate of Merrill Lynch Canadahas discretionary authority or control with respect to the investment ofthe plan assets involved in the transaction, or renders investment advice(within the meaning of 29 CFR 2510.3-21(c)) with respect to those assets;2. The plan receives from Merrill Lynch Canada (either by physical deliveryor by book entry in a securities depository) by the close of Harris' businesson the day in which the securities lent are delivered to Merrill LynchCanada, collateral consisting of cash, securities issued or guaranteedby the United States Government or its agencies or instrumentalities, orirrevocable bank letters of credit issued by a person other than MerrillLynch Canada or an affiliate thereof, or any combination thereof, having,as of the close of business on the preceding business day, a market valueor, in the case of letters of credit a stated amount, equal to not lessthan 100 percent of the then market value of the securities lent. All suchcollateral will be held within the United States;3. Prior to the making of any such loan, Merrill Lynch Canada shall havefurnished Harris with (1) the most recent available audited statement ofMerrill Lynch Canada's financial condition, (2) the most recent availableunaudited statement of its financial condition (if more recent than suchaudited statement), and (3) a representation that, at the time the loanis negotiated, there has been no material adverse change in its financialcondition since the date of the most recent financial statement furnishedto the plan that has not been disclosed to Harris. Such representationmay be made by Merrill Lynch Canada's agreeing that each such loan shallconstitute a representation by Merrill Lynch Canada that there has beenno such material adverse change;4. The loan is made pursuant to a written loan agreement, the terms ofwhich are at least as favorable to the plan as an arm's-length transactionwith an unrelated party would be. Such agreement may be in the form ofa master agreement covering a series of securities lending transactions;5. (a) The plan (1) receives a reasonable fee that is related to the valueof the borrowed securities and the duration of the loan, or (2) has theopportunity to derive compensation through the investment of cash collateral.Where the plan has that opportunity, the plan may pay a loan rebate orsimilar fee to Merrill Lynch Canada, if such fee is not greater than theplan would pay in a comparable transaction with an unrelated party;(b) The plan receives the equivalent of all distributions made to holdersof the borrowed securities during the term of the loan, including, butnot limited to, cash dividends, interest payments, shares of stock as aresult of stock splits and rights to purchase additional securities;6. If the market value of the collateral at the close of trading on a businessday is less than 100 percent of the market value of the borrowed securitiesat the close of trading on that day, Merrill Lynch Canada shall deliver,by the close of business on the following business day, an additional amountof collateral (as described in paragraph 2 above) the market value of which,together with the market value of all previously delivered collateral,equals at least 100 percent of the market value of all the borrowed securitiesas of such preceding day.Notwithstanding the foregoing, part of the collateral may be returned toMerrill Lynch Canada if the market value of the collateral exceeds 100percent of the market value of the borrowed securities, as long as themarket value of the remaining collateral equals at least 100 percent ofthe market value of the borrowed securities;7. The loan may be terminated by the plan at any time, whereupon MerrillLynch Canada shall deliver certificates for securities identical to theborrowed securities (or the equivalent thereof in the event of reorganization,recapitalization or merger of the issuer of the borrowed securities) tothe plan within (1) the customary delivery period for such securities,(2) five business days, or (3) the time negotiated for such delivery bythe plan and Merrill Lynch Canada, whichever is lesser; and8. In the event the loan is terminated, and Merrill Lynch Canada failsto return the borrowed securities or the equivalent thereof within thetime described in paragraph 7, above, (i) the plan may, under the termsof the loan agreement, purchase securities identical to the borrowed securities(or their equivalent as described above) and may apply the collateral tothe payment of the purchase price, any other obligations of Merrill LynchCanada under the agreement, and any expenses associated with the sale and/orpurchase, and (ii) Merrill Lynch Canada is obligated, under the terms ofthe loan agreement, to pay, and does pay to the plan the amount of anyremaining obligations and expenses not covered by the collateral plus interestat a reasonable rate.Notwithstanding the foregoing, Merrill Lynch Canada may, in the event thatit fails to return borrowed securities as described above, replace non-cashcollateral with an amount of cash not less than the then current marketvalue of the collateral, provided such replacement is approved by Harris.If Merrill Lynch Canada fails to comply with any condition of this exemptionin the course of engaging in a securities lending transaction, the planfiduciary who caused the plan to engage in such transaction shall not bedeemed to have caused the plan to engage in a transaction prohibited bysection 406(a)(1)(A) through (D) of the Act solely by reason of MerrillLynch Canada's failure to comply with the conditions of the exemption.For purposes of this class exemption the term ``affiliate'' of anotherperson shall include: (i) Any person directly or indirectly, through oneor more intermediaries, controlling, controlled by, or under common controlwith such other person; (ii) Any officer, director, or partner, employeeor relative (as defined in section 3(15) of the Act) of such other person;and (iii) Any corporation or partnership of which such other person isan officer, director or partner. For purposes of this definition the term``control'' means the power to exercise a controlling influence over themanagement or policies of a person other than an individual.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. Harris, an Illinois chartered banking corporation, is the third largestbank in Illinois and is among the largest U.S. pension trustees. Harrisalso is an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Bank of Montreal, whichis one of the five major Canadian banking companies. The proposed exemptionis requested on behalf of the Employees Savings and Profit Sharing Planof Bank of Montreal/Harris; the Employees Retirement Plan of Bank of Montreal/Harris;the Harris Trust for Collective Investment of Employee Benefit Accounts(the Collective Investment Trust), a declaration of trust for the collectiveinvestment of assets of employee benefit trusts of which Harris or an affiliatedbank is acting as trustee or co-trustee or as agent for the trustee ortrustees thereof; and about 160 other pension and profit sharing plansfor which Harris acts as trustee, investment manager, custodian or agent.As of January 1, 1987, approximately 1,500 plans had assets held in theCollective Investment Trust. The various plans mentioned above are collectivelyreferred to as the Plans.2. Harris, in its fiduciary capacity as agent, investment manager, custodianor trustee of the Plans, regularly engages in securities lending transactionson behalf of the Plans in order to enhance the investment returns of thePlans. In cases where the borrower of the securities is a party in interestwith respect to the Plans, Harris generally relies on Prohibited TransactionExemption (PTE) 81-6 (46 FR 7527, January 23, 1981, as amended at 52 FR18754, May 19, 1987). PTE 81-6 is a class exemption that permits, undercertain conditions, the lending of securities that are assets of employeebenefit plans to banks and certain broker-dealters which are parties ininterest with respect to such plans.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ PTE 81-6 requires, among other conditions, that the borrowerof the securities has no discretionary authority regarding the plan assetsinvolved in the transaction, that the lending plan receives collateralequal to 100 percent of the market value of the loaned securities, andthat the loan is made under a written agreement the terms of which areat least as favorable as the plan could obtain in an arm's-length transactionwith an unrelated party.3. Harris proposes to engage in securities lending transactions on behalfof the Plans with Merrill Lynch Canada, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiaryof Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner andamp; Smith (Merrill Lynch). The securitiesinvolved in the lending transactions will be securities of United Statescorporations which are regularly traded on U.S. and/or Canadian stock exchanges.The proposed securities lending transactions would comply in all respectswith the provisions of PTE 81-6 except that the borrower is not a broker-dealerregistered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the 1934 Act). PTE81-6 covers broker-dealers which are registered under the 1934 Act as wellas those which are exempted from registration under section 15(a)(1) ofthe 1934 Act as dealers in exempted Government securities (as defined insection 3(a)(12) of the 1934 Act). Merrill Lynch Canada does not providebroker-dealer services in the United States and thus is not required toregister under the 1934 Act. The applicant believes that Merrill LynchCanada is at times a party in interest with respect to some or all of thePlans because of the widespread use of its parent, Merill Lynch, to providebrokerage services to the Plans.\3\<NOTE/> Such use of Merrill Lynch often occurs without the knowledgeor control of either Harris or Merrill Lynch Canada.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ Section 3(14) of the Act defines the term ``party in interest''with respect to a plan to include a corporation which is 50 percent ormore owned by an entity that provides services to the plan.4. The applicant maintains that, if Merrill Lynch Canada were not a subsidiaryof Merrill Lynch, the proposed securities lending transactions would notbe prohibited transactions even though Merrill Lynch Canada is not registeredunder the 1934 Act. The only reason the proposed transactions would beprohibited with respect to Merrill Lynch Canada, according to the applicant,is because the prospective borrower is a subsidiary of a United Statesbroker-dealer which is itself registered under the 1934 Act. Merrill LynchCanada is a Nova Scotia corporation. The applicant represents that itsactivities are subject to Canadian laws which provide regulation comparableto registration under the 1934 Act for a U.S. broker-dealer.5. The applicant represents that Canadian securities laws were derivedmainly from the perceived need for more comprehensive protection for investorsas a result of the financial crisis that began in 1929. As with Canadianlaw in general, however, comprehensive regulation of the securities industryis centered at the Provincial rather than the Federal level. Each CanadianProvince has written provisions for the registration of securities andfor the regulation of persons engaging in the sale of securities. Regulatoryand enforcement authority is vested in a Provincial Securities Commissionor similarly denominated entity. According to the applicant, Provincialsecurities regulations generally parallel U.S. requirements in that theymandate that primary securities offerings may be made only after the filingof a prospectus containing complete disclosure. Such regulations also requireregistration of securities dealers, enforce capitalization requirementsfor dealers, license securities exchanges, and vest regulatory, investigativeand criminal enforcement authority in the Securities Commissions. Additionally,a privately funded national assurance fund exists for the protection ofsecurities investors.6. The applicant points out that the proposed exemption is virtually identicalto PTE 81-6. Accordingly, the same protections afforded to plans relyingon PTE 81-6 will be present for the participants and beneficiaries of anyPlans engaging in the described transactions. In regard to the collateralrequirements described in conditions 2 and 6 of the proposed exemption,the applicant also points out that all the collateral for the loans ofsecurities will be held within the United States. The letters of creditor other forms of collateral specified in the exemption would be held atHarris as trustee or agent for the Plans. Such collateral would providean immediate, independent source of funds available to the appropriatePlans in the event that a securities loan is terminated and Merrill LynchCanada fails to return the borrowed securities or equivalent to the Planswithin a certain period of time.7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionswill satisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because,among other things: (1) All the conditions specified in PTE 81-6 for theprotection of plans engaging in transactions in reliance on that classexemption will be met in regard to the transactions proposed in the application;(2) the securities involved in the proposed lending transactions will besecurities of U.S. corporations which are regularly traded on U.S. and/orCanadian stock exchanges; (3) the applicant maintains that the proposedtransactions would not be prohibited except for the described relationshipbetween Merrill Lynch Canada and Merrill Lynch; (4) the activities of MerrillLynch Canada are subject to Canadian laws which provide regulation comparableto registration under the 1934 Act for a U.S. broker-dealer; and (5) allthe collateral for any securities loans entered into under the proposedexemption will be held within the United States.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact: </T2>Paul Kelty of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Popham, Haik, Schnobrich andamp; Kaufman, Ltd. 401(k) Profit SharingPlan and Trust (the Plan) Located in Minneapolis, Minnesota</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">[Application No. D-7327]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply to the past purchase by the individuallydirected accounts (the Accounts) in the Plan held by certain shareholders(the Shareholders), who are also employees and/or officers and directorsof Popham, Haik, Schnobrich andamp; Kaufman, Ltd. (the Employer), the Plansponsor and a party in interest with the respect to the Plan, of 89,000shares of stock owned by the Employer/Plan sponsor; provided the termsand conditions of the transactions were as favorable to the Plan as thosewhich could have been obtained in an arm's-length transaction between unrelatedparties.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Effective Date: </T2>If granted, this exemption will be effective March25, 1987.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan with individually directed accountsand 182 participants. Total plan assets were $4,479,082 as of June 30,1986. The Employer is a law firm with offices in Minneapolis, Minnesota,Denver, Colorado, and Washington, DC. The independent trustee of the Planis the Marquette Bank, Minneapolis, N.A. (the Trustee).2. On March 25, 1987, the nine Shareholders \4\<NOTE/> directed the Trustee to purchase 89,000 shares of RadersburgMining Company (Radersburg) common stock (the Stock) for their Accountsin the Plan from the Employer at a price of $1.00 per share. The applicantrepresents that the price was determined by reference to an arm's-lengthsales transaction of 37,000 shares of the Stock between Neil Croonquistand Thomas Kelm, parties unrelated to the Plan or Employer, on March 24,1987 for $1.00 per share. The Employer had acquired the Stock in September,1986 from its client, Radersburg, for $1.00 per share in full settlementof outstanding legal fees. Also in September, 1986, seventeen creditorsconverted Radersburg debts into the Stock at $1.00 per share.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The nine Shareholders are: Ray Haik, D. William Kaufman,Denver Kaufman, James Lockhart, Robert Minish, Roger Schnobrich, JamesSteilen, G. Marc Whtehead and Rolfe Worden.3. The applicant further represents that the Shareholders and the Trusteewere in full compliance with all Securities and Exchange Commission rulesand regulations regarding the transaction. The Plan paid no fees or commissionsin connection with the purchase. Subsequent to the purchase, the Accountsof the nine Shareholders held between .68%-10.58% of their Accounts' assetsin the Stock. Each of the nine Shareholders has represented that he desiredthat the purchase be consummated on behalf of his individually directedaccount in the Plan.4. An independent appraisal of the Stock was performed on August 12, 1987by Peter L. Hauser, Vice President of Equity Securities Trading Co., Inc.of Minneapolis, Minnesota. Mr. Hauser represents that he has more thantwenty years' experience in the securities industry and is qualified toevaluate the Stock. He further represents that approximately .1% of hisincome in 1987 was derived from the partners of the Employer. He determinedthat, as of March 25, 1987, the fair market value of the Stock was $1.00per share.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the transaction met the statutorycriteria contained in section 408(a) of the Act because: (1) The transactioninvolved no more than 10.58% of the assets of any of the Accounts; (2)the purchase price paid by the Plan was determined by reference to arm's-lengthtransactions between unrelated parties; and (3) the nine Shareholders werethe only Plan participants affected by the transaction and each has representedthat he desired the transaction to be consummated.Notice to Interested Persons: Because the nine Shareholders are the solePlan participants to be affected by the transaction, the Department hasdetermined that there is no need to distribute the notice of pendency ofthe proposed exemption to interested persons. Comments and requests forhearing must be received within 30 days of the date of publication of thisnotice of proposed exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact: </T2>Mrs. Betsy Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Morison Securities, Inc. (Morison) Located in Minneapolis, Minnesota</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">[Application No. D-7336]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of theCode shall not apply to the acquisition by various individuals who areclients of Morison of certain public limited partnership units (the Units)from their individual retirement accounts (the IRAs), their Keogh plans(the Keoghs) or their profit sharing plans (the PS Plans) for cash, providedthe IRAs, Keoghs and PS Plans receive no less than the fair market valueof the Units on the dates of the sales.\5\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ Because the IRAs meet the conditions described in 29 CFR2510.3-2(d), there is no jurisdiction under Title I of the Act with respectto the IRAs. Because there are no employees covered under the Keoghs andPS Plans, there is no jurisdiction under Title I of the Act with respectto the Keoghs and PS Plans pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, thereis jurisdiction with respect to the IRAs, PS Plans and the Keoghs underTitle II of the Act pursuant to section 4975 of the Code.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. Morison is a retail securities Broker/Dealer, registered with the NASD,and located in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Various clients of Morison haveset up self-directed qualified plans. These include 175 IRAs, 6 Keoghs,and 3 PS Plans. These 184 plans each have only one participant.2. Each of the subject plans was established for the sole purpose of purchasingthe Units, which are certain public limited partnership units, mainly inthe oil and gas industry. The two largest investments are in Damson Oilandamp; Gas (Damson) whose A and B Units are traded publicly on the AMEXand whose IPX and IPY Units are publicly traded on the OTC Market, andin the Western Real Estate Fund, whose Units are publicly traded on theOTC Market. Damson's 8501 and 851E Units are not publicly traded.3. As the plans are self-directed, the Units must be held by an independentcustodian. Morison does not, due to the type of Broker-Dealer it is, maintainany client securities or funds. The plan participants each want to purchasethe Units from their respective IRAs, Keoghs and PS Plans. Morison hasrequested the prohibited transaction exemption on behalf of its clientsto permit each to purchase the Units from his plan for cash. No commissionswill be paid on the sales.4. For those Units which are publicly traded, the sales price for the subjecttransactions will be the closing price on the day preceding the sale. Ifthere is no public market value for the Units, the price will be determinedby the Unit sponsor's estimate of fair market value. Morison representsthat the Unit sponsor is independent of the IRAs, Keoghs and PS Plans,and is also best able to arrive at a value as it has all of the facts regardingthe investment. Morison represents that in some limited cases where a publicmarket does not exist and the Unit sponsors are unwilling to offer a fairmarket value, the sales price would be determined by independent thirdparty valuations.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionssatisfy the criteria of section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because: (a) Thesales will be one-time transactions for cash, and no commissions will becharged on the sales; (b) the sales price for the Units will be determinedby the market price, or if not publicly traded, the fair market value asestablished by the Unit sponsor or independent expert; and (c) the oneparticipant in each IRA, Keogh or PS Plan will be the only participantto be affected by the particular transaction, and the transaction willnot occur unless the participant desires that it be consummated.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact: </T2>Gary H. Lefkowitz of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Sammons Trucking Amended and Restated Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan),Located in Missoula, Montana</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7340]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply, effective June 3, 1975, to: (1) The salesby the Plan of five parcels of unimproved real property (the Properties)to Robert R. and Mary Lynn Van Derhoff (the Van Derhoffs), parties in interestwith respect to the Plan; and (2) extensions of credit by the Plan to theVan Derhoffs in conjunction with the sales of the Properties; providedthat the terms and conditions of such transactions are at least as favorableto the Plan as those which the Plan could obtain in arm's length transactionswith unrelated parties.Effective date: The effective date of the proposed exemption, if granted,will be June 3, 1975.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution pension plan which is sponsored bythe Sammons Trucking Company (the Employer), a Montana closely-held corporationengaged in the business of interstate commercial transport. As of September14, 1987, there where 59 active participants in the Plan, which had totalnet assets of $1,932,531 as of March 31, 1987. Investment decisions onbehalf of the Plan are the responsibility of the Plan's trustees, JamesD. Basolo and Hal W. Fullerton (the Trustees), each of whom is an officerof the Employer. The Van Derhoffs, who are related as father and daughter,represent that since 1974, their business, Van Derhoff Realty, locatedin Plains, Montana, has been a provider of property management and brokerageservices to the Plan.2. The Trustees represent that commencing in 1975, on behalf of the Planthey embarked on an investment program which consisted of the purchaseof undeveloped real property, the subdivision of such property and thesales of the subdivided parcels by contracts for deed involving extensionsof credit by the Plan to the purchasers of the parcels. As of March 31,1985 the Plan had executed sixty-five such contracts resulting from salesof subdivided parcels of real property between 1975 and 1985. Five of thesesales and extensions of credit (the Contracts) were made to one or bothof the Van Derhoffs. The Trustees are requesting an exemption for the Plan'ssales of real property and extensions of credit to the Van Derhoffs underthe Contracts, the terms of which are described herein.3. Under each Contract, the buyer made payments as per the Contract termsto a designated Bank escrow agent which was required to convey the subjectproperty to the buyer by a warranty deed upon payment of the entire purchaseprice plus interest. The buyer acknowledged under each Contract that norepresentations of any kind concerning the subject property were beingmade by the seller and each Contract specifically provided that it supersededany and all prior agreements between the parties pertaining to the saleof the subject property. Each Contract granted the buyer the right, within60 days written notice to the seller, to accelerate payment under the Contractat any time during the Contract's term and to pay any portion or all ofthe unpaid principal balance of the purchase price, together with interestaccrued to the date of such payment. According to default provisions ineach Contract, the seller had the right to declare the Contract forefeitedand all Contract rights of the buyer to be nullified if the buyer shouldremain in default on any terms of the Contract for thirty days after writtennotice of such default. Specific terms of each Contract are summarizedas follows:(A) Under a Contract executed on June 3, 1975 and closed on July 11, 1975,the Plan sold to Robert R. Van Derhoff a 10.193 acre parcel of unimprovedreal property designated as Tract Eleven in Survey No. 50A in Sanders County,Montana for a purchase price of $7,000 payable as follows: $500 in cashpaid on or before the Contract's execution and the balance of $6,500 tobe paid over ten years commencing July 15, 1975 in amortized monthly installmentsof $77.16 including interest of 7.5 percent per annum effective June 15,1975.(B) Under a Contract executed on September 29, 1977 and closed on October7, 1977, the Plan sold to Robert R. Van Derhoff a 10.385 acre parcel ofunimproved real property and a 20.030 acre parcel of unimproved real propertydesignated as Tracts Twenty-five and Forty-six, respectively, in SurveyNo. 50A in Sanders County, Montana for a purchase price of $14,174 payableas follows: $2,274 in cash paid on or before the Contract's execution andthe balance of $11,900 to be paid over ten years commencing November 10,1977 in monthly installments of $141.27 including interest of 7.5 percentper annum effective October 10, 1977.(C) Under a Contract executed on March 21, 1980 and closed on August 15,1980, the Plan sold to Robert R. Van Derhoff a 22.94 acre parcel of unimprovedreal property designated as Tract 1-A in Survey No. 486 in Sanders County,Montana for a purchase price of $18,000 payable as follows: $1,500 in cashon or before the Contract's execution and the balance of $16,500 to bepaid over 15 years commencing September 15, 1980 in amortized monthly installmentsof $177.38 including interest at ten percent per annum effective August15, 1980.(D) Under a Contract executed on June 14, 1983 and closed on June 15, 1983,the Plan sold to Robert R. Van Derhoff a 3.86 parcel of unimproved realproperty designated as Tract 1-J in Survey No. 662 in Sanders County, Montanafor a purchase price of $10,800 payable as follows: $2,100 in cash on orbefore the Contract's execution and the balance of $8,700 to be paid overten years commencing July 15, 1983 in amortized monthly installments of$115.01 including interest of ten percent per annum effective June 14,1983.(E) Under a Contract executed and closed on May 4, 1984, the Plan soldto Mary Lynn Van Derhoff a 2.99 acre parcel of unimproved real propertydesignated as Parcel E in Survey No. 726 in Sanders County, Montana fora purchase price of $9,000 payable as follows: $1,800 in cash upon theContract's execution and the balance of $7,200 to be paid over ten yearscommencing June 1, 1984 in amortized monthly installments of $95.18 includinginterest of ten percent per annum effective May 4, 1984.5. The Trustees represent that all decisions and determinations on behalfof the Plan with respect to the Contracts were made by the Plan's AdministrativeCommittee (the Committee), consisting of the Trustees and a third member,James O. Bendickson, an officer of the Employer. The Trustees representfurther that no member of the Committee is related in any way to the VanDerhoffs and that the Committee determined that the Van Derhoffs were notrelated in any way to any employee of the Employer or any Plan participant.The Trustees represent that the Van Derhoffs did not influence the decisionof the Committee with respect to any sale of property to them. Maintainingthat the subject transactions were entered into without knowledge by theCommittee or the Van Derhoffs that the Contracts constituted prohibitedtransactions under the Act or the Code, the Trustees acknowledge that allof the Contracts were paid in full by the Van Derhoffs by April 10, 1987after the Internal Revenue Service informed the Trustees that the Contractsappeared to be prohibited by the Act and the Code. The Trustees state thatthe Contracts were entered into in the ordinary course of business on behalfof the Plan and that the purchase price and other terms for the sale ofthe property under each Contract were determined by the Committee independentlyof the Van Derhoffs to be arms-length, at or above the fair market valueof each subject property. The Trustees state further that the interestrate and other terms of the Plan's commensurate extension of credit undereach Contract were established by the Committee pursuant to the same proceduresutilized on behalf of the Plan in all real estate sales under contractsfor deed on the basis of the prevailing rates offered by local commerciallenders and the prevailing rates charged in seller-financed arrangementsat the time of each Contract in the same geographic locale of the subjectproperty.6. In summary, the Trustees represent that the transactions satisfied thecriteria of section 408(a) of the Act for the following reasons: (1) Allterms and conditions of the Contracts were established on behalf of thePlan by the Committee, which is unrelated to the Van Derhoffs; (2) Underthe Contracts the Plan received purchase prices of no less than the fairmarket value of each of the Properties; (3) The terms of the extensionsof credit under the Contracts were equivalent to those between unrelatedparties in similar transactions at the same times and in the same geographiclocales as those involved in the Contracts; and (4) The Plan's interestsunder the Contracts were represented at all times by the Trustees, whoare independent of the Van Derhoffs.For Further Information Contact: Ronald Willett of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Andes/Buchanan Medical Corporation Defined Benefit Pension Plan (thePension Plan) and the Andes-Buchanan Medical Corporation Money PurchasePension Plan (the M/P Plan; Together, the Plans), Located in Fullerton,California  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7402] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedpurchase by the Plans of a certain promissory note (the Note) which issecured by a deed of trust against certain real property owned by F.V.Ltd., an unrelated party, from the Jerry P. Andes and Barbara J. AndesRevocable Estate Trust (the Andes Trust), a party in interest with respectto the Plans, provided that the price paid for the Note is the lesser ofeither the outstandng principal balance on the Note or the fair marketvalue of the Note on the date of purchase. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Acts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Pension Plan is a defined benefit pension plan which, as of September30, 1987, had seven participants and total assets of $706,944.71. The M/PPlan is a money purchase pension plan which, as of September 30, 1987,had six participants and total assets of $758,459.45. Jerry P. Andes, M.D.,(Dr. Andes) and Dennis Buchanan, M.D., (Dr. Buchanan) are the trusteesof the Plans (the Trustees), and the decision-makers with respect to thePlans' investments. 2. The Plans are sponsored by the Andes/Buchanan Medical Corporation (theEmployer). The Employer is a California medical corporation located at220 Laguna Road, Fullerton, California. The shareholders of the Employerare Dr. Andes and Dr. Buchanan. Dr. Andes is the President of the Employer. 3. Dr. Andes and his wife, Barbara J. Andes, are the trustees of the AndesTrust. The Andes Trust is an estate trust, owned by Dr. Andes and BarbaraAndes, which is a party in interest with respect to the Plans. Prior toJanuary 1980, the Andes Trust owned a limited partnership interest in F.V.Ltd. (the Partnership), a California limited partnership. The applicantstates that the Partnership is an unrelated party with respect to the Plansand the Employer, and that the Plans have never held either an equity ordebt interest in the Partnership. The general partner of the Partnershipis DVM, Inc. (DVM), a California corporation whose president and principalshareholder is William J. Carden (Mr. Carden). DVM is a general partnerin several real estate limited partnerships in southern California. Theapplicant states that both DVM and Mr. Carden are unrealated parties withrespect to the Plans and the Employer. 4. On January 14, 1980, the Andes Trust liquidated its interest in thePartnership. The Andes Trust received the Note in partial considerationfor its interest in the Partnership. The original face amount of the Notewas $170,000. The obligors on the Note are DVM, as the general partnerof the Partnership, and Mr. Carden. The Note bears simple interest at therate of 10 percent per annum. Since April 2, 1980, principal and intereston the Note have been payable in quarterly installments of $4,800. On January2, 1990, the Note provides for the payment in five equal annual installmentsof unpaid principal and interest. The applicant states that all paymentson the Note have been made in a timely manner. The outstanding principalbalance on the Note was $143,600, as of January 1, 1988. The collateral for the Note is a first deed of trust on a certain parcelof commercial real property located at 10221 thru 10231 Slater Avenue,Fountain Valley, California (the Property). There is a second deed of trustin favor of the Mitsubishi Bank of California in the amount of $3,909,500.The Property is approximately 2.65 acres of real estate with a two buildingoffice complex of approximately 115,434 square feet. The Property was appraisedon August 24, 1983 by William L. Reinhart, SRPA, and William V. Shrewsbury,MAI, independent, qualified real estate appraisers in Newport Beach, California,as having a fair market value of $5,585,000. 5. The Note was appraised on March 21, 1988 by Mark Zane Freilich a/k/aMark Zane (Mr. Zane), President of Interbranch, Inc., a California corporationengaged in mortgage brokerage and various other financial services. Mr.Zane represents that he is an independent, qualified appraiser for theNote.  Mr. Zane states that in his opinion, the fair market value of the Note,as of March 21, 1988, was the current outstanding principal balance ofthe Note as of that date. Mr. Zane represents that his valuation of theNote was based on the current value of the Note's terms and conditions,the Note's lien position with respect to other encumbrances, and the securityfor the Note based on the value of the Property as appraised by independent,qualified appraisers. Mr. Zane also represents that he will update hisappraisal of the Note at the time of the proposed transaction and thatthe appraisal will reflect any accrued but unpaid interest as of the dateof purchase. 6. The Trustees propose to have the Plans purchase the Note for cash atthe lesser of either the outstanding principal balance on the Note or thefair market value of the Note on the date of purchase. Each of the Planswould acquire a 50 percent interest in the Note. The Plans will not payany commissions or other expenses with respect to the proposed transaction.7. Mr. Zane has provided a declaration dated March 9, 1988 (the Declaration),in which he has agreed to serve as an independent fiduciary of the Plansfor purposes of the proposed transaction. Mr. Zane acknowledges in theDeclaration that he understands his duties, responsibilities and liabilitiesunder the Act in acting as a fiduciary for the Plans. Mr. Zane states thathe is qualified to act as a fiduciary of the Plans because he has beeninvolved in numerous transactions involving pension plans investing invarious types of mortgage interests and has been often called upon to adviseplan trustees with respect to the safety and diversity of their portfolios.Mr. Zane states further that he is not related in any way to any officer,director or employee of the Employer.8. Mr. Zane has analyzed the investment portfolios of the Plans to determinewhether the Note would be both an appropriate and desirable investmentfor the Plans, based on the Note's rate of return, the character and diversificationof the other assets of the Plans, and the probable liquidity needs of thePlans. Mr. Zane states that his review of the Plans' portfolios indicatesthat the Plans are substantially lacking in investments of a medium termwhich is precisely the type of investment which the Note represents forthe Plans. Mr. Zane states further that the 10% annual return on the Notewould be in excess of anything earned by the Plans' portfolios at the presenttime. Mr. Zane also believes that the security for the Note is excellent,based on the Note's senior lien position and the priority of its recordingdate. In addition, Mr. Zane states that the principal and interest paymentson the Note have been timely made and that the Note is a well seasonedinvestment. Finally, Mr. Zane notes that immediately following the proposedacquisition of the Note by the Plans, each Plan's interest in the Notewill represent less than 10% of each Plan's total assets. Thus, Mr. Zanestates that the proposed transaction will not adversely affect the liquidityneeds of the Plans.Mr. Zane concludes that the proposed transaction would be in the best interestsof the Plans. Mr. Zane states that his conclusion is based on his totalanalysis of the Note as an investment for the Plans, taking into accountthe terms of the Note and the investment policies and objectives of thePlans, as established by the Employer. In addition, Mr. Zane states thathe will monitor the proposed transaction on behalf of the Plans and willtake whatever actions are necessary to safeguard the Plans' interests.9. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a)The purchase of the Note will be a one-time transaction for cash; (b) thePlans will purchase the Note at a price which is the lesser of either theoutstanding principal balance of the Note or the fair market value of theNote, as established by a qualified, independent appraiser, as of the dateof the transaction; (c) the Plans will not pay any commissions or otherexpenses with respect to the transaction; (d) Mr. Zane, a qualified independentfiduciary, has determined that the proposed transaction is in the bestinterests of the Plans; and (e) Mr. Zane will monitor the proposed transactionon behalf of the Plans to ensure that the Plans' interests are safeguarded.For Further Information Contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information</ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries.(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 2d day of June 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Associate Director, Regulations and Interpretations, Pensionand Welfare Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-12821 Filed 6-6-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>