<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881130-0006 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-30-88.f2.A1005</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Occupational Safety and Health Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">29 CFR Part 1952</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. T-023]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Virginia State Plan; Final Approval Determination</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final State plan approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document amends Subpart EE of 29 CFR Part 1952 toreflect the Assistant Secretary's decision granting final approval to theVirginia State plan. As a result of this affirmative determination undersection 18(e) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, FederalOSHA standards and enforcement authority no longer apply to occupationalsafety and health issues covered by the Virginia plan, and authority forFederal concurrent jurisdiction is relinquished. Federal enforcement jurisdictionis retained over private sector maritime employment and worksites locatedwithin Federal military facilities as well as on other Federal enclaveswhere civil jurisdiction has been ceded by the State to the Federal government.Federal jurisdiction remains in effect with respect to Federal governmentemployers and employees.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>November 30, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>James Foster, Director, Officeof Information and Consumer Affairs, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,U.S. Department of Labor, Room N-3637, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210. Telephone: (202) 523-8148.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Introduction</ITAG>Section 18 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (the ``Act'')provides that States which desire to assume responsibility for the developmentand enforcement of occupational safety and health standards may do so bysubmitting, and obtaining Federal approval of, a State plan. Proceduresfor State plan submission and approval are set forth in regulations at29 CFR Part 1902. If the Assistant Secretary, applying the criteria setforth in section 18(c) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.3 and 1902.4, finds thatthe plan provides or will provide for State standards and enforcement whichare ``at least as effective'' as Federal standards and enforcement, initialapproval is granted.A State may commence operations under its plan after this determinationis made, but the Assistant Secretary retains discretionary Federal enforcementauthority during the initial approval period as provided by section 18(e)of the Act. A State plan may receive initial approval even though, uponsubmission, it does not fully meet the criteria set forth in 29 CFR 1902.3and 1902.4 if it includes satisfactory assurance by the State that it willtake the necessary ``developmental steps'' to meet the criteria withina three-year period. 29 CFR 1902.(b). The Assistant Secretary publishesa notice of ``certification of completion of developmental steps'' whenall of a State's developmental commitments have been satisfactorily met.29 CFR 1902.34.When a State plan that has been granted initial approval is developed sufficientlyto warrant a suspension of concurrent Federal enforcement activity, itbecomes eligible to enter into an ``operational status agreement'' withOSHA. 29 CFR 1954.3(f).A State must have enacted its enabling legislation, promulgated State standards,achieved an adequate level of qualified personnel, and established a systemfor review of contested enforcement actions. Under these voluntary agreements,concurrent Federal enforcement will not be initiated with regard to Federaloccupational safety and health standards in those issues covered by theState plan, where the State program is providing an acceptable level ofprotection.Following the initial approval of a complete plan, or the certificationof a developmental plan, the Assistant Secretary must monitor and evaluateactual operations under the plan for a period of at least one year to determine,on the basis of actual operations under the plan, whether the criteriaset forth in section 18(c) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.3, 1902.4 and 1902.37are being applied. An affirmative determination under section 18(e) ofthe Act (usually referred to as ``final approval'' of the State plan) resultsin the relinquishment of authority for Federal concurrent jurisdictionin the State with respect to occupational safety and health issues coveredby the plan. 29 U.S.C. 667(e). To enable OSHA to evaluate State performancein relation to the foregoing criteria, State participation in OSHA's computerizedIntegrated Management Information System is required.An additional requirement for final approval consideration is that a Statemust meet the compliance staffing levels, or benchmarks, for safety andhealth compliance officers established by OSHA for that State. This requirementstems from a 1978 Court Order by the U.S. District Court for the Districtof Columbia (<T3>AFL-CIO</T3> v. <T3>Marshall,</T3> C.A. No. 74-406), pursuant to a U.S. Court of Appealsdecision that directed the Assistant Secretary to calculate for each Stateplan State the number of enforcement personnel needed to assure a ``fullyeffective'' enforcement program.<ITAG tagnum="85">History of the Virginia Plan and Its Compliance Staffing Benchmarks</ITAG>VirginiaPlanOn December 18, 1972, Virginia submitted an occupational safety and healthplan in accordance with section 18(b) of the Act and 29 CFR Part 1902,Subpart C, and on April 11, 1973, a notice was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (38 FR 9194) concerning the submission of theplan, announcing that initial Federal approval of the plan was at issueand offering interested persons 30 days in which to submit data, viewsand arguments in writing concerning the plan.Comments addressing specific areas of the Virginia plan, including allegeddeficiencies, were received from the Virginia State Association of ProfessionalFire Fighters; Mary A. Marshall, Member of the Virginia House of Delegates;Harold Gordon of Gordon and Healy; the American Federation of Labor andCongress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO); and the Virginia StateAFL-CIO. Following review of the Virginia plan, the public comments, andthe results of discussions with the State, several modifications and clarificationswere received from the State.Plan review and a subsequent determination as to effectiveness, requiredunder section 18(c) of the Act and Subpart B of 29 CFR Part 1902, disclosedseveral reasons for determining that the Virginia plan as submitted, whichrelied primarily on criminal enforcement procedures, was not ``at leastas effective'' as the Federal civil enforcement scheme. Consequently, theAssistant Secretary initiated formal proceedings in accordance with section18(d) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.19(a) to reject the plan. A Notice ofthe Proposed Rejection and Notice of Hearing was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (39 FR 24844, August 1, 1974) which fully describedthe ramifications of the State's reliance on a criminal enforcement processand the Assistant Secretary's conclusions regarding the resulting lackof effectiveness of the proposed Virginia program in comparison to Federalenforcement procedures. Although an opportunity was given for a publichearing on the rejection proceeding, only representatives of the Districtof Columbia requested permission to appear, and that request was subsequentlywithdrawn.In view of the complexity of the subject matter involved in the proposedrejection, Requests for Admissions, Interrogatories and Answers to Interrogatorieswere exchanged between the parties to the proceeding. Before the commencementof a formal hearing on the proposed rejection, the Virginia General Assembly,in its 1975 regular session, amended section 40.1-49.1 of the Code of Virginia(1950) which serves as the enforcement portion of the enabling legislation.On June 16, 1975, the U.S. Department of Labor filed a motion to dismissthe proposed rejection on the grounds that the amended legislation, whichprovided for civil rather than criminal court review of contested enforcementactions and the right of employees to participate as parties in those proceedings,was in the process of being reviewed for possible approval and had renderedmoot the proceeding on which the rejection was based. To this end, pursuantto section 18(c) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.12, the Assistant Secretarypublished for public comment in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (40 FR 25741, June 18, 1975) a notice of Submissionof Modifications to the Developmental Plan which recognized that the 1975amendments appeared substantially to remove the basis for the proposedrejection.Public comments in response to this notice were received from Area 4, UnitedPaper Workers International Union, AFL-CIO. There were no requests fora public hearing.Prior to the date scheduled for argument on whether the proposed rejectionproceeding should be dismissed, the Assistant Secretary and the VirginiaCommissioner of Labor and Industry agreed upon Consent Findings, confirmedby a subsequent Consent Order, notice of which was published in the October30, 1975 <T4>Federal Register</T4> (40 FR 50584), to suspend the proposed rejectionproceedings pending the outcome of OSHA's review of the amended Virginiaplan.Although the 1975 legislative amendments appeared to resolve many of theobjections to Virginia's enforcement process, the Department of Labor'sreview tentatively determined that the Virginia plan still did not provideenforcement procedures ``as effective as'' their Federal counterparts.Discussions and meetings between State and Federal representatives, however,resulted in several administrative commitments and legislative proposalsby Virginia in response to the concerns expressed by Federal reviewers.The 1976 session of the Virginia General Assembly enacted further amendmentsto the State's enabling legislation. On June 21, 1976, the State formallysubmitted its revised plan, including the amended enabling legislation,to the Assistant Secretary. As noted above, the plan included provisionsfor the review of contested cases by the Virginia civil court system whereasFederal OSHA utilizes an administrative review process.On September 28, 1976, the Assistant Secretary published a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice granting approval of the Virginia planas a developmental plan under Section 18(b) of the Act (41 FR 42655). Theplan provides for a program patterned in most respects (other than itsprocedures for contested cases) after that of the Federal OccupationalSafety and Health Administration.The Virginia plan covers all occupational safety and health issues exceptprivate sector maritime employment and employment at worksites locatedwithin Federal military facilities as well as on other Federal enclaveswhere civil jurisdiction has been ceded by the State to the Federal government.The Virginia Department of Labor and Industry is designated as having responsibilityfor administering the plan throughout the State. At the time of initialplan approval, the responsibility for health standards enforcement restedwith the Bureau of Occupational Health in the Virginia Department of Health.Effective July 1, 1985, the Bureau of Occupational Health was transferredfrom the Department of Health to the Department of Labor and Industry.The plan provides for the adoption by Virginia of standards which are ``atleast as effective'' as the Federal occupational safety and health standards.In most cases the State standards are identical to the Federal. The planrequires employers to furnish employment and places of employment whichare free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to causedeath or serious physical harm, and to comply with all occupational safetyand health standards promulgated by the State agency. Employees are requiredto comply with all standards and regulations applicable to their conduct.The plan contains provisions similar to Federal procedures governing emergencytemporary standards; imminent danger proceedings; coverage under the generalduty clause; variances; safeguards to protect trade secrets; protectionof employees against discrimination for exercising their rights under theplan; and employer and employee rights to participate in inspection andreview proceedings. Appeals of citations and penalties are filed with theCommissioner of Labor and Industry and are heard by the General DistrictCourts of Virginia, which are located in each Virginia county and in theindependent cities. (Although the General District Courts are not courtsof record, the 1979 session of the Virginia General Assembly enacted amendmentsto Title 40.1 of the Code of Virginia to require the Virginia courts toissue written orders based on findings of fact and conclusions of law incases involving the contest of citations and penalties related to violationsof occupational safety and health standards.) Decisions of the GeneralDistrict Courts may be appealed to the Virginia Circuit Courts. Decisionsof the Circuit Courts may be appealed to the Virginia Supreme Court.The notice of initial approval noted a few additional distinctions betweenthe Federal and Virginia programs. The State does not cover private sectormaritime employment or employment at worksites located within Federal militaryfacilities as well as on other Federal enclaves where civil jurisdictionhas been ceded by the State to the Federal government. As indicated above,unlike the Federal administrative process for the review of contested cases,in Virginia, General District Courts hear formal contests of penaltiesand/or citations for safety and health violations. Appeals of DistrictCourt determinations are heard de novo by the State Circuit Courts.The Assistant Secretary's initial approval of the Virginia developmentalplan, a general description of the plan, a schedule of required developmentalsteps, and a provision of discretionary concurrent Federal enforcementduring the period of initial approval were codified in the Code of FederalRegulations (29 CFR Part 1952, Subpart EE; 41 FR 42655, September 28, 1976).A minor correction to the approval notice was published on February 25,1977 (42 FR 10989). As a result of the approval of the Virginia State plan,the Assistant Secretary published a notice announcing the Dismissal ofRejection Proceedings against the Virginia plan (41 FR 56412, December28, 1976).In accordance with the State's developmental schedule, all major structuralcomponents of the plan were put in place and documentation submitted forOSHA approval on or before September 23, 1979. These ``developmental steps''included amendments to Title 40.1 of the Code of Virginia, promulgationof State occupational safety and health standards essentially identicalto Federal standards and establishment of a public employee program. Incompleting these developmental steps, the State developed and submittedfor Federal approval all components of its program including, among otherthings, legislative amendments, a judicial system of review for contestedcases, a merit staffing system, regulations for inspections, citationsand proposed penalties, recordkeeping and reporting regulations, a voluntarycompliance program, including on-site consultation services, and a safetyand health poster for private and public employees.These submissions were carefully reviewed by OSHA; after opportunity forpublic comment and modification of State submissions, where appropriate,the major plan elements were approved by the Assistant Secretary as meetingthe criteria of section 18 of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.3 and 1902.4. TheVirginia subpart of 29 CFR Part 1952 was amended to reflect each of theseapproval determinations (see 29 CFR 1952.372). On October 1, 1981 an operational status agreement was entered into betweenFederal OSHA and Virginia. A <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice announcing the operational status agreementwas published on June 11, 1982 (47 FR 25323). Under the terms of the agreement,OSHA voluntarily suspended the application of concurrent Federal enforcementauthority with regard to Federal occupational safety and health standardsin all issues covered by the Virginia plan. On August 15, 1984, in accordance with procedures at 29 CFR 1902.34 and1902.35, the Assistant Secretary certified that Virginia had satisfactorilycompleted all developmental steps (49 FR 33123, August 21, 1984). In certifyingthe plan, the Assistant Secretary found the structural features of theprogram_the statutes, standards, regulations, and written procedures foradministering the Virginia plan_to be at least as effective as correspondingFederal provisions. Certification does not, however, entail findings orconclusions by OSHA concerning adequacy of actual plan performance. Ashas already been noted, OSHA regulations provide that certification initiatesa period of evaluation and monitoring of State activity to determine inaccordance with Section 18(e) of the Act whether the statutory or regulatorycriteria for State plans are being applied in actual operations under theplan and whether final approval should be granted. On June 13, 1978, OSHA published a notice in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>(43 FR 25491) requesting public comment on apetition received by the Agency requesting withdrawal of OSHA approvalof the Virginia State plan. The petition was submitted by the Oil, Chemical,and Atomic Workers (OCAW) International Union. Three additional petitionsrequesting plan withdrawal were subsequently filed by the Fairfax County,Virginia, Board of Supervisors, the Virginia State AFL-CIO, and the Buildingand Construction Trades Department of the AFL-CIO. On October 3, 1980,a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice was published (45 FR 65625) requestingpublic comments on the three petitions as well as providing an additionaltime period for public comments on the OCAW petition. The OCAW petition alleged that Virginia's enforcement of safety and healthstandards was not as effective as that of Federal OSHA. The Virginia StateAFL-CIO criticized Virginia's judicial review system and alleged that Virginiahad failed to enforce safety and health standards as effectively as FederalOSHA. The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors and the Building and ConstructionTrades Department alleged that Virginia's enforcement in the constructionindustry was ineffective and insufficient. Of the 101 written comments received in response to the two notices requestingpublic comment, 97 expressed support for the Virginia plan while four letterssupported the petitions for withdrawal, two of those letters having beensubmitted by petitioners themselves. In a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice dated July 14, 1981 (46 FR 36141) theAssistant Secretary announced that in light of recent Federal monitoringdata, comparison with Federal performance, information provided in thepublic comments, and other relevant factors, a withdrawal proceeding againstthe Virginia State plan was not warranted and the petitions were thereforedenied. On December 12, 1986, OSHA published a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice (51 FR 44784) announcing that effectiveOctober 1, 1986, concurrent Federal authority had been reinstituted inVirginia with respect to general schedule inspections resulting in denialsof entry under the Virginia State plan. The resumption of concurrent enforcementauthority was undertaken as a temporary measure to allow Virginia to completeits efforts to legislatively address difficulties it had encountered inthe area of right of entry. The specific difficulty resulted from the 1985Virginia Supreme Court decision in <T3>Mosher Steel-Virginia </T3>v. <T3>Teig, </T3>327 S.E. 2d 87 (Va., 1985), that suggested, but did notexpressly hold, that Virginia employers challenging general schedule inspectionwarrants would be entitled to discovery, including the release of confidentialinspection scheduling information and ``establishment lists'' of workplaceslikely to be inspected in the future. In a subsequent case (<T3>Mosher Steel-Virginia </T3>v. <T3>Amato, </T3>Chancery No. 86-04354) involving a challenge to a Stateinspection warrant, the Circuit Court for the City of Roanoke, relyingon the 1985 Virginia Supreme Court decision, ordered State officials responsiblefor enforcing the plan to submit to discovery requested by the employer,including the submission of data underlying the Virginia inspection plan,deposition of officials responsible for developing and implementing theinspection scheduling plan, and the release to the employer of variousconfidential scheduling material, including establishment lists. In casesinvolving similar challenges to Federal OSHA inspection warrants, the Federalcourts have held such discovery improper. It was the Assistant Secretary'sdetermination that these State court decisions rendered Virginia's rightof entry authority less effective than the Federal and necessitated thereinstitution of limited concurrent Federal enforcement authority to ensureworker protection. The 1987 session of the Virginia General Assembly enacted legislative amendmentsto remedy the Virginia plan's right of entry difficulties. OSHA's reviewof those amendments determined that the amendments provided the Virginiaplan with a basis to obtain search warrants on terms and conditions equivalentto those which are available Federally. Accordingly, the Assistant Secretaryapproved the legislative amendments in the September 17, 1987 <T4>Federal Register </T4>(52 FR 35069) and announced that the limitedexercise of concurrent Federal jurisdiction in Virginia had been terminatedwhen the amendments became effective on July 1, 1987. Virginia BenchmarksIn 1978, the Assistant Secretary was directed by the U.S. District Courtfor the District of Columbia (<T3>AFL-CIO </T3>v. <T3>Marshall, </T3>C.A. No. 74-406), pursuant to a U.S. Court of Appealsdecision, to calculate for each State plan State the number of enforcementpersonnel (compliance staffing benchmarks) needed to assure a ``fully effective''enforcement program. In 1980, OSHA submitted a Report to the Court containingthe benchmarks and requiring Virginia to allocate 51 safety complianceofficers and 74 industrial hygienists to conduct inspections under theplan. In September 1984 the Virginia State designee in conjunction with OSHAcompleted a review of the components and requirements of the 1980 compliancestaffing benchmarks established for Virginia. Pursuant to an initiativebegun in August 1983 by the State plan designees as a group with OSHA,and in accord with the formulas and general principles established by thatgroup for individual State revision of the benchmarks, Virginia reassessedthe staffing necessary for a ``fully effective'' occupational safety andhealth program in the State. This reassessment resulted in a proposal toOSHA contained in comprehensive documents of revised staffing benchmarksof 38 safety and 21 health compliance officers. After the opportunity forpublic comment and service on the AFL-CIO, the Assistant Secretary approvedthese revised staffing requirements on January 17, 1986 (51 FR 2481).<ITAG tagnum="84">History of the Present Proceedings</ITAG>Procedures for final approval of State plans are set forth at 29 CFR Part1902, Subpart D. On September 2, 1988, OSHA published notice (53 FR 34121)of the eligibility of the Virginia State plan for determination under section18(e) of the Act as to whether final approval of the plan should be granted.The determination of eligibility was based on monitoring of State operationsfor at least one year following certification, State participation in theFederal-State Integrated Management Information System, and staffing whichmeets the revised State staffing benchmarks. The September 2 <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice set forth a general description of theVirginia plan and summarized the results of Federal OSHA monitoring ofState operations during the period from January 1, 1987 through March 31,1988. In addition to the information set forth in the notice itself, OSHAsubmitted, as part of the record in this rulemaking proceeding, extensiveand detailed exhibits documenting the plan, including copies of the Statelegislation, administrative regulations and procedural manuals under whichVirginia operates its plan, and copies of all previous <T4>Federal Register </T4>notices regarding the plan. A copy of the January 1987-March 1988 Evaluation Report of the Virginiaplan (``18(e) Evaluation Report''), which was extensively summarized inthe September 2 proposal and provided the principal factual basis for theproposed 18(e) determination, was included in the record. Copies of allOSHA evaluation reports on the plan since its certification as having completedall developmental steps were made part of the record. To assist and encourage public participation in the 18(e) determination,copies of the complete record were maintained in the OSHA Docket Officein Washington, DC., in the OSHA Regional Office in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,and at the Virginia Department of Labor and Industry in Richmond. Summariesof the September 2 proposal, with an invitation for public comments, werepublished in Virginia on September 4, 1988, and on September 26, 1988.The September 2 proposal invited interested persons to submit by October7 written comments and views regarding the Virginia plan and whether finalapproval should be granted. An opportunity to request an informal publichearing also was provided. Twenty-one (21) comments were received in responseto this notice, one of which requested an informal hearing. <ITAG tagnum="85">Summary and Evaluation of Comments and Requests for an Informal HearingReceived</ITAG>During this proposed rulemaking OSHA has encouraged interested membersof the public to provide information and views regarding operations underthe Virginia plan to supplement the information already granted duringOSHA monitoring and evaluation of plan administration. In response to the September 2 notice, OSHA received comments from: FrankC. Bedell, President of the Virginia Petroleum Jobbers Association, Inc.[Ex. 3-1]; William C. Ashworth, Vice-President and General Manager of theRock-Tenn Company, Paperboard Products Division [Ex. 3-2]; K.W. Callan,Plant Manager of the American Furniture Company, Inc. [Ex. 3-3]; E. J.Estep, Personnel Director of the Electro-Mechanical Corporation [Ex. 3-4];Robert E. Wages, Vice-President of the Oil, Chemical and Atomic WorkersInternational Union (OCAW) [Ex. 3-5]; Ken Decker, Personnel Manager ofNI Industries, Inc. [Ex. 3-6]; Douglas Ashbrook, Project Manager of theR. L. Johnson Construction Company, Inc. [Ex. 3-7]; John N. Jordan, VicePresident and Director of Human Resources of Armstrong World Industries,Inc. [Ex. 3-8]; Stuart H. Pouliot, Manager, Employee and Environment Protection,of Philip Morris, U.S.A. [Ex. 3-9]; Sandra Y. Williams, Executive Directorof the Masonry Contractors Association of Virginia [Ex. 3-10]; RoderickTriplett, III, President of the Virginia Association of Plumbing-Heating-CoolingContractors [Ex. 3-11]; Mark I. Singer, Executive Director of the RichmondArea Municipal Contractors Association [Ex. 3-12]; Mark I. Singer, ExecutiveDirector of the Virginia Electrical Contractors Association, Inc. [Ex.3-13]; John D. Tickle, President and CEO of the Morrison Molded Fiber GlassCompany [Ex. 3-14]; Z. C. Cameron, Jr., of the Virginia Manufacturers Association[Ex. 3-15]; H. Kim Anderson, Executive Director of the Virginia PetroleumCouncil [Ex. 3-16]; David H. Laws, President, and Bill Wilson, Director,Safety and Health, of the Virginia State AFL-CIO [Ex. 3-17]; A. T. Hamilton,Employee Relations Manager of the Aqualon Company [Ex. 3-18]; William C.Wilson, Director of Safety and Health of the United Food and CommercialWorkers Union, Local 400 [Ex. 3-19]; James T. Hicks, Safety and SecurityManager, and L. Mel Kent, Industrial Relations Manager, of the BrunswickCorporation, Defense Division [Ex. 3-20]; and Jon K. Parish, Director,Loss Control and Training, of the Lane Company [Ex. 3-21]. Twenty of the comments expressed support for final approval on the groundsof State competence, responsiveness, and specific knowledge of local conditions.Several of these comments indicated that the State has established andoperates an effective safety and health program without adversarial relationswith local industries and workers, and that the State has been effectivein protecting employees in Virginia. Many of the comments commended theState for developing and adopting its own confined spaces standards forthe telecommunications industry and for general industry and construction.The comments also praised the competency and professionalism of Virginiainspectors and officials. The October 1 comment submitted by Robert Wages of OCAW [Ex. 3-5] urgedthat the Assistant Secretary deny final approval to the Virginia Stateplan and requested an informal hearing pursuant to 29 CFR 1902.39. Mr.Wages' objection to final approval for the Virginia program was specificallybased on the results of a State investigation into a fatal accident in1988 at an oil refinery in which the employer was cited and assessed apenalty for a serious violation. It was Mr. Wages' contention that sincethe employer had been informed of the hazardous condition two months earlier,a citation for a willful violation should have been issued. OSHA's Philadelphia Regional Office conducted an investigation of the allegationscontained in Mr. Wages' letter and found that although the condition resultingin the accident clearly constituted a serious violation, the evidence wasinconclusive as to whether the circumstances surrounding the employer'saction could be construed as purposeful or deliberate so as to supportthe issuance of a citation for a willful violation. It was the judgmentof the Regional Office that the Virginia program's decision to cite theemployer for a serious violation of the State's ``general duty clause''(Title 40.1-51.1(a), Code of Virginia) was appropriate under the circumstancesof the case. Furthermore, the Regional investigation noted that the Virginiaprogram has a strong policy of citing willful violations when warrantedand of supporting them at trial. In light of the Regional Office's finding that the OCAW allegations againstthe Virginia program were unfounded and that the State's actions in thecase were appropriate, the Agency has determined that an informal publichearing on the matter is not warranted. <ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions </ITAG>As required by 29 CFR 1902.41, in considering the granting of final approvalto a State plan, OSHA has carefully and thoroughly reviewed all informationavailable to it on the actual operation of the Virginia State plan. Thisinformation has included all previous evaluation findings since certificationof completion of the State plan's developmental steps, especially datafor the period of January 1, 1987 through March 31, 1988 and informationpresented in written submissions. Findings and conclusions in each of theareas of performance are as follows. (1) <T3>Standards. </T3>Section 18(c)(2) of the Act requires State plans toprovide for occupational safety and health standards which are at leastas effective as Federal standards. Such standards where not identical tothe Federal must be promulgated through a procedure allowing for considerationof all pertinent factual information and participation of all interestedpersons (29 CFR 1902.4(b)(2)(iii); must, where dealing with toxic materialsor harmful physical agents, assure employee protection throughout his orher working life (29 CFR 1902.4(b)(2)(i)); must provide for furnishingemployees appropriate information regarding hazards in the workplace throughlabels, posting, medical examinations, etc. (29 CFR 1902.4(b)(2)(vi));must require suitable protective equipment, technological control, monitoring,etc. (29 CFR 1902.4(b)(2)(vii)); and, where applicable to a product, mustbe required by compelling local conditions and not pose an undue burdenon interstate commerce (29 CFR 1902.3(c)(2)).As documented in the approved Virginia State plan and OSHA's evaluationfindings made a part of the record in this 18(e) determination proceeding,and as discussed in the September 2 notice, the Virginia plan providesfor the adoption of standards and amendments thereto which are, in mostcases, identical to Federal standards. The State's law and regulations,previously approved by OSHA and made a part of the record in this proceeding,include provisions addressing all of the structural requirements for Statestandards set out in 29 CFR Part 1902. In order to qualify for final State plan approval, a State program mustbe found to have adhered to its approval procedures (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(2));to have timely adopted identical or at least as effectve standards, includingemergency temporary standards and standards amendments (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(3));to have interpreted its standards in a manner consistent with Federal interpretationsand thus to demonstrate that in actual operation State standards are atleast as effective as the Federal (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(4)); and to correctany deficiencies resulting from administrative or judicial challenge ofState standards (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(5)). As noted in the ``18(e) Evaluation Report'' and summarized in the September2, 1988, <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice, Virginia has generally adopted standardsin a timely manner which are identical to Federal standards. When a State adopts Federal standards, the State's interpretation and applicationof such standards must ensure consistency with Federal interpretation andapplication. Virginia has generally adopted standards interpretations whichare at least as effective as the Federal. OSHA's monitoring has found thatthe State's application of its standards is comparable to Federal standardsapplication. No challenges to standards have occured in Virginia.Therefore, in accordance with section 18(c)(2) of the Act and the pertinentprovisions of 29 CFR 1902.3, 1902.4 and 1902.37, OSHA finds the Virginiaprogram in actual operation to provide for standards adoption, correctionwhen found deficient, interpretation and application, in a manner at leastas effective as the Federal program. (2) <T3>Variances. </T3>A State plan is expected to have the authority andprocedures for the granting of variances comparable to those in the Federalprogram (29 CFR 1902.4(b)(iv)). The Virginia State plan contains such provisionsin both law and regulations which have been previously approved by OSHA.In order to qualify for final State plan approval, permanent variancesgranted must assure employment equally as safe and healthful as would beprovided by compliance with the standard (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(6)); temporaryvariances granted must assure compliance as early as possible and provideappropriate interim employee protection (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(7)). As notedin the 18(e) Evaluation Report and the September 2 notice, no permanentvariances were granted during the reporting period. Action on these requestswas in accordance with the State's procedures and the granted variancesprovided protection equivalent to that provided under the standard. Notemporary variances were requested during the evaluation period. Accordingly, OSHA finds that the Virginia program effectively grants variancesfrom its occupational safety and health standards. (3) <T3>Enforcement.</T3> Section 18(c)(2) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.3(d)(1)require a State program to provide a program for enforcement of State standardswhich is and will continue to be at least as effective in providing safeand healthful employment and places of employment as the Federal program.The State must require employer and employee compliance with all applicablestandards, rules and orders (29 CFR 1902.3(d)(2)) and must have the legalauthority for standards enforcement including compulsory process (29 CFR1902.4(c)(2)).The Virginia occupational safety and health statutes and implementing regulations,previously approved by OSHA, establish employer and employee complianceresponsibility and contain legal authority for standards enforcement interms substantially identical to those in the Federal Act. In order tobe qualified for final approval, the State must have adhered to all approvedprocedures adopted to ensure an at least as effective compliance program(29 CFR 1902.37(b)(2)). The ``18(e) Evaluation Report'' data show no lackof adherence to such procedures.(a) <T3>Inspections.</T3> A plan must provide for inspection of covered workplaces,including in response to complaints, where there are reasonable groundsto believe a hazard exists (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(i)). As noted in the September2, 1987 <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice, Virginia has procedures similar to thoseof Federal OSHA for processing and responding to complaints. Data containedin the 18(e) Evaluation Report indicate the State responded to 56.6% ofsafety complaints and 56.4% of health complaints with an inspection. (EvaluationReport, pages 13 and 14.)In order to qualify for final approval, the State program, as implemented,must allocate sufficient resources toward high-hazard workplaces whileproviding adequate attention to other covered workplaces (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(8)).Data contained in the 18(e) Evaluation Report indicate that 96.2% of theState's programmed safety and 100% of its programmed health inspectionswere conducted in high-hazard industries. (Evaluation Report, page 12.)(b) <T3>Employee Notice and Participation in Inspections.</T3> In conductinginspections the State plan must provide an opportunity for employees andtheir representatives to point out possible violations through such meansas employee accompaniment or interviews with employees (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(ii)).The State's procedures require compliance officers to provide this opportunity.During the evaluation period, 97.6% of initial inspections included eitheremployee representatives on the walkaround or interviews with employees.OSHA has concluded that employee representation is properly provided inState inspections. (Evaluation Report, page 16.)In addition, the State plan must provide that employees be informed oftheir protections and obligations under the Act by such means as the postingof notices (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(2)(iv)), and provide that employees have accessto information on their exposure to regulated agents and access to recordsof the monitoring of their exposure to such agents (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(vi)).To inform employees and employers of their protections and obligations,Virginia requires that a poster approved by OSHA (45 FR 77001) be displayedin all covered workplaces. Requirements for the posting of the poster andother notices such as citations, contents, hearings and variance applicationsare set forth in the previously approved State law and regulations whichare substantially identical to Federal requirements. Information on employeeexposure to regulated agents and access to medical and monitoring recordsis provided through State standards, including the Access to Employee andMedical Records standard and the Hazard Communication standard, which areidentical to those of Federal OSHA. Federal OSHA's evaluation concludedthat the State's performance is satisfactory.(c) <T3>Nondiscrimination.</T3> A State is expected to provide appropriateprotection to employees against discharge or discrimination for exercisingtheir rights under the State's program including provision for employersanctions and employee confidentiality (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(v)). Title 40.1of the Code of Virginia and State regulations provide for discriminationprotection equivalent to that provided by Federal OSHA. The State investigated25 discrimination complaints during the evaluation period. Of the investigatedcomplaints, 4 were found to have merit. All of the meritorious cases weresettled or litigated. This compared favorably with Federal experience.(Evaluation Report, pages 19-20.)(d) <T3>Restraint of Imminent Danger; Protection of Trade Secrets. </T3>A Stateplan is required to provide for the prompt restraint of imminent dangersituations, (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(2)(vii) and to provide adequate safeguardsfor the protection of trade secrets (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(2)(viii)). The Statehas provisions concerning imminent danger and protection of trade secretsin its law, regulations and field operations manual which are similar tothe Federal. There were 6 imminent danger situations identified duringthe evaluation period. There were no Complaints About State Program Administration(CASPA's) filed concerning the protection of trade secrets during the reportingperiod.(e) <T3>Right of Entry; Advance Notice. </T3>A State program is expected tohave authority for right of entry to inspect and compulsory process toenforce such right equivalent to the Federal program (section 18(c)(3)of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.3(e)). In addition, a State is expected to prohibitadvance notice of inspection, allowing exception thereto no broader thanthe Federal program (29 CFR 1902.3(f)). Title 40.1 of the Code of Virginiaauthorizes the Commissioner to enter and inspect all covered workplacesin terms substantially identical to those in the Federal Act. The Virginialaw also allows the Commissioner to apply for a warrant from the Statecourts to permit entry into such establishments that have refused entryfor the purpose of inspection or investigation. The Virginia law also prohibitsadvance notice, and implementing procedures for exceptions to this prohibitionare substantially identical to the Federal. In order to be found qualified for final approval, a State is expectedto take action to enforce its right of entry when denied (20 CFR 1902.37(b)(9))and to adhere to its advance notice procedures. Virginia had 18 denialsof entry during this evaluation period, and was successful in obtainingwarrants for 14 of them. One case was referred to Federal OSHA during the9-month period of concurrent Federal jurisdiction, and in 3 instances short-termconstruction jobs were completed before entry could be obtained. The 18(e)Evaluation Report indicates that 13 instances of advance notice procedureswere used and in all cases the State's use of its procedures were proper.(Evaluation Report, pages 15-16.) (f) <T3>Citations, Penalties, and Abatement. </T3>A State plan is expectedto have authority and procedures for promptly notifying employers and employeesof violations identified during inspections, for the proposal of effectivefirst-instance sanctions against employers found in violation of standardsand for prompt employer notification of such penalties (29 CFR 1902.4(c)(2)(x)and (xi)). The Virginia plan, through its law, regulations and field operationsmanual, which have all been previously approved by OSHA, has establisheda system similar to the Federal for prompt issuance of citations to employersdelineating violations and establishing reasonable abatement period requiringposting of such citations for employee information and proposing penalties.In order to be qualified for final approval, the State, in actual operation,must be found to conduct competent inspections in accordance with approvedprocedures and to obtain adequate information to support resulting citations(29 CFR 1902.37(b)(10)), to issue citations, proposed penalties and failure-to-abatenotifications in a timely manner (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(11)), to propose penaltiesfor first instance violations that are at least as effective as those underthe Federal program (29 CFR 1902.37(b)(12)), and to ensure abatement ofhazards including issuance of failure-to-abate notice and appropriate penalties(29 CFR 1902.37(b)(13)). Procedures for the Virginia occupational safety and health compliance programare set out in the Virginia Field Operations Manual, which is patternedafter the Federal manual, and thus the State follows inspection procedures,including documentation procedures, which are similar to the Federal. Theevaluation report notes overall adherence by Virginia to these procedures.Virginia cites an average of 3.6 violations per programmed safety inspectionwith citations and 4.5 violations per programmed health inspection withcitations; and 17.8% of safety and 8.6% of health violations were citedas serious by the State. The percentage of serious safety and health violationswas lower than the comparable Federal statistics and was attributed toinstances of incorrect hazard classification and identification by complianceofficers. The State provided compliance officers with supplemental trainingto ensure the proper classification of violations of certain specific standards.Virginia's lapse time from last day of inspection to issuance of citationaveraged 28.8 days for safety and 48.3 days for health. (Evaluation Report,pages 16-18.) Virginia's procedures for calculation of penalties are similar to thoseof Federal OSHA, with the exception that the State has not adopted theFederal procedure for citing willful violations with instance-by-instancepenalties. The evaluation report indicates that the average proposed penaltiesfor serious violations were $325.50 for safety and $447 for health. (EvaluationReport, pages 18-19.) Follow-up inspections accounted for .9% of Virginia's total safety inspectionsand 3.7% of its health inspections, with 17.2% of the safety follow-upinspections and 28.6% of the health follow-ups resulting in failure-to-abatenotifications. Virginia's abatement periods for serious violations averaged7.9 days for safety and 28.3 days for health. (Evaluation Report, page18.) (g) <T3>Contested Cases. </T3>In order to be considered for initial approvaland certification, a State plan must have authority and procedures foremployer contest of citations, penalties and abatement requirements atfull administrative or judicial hearings. Employees must also have theright to contest abatement periods and the opportunity to participate asparties in all proceedings resulting from an employer's contest (29 CFR1902.4(c)(2)(xii)). Virginia's procedures for employer and employee contestof citations, penalties and abatement requirements and for ensuring employees'rights are contained in the law, regulations and field operations manualmade a part of the record in this proceeding. As noted elsewhere in thisnotice, the Virginia plan provides for the review of contested cases bythe Virginia civil court system whereas Federal OSHA utilizes an administrativereview process. Appeals of citations and penalties are filed with the Commissionerof Labor and Industry and are heard by the General District Courts of Virginia.Decisions of the General District Courts may be appealed to the VirginiaCircuit Courts. Decisions of the Circuit Courts may be appealed to theVirginia Supreme Court. During the evaluation period, 4.0% of safety inspectionswith citations and 1.2% of health inspections with citations resulted incontests. (Evaluation Report, pages 19 and 20.) To qualify for final approval, the State must seek review of any adverseadjudications and take action to correct any enforcement program deficienciesresulting from adverse administrative or judicial determinations (29 CFR1902.37(b)(14)). As noted elsewhere in this notice, a 1985 decision bythe Virginia Supreme Court had created a situation whereby the State'sability to obtain search warrants when denied entry on general scheduleinspections was severely compromised. The State plan officials recognizedthe difficulty and successfully sought corrective legislative amendmentsduring the 1987 session of the Virginia General Assembly. Those amendmentsbecame effective on July 1, 1987. The Virginia (18)(e) Evlauation Reportnoted no other instances of adverse adjudications. (Evaluation Report,pages 4 and 19-20.) Accordingly, OSHA finds that the Virginia plan effectively responds toadverse administrative and court decisions.(h) <T3>Enforcement Conclusion.</T3> In summary, the Assistant Secretary findsthat enforcement operations provided under the Virginia plan are competentlyplanned and conducted, and are overall at least as effective as FederalOSHA enforcement.(4) <T3>Public Employee Program.</T3> Section 18(c)(6) of the Act requiresthat a State which has an approved plan must maintain an effective andcomprehensive occupational safety and health program applicable to allemployees of public agencies of the State and its political subdivisions,which program must be as effective as the standards contained in an approvedplan. 29 CFR 1902.3(j) requires that a State's program for public employeesbe as effective as the State's program for private employees covered bythe plan. The Virginia plan provides a program in the public sector whichis very similar to that in the private sector, except that no penaltiesare proposed.During the evaluation period, Virginia conducted 129 public sector inspections,citing 367 violations, of which 28.3% were classified as serious. The proportionof inspections dedicated to the public sector (3.5% of total inspectionsduring the evaluation period) was appropriate to the needs of public employees.(Evaluation Report, pages 10-11.)Injury and illness rates for State and local government employment arehigher than in the private sector (1986: all case rate_9.4: lost workdaycase rate_4.5). The State and local government lost workday case rate decreasedslightly from 4.6 to 4.5 in 1986, while the private sector rate had a slightincrease from 3.4 to 3.5.Because Virginia's performance in the public sector is comparable to thatin the private sector, OSHA concludes that the Virginia program meets thecriteria in 29 CFR 1902.3(j).(5) <T3>Staffing and Resources.</T3> Section 18(c)(4) of the Act requires Stateplans to provide the qualified personnel necessary for the enforcementof standards. In accordance with 29 CFR 1902.37(b)(1), one factor whichOSHA must consider in evaluating a plan for final approval is whether theState has a sufficient number of adequately trained and competent personnelto discharge its responsibilities under the plan.The Virginia plan provides for 38 safety compliance officers and 21 industrialhygienists as set forth in the Virginia FY 1988 grant. This staffing levelmeets the approved, revised fully effective benchmarks for Virginia forsafety and health staffing, as discussed elsewhere in this notice.The State provides a comprehensive training program for new compliancepersonnel and refresher and specialized training for experienced staff,which includes attendance at the OSHA Training Institute and in-house andfield training exercises.As noted in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice announcing certification of the completionof developmental steps for Virginia (49 FR 33123), all personnel underthe plan meet civil service requirements under the State merit system,which was found to be in substantial conformity with the Standards fora Merit System of Personnel Administration by the U.S. Office of PersonnelManagement.Because Virginia has allocated sufficient enforcement staff to meet therevised benchmarks for that State, and personnel are trained and competent,the requirements for final approval set forth in 29 CFR 1902.37(b)(1),and in the 1978 Court Order in <T3>AFL-CIO</T3> v. <T3>Marshall, supra,</T3> are being met by the Virginia plan.Section 18(c)(5) of the Act requires that the State devote adequate fundsto administration and enforcement of its standards. The Virginia plan wasfounded at $3,801,868 in FY 1988. (Fifty percent of the funds were providedby Federal OSHA and 50% were provided by the State.)As noted in the 18(e) Evaluation Report, Virginia's funding is judged sufficientin absolute terms; moreover, the State allocates its resources to the variousaspects of the program in a manner similar to OSHA. On this basis, OSHAfinds that Virginia has provided sufficient funding for the various activitiescarried out under the plan.(6) <T3>Record and Reports.</T3> State plans must assure that employers inthe State submit reports to the Secretary in the same manner as if theplan were not in effect (section 18(c)(7) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.3(k)).The plan must also provide assurances that the designated agency will makesuch reports to the Secretary in such form and containing such informationas he may from time to time require (section 18(c)(8) of the Act and 29CFR 1902.3(1)).Virginia employer recordkeeping requirements are equivalent to those ofFederal OSHA, and the State participates in the BLS Annual Survey of OccupationalIllnesses and Injuries. As noted elsewhere in this notice, the State participatesand has assured its continuing participation with OSHA in the IntegratedManagement Information System as a means of providing reports on its activitiesto OSHA.For the foregoing reasons, OSHA finds that Virginia has met the requirementsof sections 18(c) (7) and (8) of the Act on employer and State reportsto the Secretary.(7) <T3>Voluntary Compliance Program.</T3> A State plan is required to undertakeprograms to encourage voluntary compliance by employers and employees (29CFR 1902.4(c)(2)(xiii)).Training programs for both the State's public and private sectors havebeen established and are ongoing. In the public sector, 199 employers andsupervisors and 5,789 employees participated in 149 training sessions in1987. In the private sector, 192 employers and supervisors and 3,864 employeesparticipated in 280 training sessions. (Evaluation Report, page 10.)In the private sector, Virginia provides on-site consultative servicesto employers under a cooperative agreement with OSHA made pursuant to Section7(c)(1) of the Act and 29 CFR Part 1908. On-site consultation for the publicsector is provided under the Virginia plan.Accordingly, OSHA finds that Virginia has established and is administeringan effective voluntary compliance program.(8) <T3>Injury and Illness Statistics.</T3> As a factor in its 18(e) determination,OSHA must consider whether the Bureau of Labor Statistics' annual occupationalsafety and health survey and other available Federal and State measurementsof program impact on worker safety and health indicate that trends in workersafety and health injury and illness rates under the State program comparefavorably with those under the Federal program. See section 1902.37(b)(15).The 1985 and 1986 Bureau of Labor Statistics' injury and illness ratesfor Virginia (private sector all case rate for 1985 was 7.3 and for 1986was 7.6; lost workday case rate for 1985 was 3.4 and for 1986 was 3.5)were comparable to rates in States where Federal OSHA provides enforcementcoverage. In 1986 the all case incidence rates and the lost workday caserates for private sector, manufacturing and construction experienced amix of increases and decreases in Virginia. The rates of increase werewithin the acceptable range established under OSHA's State Plan ActivitiesMeasures. In addition, only one of the five most hazardous industries inVirginia showed an increase from 1985 to 1986 in its lost workday caserate (SIC 42, Lumber and Wood Products, except Furniture), and that rate(8.9) was the same as the 1986 Federal rate for that particular industry.OSHA finds that the trends in injury and illness statistics in Virginiawere comparable with those in States with Federal enforcement.DecisionOSHA has carefully reviewed the record developed during the above describedproceedings, including all comments received thereon. The present <T4>Federal Register</T4> document sets forth the findings and conclusionsresulting from this review.In light of all the facts presented on the record, the Assistant Secretaryhas determined that the Virginia State plan for occupational safety andhealth, which has been monitored for at least one year subsequent to certification,is in actual operation at least as effective as the Federal program andmeets the statutory criteria for State plans in section 18(e) of the Actand implementing regulations at 29 CFR Part 1902. Therefore, the VirginiaState plan is hereby granted final approval under section 18(e) of theAct and implementing regulations at 29 CFR Part 1902, effective November30, 1988.Under this 18(e) determination, Virginia will be expected to maintain aState program which will continue to be at least as effective as operationsunder the Federal program in providing employee safety and health at coveredworkplaces. This requirement includes submitting all required reports tothe Assistant Secretary as well as submitting plan supplements documentingState-initiated program changes, changes required in response to adverseevaluation findings, and responses to mandatory Federal program changes.In addition, Virginia must continue to allocate sufficient safety and healthenforcement staff to meet the benchmarks for State staffing establishedby the Department of Labor, or any revision to those benchmarks.Effect of DecisionThe determination that the criteria set forth in section 18(c) of the Actand 29 CFR Part 1902 are being applied in actual operations under the Virginiaplan terminates OSHA authority for Federal enforcement of its standardsin Virginia, in accordance with section 18(e) of the Act, in those issuescovered under the State plan. Section 18(e) provides that upon making thisdetermination ``the provisions of sections 5(a)(2), 8 (except for the purposeof carrying out subsection (f) of this section), 9, 10, 13, and 17, shallnot apply with respect to any occupational safety or health issues coveredunder the plan, but the Secretary may retain jurisdiction under the aboveprovisions in any proceeding commenced under section 9 or 10 before thedate of determination.''Accordingly, Federal authority to issue citations for violation of OSHAstandards (sections 5(a)(2) and 9); to conduct inspections (except thosenecessary to conduct evaluations of the plan under section 18(f), and otherinspections, investigations or proceedings necessary to carry out Federalresponsibilities which are not specifically preempted by section 18(e)(section 8); to conduct enforcement proceeding in contested cases (section10); to institute proceedings to correct imminent dangers (section 13);and to propose civil penalties or initiate criminal proceedings for violationsof the Federal Act (section 17) is relinquished as of the effective dateof this determination.Federal authority under provisions of the Act not listed in section 18(e)is unaffected by this determination. Thus, for example, the Assistant Secretaryretains his authority under section 11(c) of the Act with regard to complaintsalleging discrimination against employees because of the exercise of anyright afforded to the employee by the Act although such complaints maybe initially referred to the State for investigation. Any proceeding initiatedby OSHA under sections 9 and 10 of the Act prior to the date of this finaldetermination would remain under Federal jurisdiction. The Assistant Secretaryalso retains his authority under section 6 of the Act to promulgate, modifyor revoke occupational safety and health standards which address the workingconditions of all employees, including those in States which have receivedan affirmative 18(e) determination. In the event that a State's 18(e) statusis subsequently withdrawn and Federal authority reinstated, all Federalstandards, including any standards promulgated or modified during the 18(e)period, would be Federally enforceable in the State.In accordance with section 18(e), this determination relinquishes FederalOSHA authority only with regard to occupational safety and health issuescovered by the Virginia plan, and OSHA retains full authority over issueswhich are not subject to State enforcement under the plan. Thus, for example,Federal OSHA retains its authority to enforce all provisions of the Act,and all Federal standards, rules or orders which relate to safety or healthin private sector maritime employment and employment at worksites locatedwithin Federal military facilities as well as on other Federal enclaveswhere civil jurisdiction has been ceded by the State to the Federal government.In addition Federal OSHA may subsequently initiate the exercise of jurisdictionover any issue (hazard, industry, geographical area, operation or facility)for which the State is unable to provide effective coverage for reasonswhich OSHA determines are not related to the required performance or structureof the State plan.As provided by section 18(f) of the Act, the Assistant Secretary will continueto evaluate the manner in which the State is carrying out its plan. Section18(f) and regulations at 29 CFR Part 1955 provide procedures for the withdrawalof Federal approval should the Assistant Secretary find that the Statehas subsequently failed to comply with any provision or assurance containedin the plan. Additionally, the Assistant Secretary is required to initiateproceedings to revoke an 18(e) determination and reinstate concurrent Federalauthority under procedures set forth in 29 CFR 1902.47, <T3>et seq.</T3>, if his evaluations show that the State has substantiallyfailed to maintain a program which is at least as effective as operationsunder the Federal program, or if the State does not submit program changesupplements to the Assistant Secretary as required by 29 CFR Part 1953.Explanation of Changes to 29 CFR Part 195229 CFR Part 1952 contains, for each State having an approved plan, a subpartgenerally describing the plan and setting forth the Federal approval statusof the plan. 29 CFR 1902.43(a)(3) requires that notices of affirmative18(e) determinations be accompanied by changes to Part 1952 reflectingthe final approval decision. This notice makes changes to Subpart EE ofPart 1952 to reflect the final approval of the Virginia plan.The table of contents for Part 1952, Subpart EE, has been revised to reflectthe following changes:Section 1952.374, Final approval determination granting final approvalof the plan, which formerly was reserved, has been completed to reflectthe determination granting final approval of the plan. The section containsa more accurate description of the current scope of the plan than the onecontained in the initial approval decision.Section 1952.375, Level of Federal enforcement, has been changed to reflectthe State's 18(e) status. This replaces the former description of the relationshipof State and Federal enforcement under an Operational Status Agreement,which was entered into on October 1, 1981. Federal concurrent enforcementauthority has been relinquished as part of the present 18(e) determinationfor Virginia and the Operational Status Agreement is no longer in effect.Section 1952.375 describes the issues where Federal authority has beenterminated and the issues where it has been retained in accordance withthe discussion of the effects of the 18(e) determination set forth earlierin the present <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice.Section 1952.376, Where the plan may be inspected, has been changed toreflect a new room number N3700 for the Office of State Programs, OccupationalSafety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act </ITAG>OSHA certifies pursuant to the Regulatory Act of 1980 (5 U.S.C. 601, <T3>et seq</T3>.) that this rulemaking will not have a significant economicimpact on a substantial number of small entities. Final approval will notplace small employers in Virginia under any new or different requirementsnor would any additional burden be placed upon the State government beyondthe responsibilities already assumed as part of the approved plan. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 1952 </ITAG>Intergovernmental relations, Law enforcement, Occupational safety and health.<ITAG tagnum="20">(</ITAG><T4>Authority:</T4> Sec. 18, 84 Stat. 1608 (29 U.S.C. 667); 29 CFR Part1902, (Sec. 18, 84 Stat. 1608 (29 U.S.C. 667); 29 CFR Part 1902, Secretaryof Labor's Order No. 9-83 (48 FR 35736)) <ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 23rd day of November 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John A. Pendergrass, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1952_[AMENDED] </ITAG>Accordingly, Subpart EE of 29 CFR Part 1952 is hereby amended as follows:1. The authority citation for Part 1952 continues to read: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Secs. 8, 18, Occupational Safety and Health Act 1970(29 U.S.C. 657, 667); Secretary of Labor's Order No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754),8-76 (41 FR 25059), or 9-83 (48 FR 35736), as applicable. </ITAG>2. The table of contents for Part 1952, Subpart EE is revised to read asfollows: <ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart EE_Virginia </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1952.370 Description of the plan as initially approved. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1952.371 Developmental schedule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1952.372 Completion of developmental steps and certification. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1952.373 Compliance staffing benchmarks. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1952.374 Final approval determination. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1952.375 Level of Federal enforcement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1952.376 Where the plan may be inspected. </ITAG>3. Section 1952.374 is added, and andSection;andSection; 1952.375 and 1952.376are revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1952.374 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Final approval determination. </ITAG>(a) In accordance with section 18(e) of the Act and procedures in 29 CFRPart 1902, and after determination that the State met the ``fully effective''compliance staffing benchmarks as revised in 1984 in response to a CourtOrder in <T3>AFL-CIO</T3> v. <T3>Marshall</T3> (CA 74-406), and was satisfactorily providing reportsto OSHA through participation in the Federal-State Integrated ManagementInformation System, the Assistant Secretary evaluated actual operationsunder the Virginia State plan for a period of at least one year followingcertification of completion of developmental steps (49 FR 33123). Basedon the 18(e) Evaluation Report for the period of January 1, 1987 throughMarch 31, 1988, and after opportunity for public comment, the AssistantSecretary determined that in operation the State of Virginia's occupationalsafety and health program is at least as effective as the Federal programin providing safe and healthful employment and places of employment andmeets the criteria for final State plan approval in section 18(e) of theAct and implementing regulations at 29 CFR Part 1902. Accordingly, theVirginia plan was granted final approval and concurrent Federal enforcementauthority was relinquished under section 18(e) of the Act effective November30, 1988. (b) The plan which has received final approval covers all activities ofemployers and places of employment in Virginia except for private sectormaritime and worksites located within Federal military facilities as wellas on other Federal enclaves where civil jurisdiction has been ceded bythe State to the Federal government. (c) Virginia is required to maintain a State program which is at leastas effective as operations under the Federal program; to submit plan supplementsin accordance with 29 CFR Part 1953; to allocate sufficient safety andhealth enforcement staff to meet the benchmarks for State staffing establishedby the U.S. Department of Labor, or any revisions to those benchmarks;and, to furnish such reports in such form as the Assistant Secretary mayfrom time to time require. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1952.375 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Level of Federal Enforcement. </ITAG>(a) As a result of the Assistant Secretary's determination granting finalapproval to the Virginia plan under section 18(e) of the Act, effectiveNovember 30, 1988, occupational safety and health standards which havebeen promulgated under section 6 of the Act do not apply with respect toissues covered under the Virginia plan. This determination also relinquishesconcurrent Federal OSHA authority to issue citations for violations ofsuch standards under section 5(a) (2) and 9 of the Act; to conduct inspectionsand investigations under section 8 (except those necessary to conduct evaluationof the plan under section 18(f) and other inspections, investigations,or proceedings necessary to carry out Federal responsibilities not specificallypreempted by section 18(e)); to conduct enforcement proceedings in contestedcases under section 10; to institute proceedings to correct imminent dangersunder section 13; and to propose civil penalties or initiate criminal proceedingsfor violations of the Federal Act under section 17. The Assistant Secretaryretains jurisdiction under the above provisions in any proceeding commencedunder section 9 or 10 before the effective date of the 18(e) determination.(b)(1) In accordance with section 18(e), final approval relinquishes FederalOSHA authority only with regard to occupational safety and health issuescovered by the Virginia plan. OSHA retains full authority over issues whichare not subject to State enforcement under the plan. Thus, Federal OSHAretains its authority relative to safety and health in private sector maritimeactivities and will continue to enforce all provisions of the Act, rulesor orders, and all Federal standards, current or future, specifically directedto maritime employment (29 CFR Part 1915, shipyard employment; Part 1917,marine terminals; Part 1918, longshoring; Part 1919, gear certification)as well as provisions of general industry standards (29 CFR Part 1910)appropriate to hazards found in these employments, and employment at worksiteslocated within Federal military facilities as well as on other Federalenclaves where civil jurisdiction has been ceded by the State to the Federalgovernment. Federal jurisdiction is also retained with respect to Federalgovernment employers and employees. (2) In addition, any hazard, industry, geographical area, operation orfacility over which the State is unable to effectively exercise jurisdictionfor reasons which OSHA determines are not related to the required performanceor structure of the plan shall be deemed to be an issue not covered byplan which has received final approval, and shall be subject to Federalenforcement. Where enforcement jurisdiction is shared between Federal andState authorities for a particular area, project, or facility, in the interestof administrative practicability Federal jurisdiction may be assumed overthe entire project or facility. In any of the aforementioned circumstances,Federal enforcement authority may be exercised after consultation withthe State designated agency. (c) Federal authority under provisions of the Act not listed in section18(e) is unaffected by final approval of the plan. Thus, for example, theAssistant Secretary retains his authority under section 11(c) of the Actwith regard to complaints alleging discrimination against employees becauseof the exercise of any right afforded to the employee by the Act, althoughsuch complaints may be referred to the State for investigation. The AssistantSecretary also retains his authority under section 6 of the Act to promulgate,modify or revoke occupational safety and health standards which addressthe working conditions of all employees, including those in States whichhave received an affirmative 18(e) determination, although such standardsmay not be Federally applied. In the event that the State's 18(e) statusis subsequently withdrawn and Federal authority reinstated, all Federalstandards, including any standards promulgated or modified during the 18(e)period, would be Federally enforceable in that State. (d) As required by section 18(f) of the Act, OSHA will continue to monitorthe operations of the Virginia State program to assure that the provisionsof the State plan are substantially complied with and that the programremains at least as effective as the Federal program. Fairlure by the Stateto comply with its obligations may result in the revocation of Federalenforcement, and/or proceedings for withdrawal of plan approval. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1952.376 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Where the plan may be inspected. </ITAG>A copy of the principal documents comprising the plan may be inspectedduring normal business hours at the following locations: Office of StatePrograms, Occupational Safety and Heatlh Administration, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Room N3700, Washington, DC 20210;Office of the Regional Administrator, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,U.S. Department of Labor, Gateway Building_Suite 2100, 3535 Market Street,Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104; and the Office of the Commissioner, VirginiaDepartment of Labor and Industry, P.O. Box 12064, 205 North Fourth Street,Richmond, Virginia 23241-0064.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-27480 Filed 11-29-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-26-M   </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>