<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88726-0019 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-26-88.f2.A1018</DOCID><TEXT>  <FTAG tagnum="4702"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 26, 1988 /Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 53, No. 143</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Tuesday, July 26, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Agricultural Marketing Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Parts 1098 and 1007 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. AO-184-A52 and AO-366-A29; DA-88-104] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Milk in the Nashville and Georgia Marketing Areas; Recommended Decisionand Opportunity To File Written Exceptions on Proposed Amendments to TentativeMarketing Agreements and to Orders </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Proposed rule.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary:</T2> This decision recommends certain changes in the poolingprovisions of the Nashville, Tennessee, and Georgia milk orders based onindustry proposals considered at a public hearing held at Nashville, Tennessee,on November 3, 1987. A pool distributing plant physically located in theNashville, Tennessee, marketing area would be regulated under that orderirrespective of the market in which the plant has most of its fluid milkproducts distribution. Another change in the Nashville order would establisha plus location adjustment of 8.5 cents per hundredweight for milk receivedat plants located in 18 Tennessee counties south of Nashville. These changesare needed to reflect current marketing conditions and to insure orderlymarketing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>date:</T2> Comments are due on or before August 10, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>address:</T2> Comments (four copies) should be filed with the HearingClerk, Room 1079, South Building, United States Department of Agriculture,Washington, DC 20250.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:</T2> Robert F. Groene, Marketing Specialist,USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968, South Building,P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-2089.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information:</T2> This administrative action is governedby the provisions of sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291. The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612), requires the Agencyto examine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The amendment would promoteorderly marketing of milk by producers and regulated handlers. This action would change the regulatory status that prevailed when thehearing was held of two pool distributing plants located in the Nashvillemarketing area. At that time, one of the plants was regulated by the Memphismilk order and the other plant was regulated by the Georgia milk order.Both plants would be regulated under the Nashville order under the provisionsadopted herein. The cost of the raw milk supplies to the pool plants wouldbe unchanged. There would be no economic impact of such action on the returnsto dairy farmers under the Memphis order because milk is pooled under suchorder on an individual handler basis. Under the Georgia order, there shouldbe little, if any, change in the returns to dairy farmers due to a shiftin regulation because the utilization of milk at the Georgia plant differslittle form the Class I utilization percentage of the Georgia market. Thereturns to dairy farmers under the Nashville order will be reduced slightlysince the utilization of milk at the two pool plants that would be addedis less than the Nashville market's Class I utilization percentage. TheNashville producers whose blend prices would be reduced are members ofDairymen, Inc. (DI), a cooperative association whose representative testifiedthat the cooperative was not opposed to the ``lock-in'' proposal whichwould result in the pooling of additional pool plants under the Nashvilleorder. Prior document in this proceeding: Notice of Hearing: Issued October 16, 1987; published October 21, 1987(52 FR 39232). <ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement </ITAG>Notice is hereby given of the filing with the Hearing Clerk of this recommendeddecision with respect to the proposed amendments to the tentative marketingagreements and the orders regulating the handling of milk in the Nashville,Tennessee, and Georgia marketing areas. This notice is issued pursuantto the provisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937,as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicable rules of practice andprocedure governing the formulation of marketing agreements and marketingorders (7 CFR Part 900). Interested parties may file written exceptions to this decision with theHearing Clerk, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, 20250, bythe 15th day after publication of this decision in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> Four copies of the exceptions should be filed.All written submissions made pursuant to this notice will be made availablefor public inspection at the office of the Hearing Clerk during regularbusiness hours (7 CFR 1.27(b)). The proposed amendments set forth below are based on the record of a publichearing held at Nashville, Tennessee, on November 3, 1987, pursuant toa notice of hearing issued October 16, 1987 (52 FR 39232). The material issues on the record of hearing relate to: 1. Regulation of a distributing plant physically located in the Nashvillemarketing area. 2. Location adjustment for milk received at Tennessee plants located southof Nashville. <ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions </ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof: 1. <T3>Regulation of a distributing plant physically located in the Nashvillemarketing area.</T3> The Nashville, Tennessee, order (Nashville order)should be amended to provide that a distributing plant which meets thepooling standards of the Nashville order and one or more other Federalorders and which is located in the Nashville order's marketing area shallbe a pool plant under the Nashville order irrespective of the quantityof fluid milk products distributed in any other Federal order market. However,such pool plant status should be accorded only as long as the Nashvilleorder's Class I price at the plant is not less than the Class I price thatwould be applicable at the plant if regulated under the order for the Federalorder marketing area in which the plant has the greatest route disposition.Presently, when a distributing plant qualifies for pooling under the Nashvilleorder and another order, it is regulated in the market in which it hasthe greater route sales. The ``lock-in'' provision adopted herein for the Nashville order cannotachieve its intended purpose without a corollary change in the poolingstandards of the Georgia order. Thus, the Georgia order should providethat any plant with route sales in the Georgia marketing area shall beexempt from full regulation under that order, even though it has more salesin the Georgia market than in the other market, if the plant is subjectto full regulation under the other order. Malone andamp; Hyde Dairy proposed (proposals 1 and 2 as listed in the Noticeof Hearing) that a distributing plant that is physically located in theNashville order's marketing area (Order 98) should be regulated by thatorder irrespective of the quantity of such plant's route disposition inany other Federal order marketing area. Proposal No. 1 would amend Order98 by locking in such a plant under the order and proposal No. 2 is intendedto amend the Georgia order (Order 7) by releasing from regulation sucha plant even though the plant may have more fluid milk sales in the Order7 area than in the Order 98 area. A witness for Malone andamp; Hyde stated that this action is necessary inorder to minimize disruptive market conditions in the Kentucky and Tennesseesupply areas. The witness indicated that the proposal would affect theMalone andamp; Hyde distributing plant located in Nashville, Tennessee, butregulated by the Memphis order (Order 97). It would also affect HeritageFarms (Kroger) distributing plant located in Rutherford County, Tennessee(Order 98 marketing area), but currently regulated by the Georgia order(Order 7). He said that the milk procurement and sales patterns of theMalone andamp; Hyde and Kroger plants establish a primary association ofsuch plants with the Order 98 market. The Malone andamp; Hyde witness testified that the traditional method ofpooling a distributing plant has been on the basis of the market in whichthe plant has the most sales. The justification for this method, he said,was to ensure that all handlers having the major portion of their salesin the same order area were subject to the same minimum order prices andother regulatory provisions. He said that this principle rested on an assumptionthat such competing plants would be located in the same geographic area.Also, the witness for Malone andamp; Hyde said that the traditional methodof pooling fluid milk plants has become outdated because of large processingplants, such as chain store plants, that have sales over wide geographicalareas. The proposal, he said, better serves the principle of trying toassure that all handlers competing for milk procurement and sales in anorder area are subject to the same price as their competition. He indicatedthe proposal would regulate a distributing plant under the order for themarketing area where it is physically located even though its route distributionwas greater in another Federal order's marketing area. A representative of Southern Milk Sales (SMS), a cooperative associationwhose members supply about 40 percent of the fluid milk receipts of theKroger plant at Murfreesboro, Tennessee, testified in support of the proposalto fully regulate under the Nashville order distributing plants physicallylocated within the Nashville marketing area. A representative for the National Farmers Organization (NFO), which hadno member producers on the Nashville or Georgia markets at the time ofthe hearing, testified in opposition to the lock-in proposal and the proposedchange in location adjustment under the Nashville order. It was NFO's positionthat pooling on the basis of a plant's physical location is ``not goodFederal order policy.'' The NFO representative testified that ``the issuesof producer blend price equity in the Southeast should be addressed bythe merger of Federal orders, not by jerry-rigging the present orders topool targeted plants on selected orders.'' NFO contended that the proposed lock-in deviates from the well-establishedprinciples of pooling plants and producers in accordance with the salesareas served. The cooperative's representative contended that this poolingtechnique has fostered both producer and handler equity over the yearsand should not be abandoned. At the time of the hearing, there were only three regulated handlers underthe Nashville order: Purity Dairies in Nashville, a pool distributing plant;DI in its capacity as the operator of a cooperative balancing plant inLewisburg, Tennessee; and DI in its capacity as the handler of its membermilk. Purity Dairies has Class I distribution principally in the Nashvillemarket with some distribution in Alabama. The Lewisburg plant operatesas a manufacturing plant and reload center. During the months of flushproduction, the plant manufactures milk that is in excess of handlers'fluid milk needs and during the fall months, the plant transfers ClassI milk to plant in other markets. Marketing changes that have occurred since a hearing in 1983 on the issueof whether the Malone andamp; Hyde plant should be pooled under the Nashvilleorder on the basis of the plant's location or under the Memphis order onthe basis of greater sales in the market warrant the pooling of the Maloneandamp; Hyde plant under the Nashville order. Malone andamp; Hyde purchasedits Nashville distributing plant from Kraft Diary Group in 1983. The companydistributes milk through company-owned warehouses throughout the Southeastand south central states from Georgia to Arkansas. Beginning in 1984, the Malone andamp; Hyde plant became regulated under theMemphis order because it distributed the principal portion of its bottledmilk to the Memphis market. In 1984, the plant's sales in Memphis representedmore than 50 percent of its total distribution and the Nashville-area saleswere less than half of the Memphis sales. While the Malone andamp; Hyde plant's distribution in Memphis has remainedfairly constant since 1984, the plant's sales in Nashville and Alabama-WestFlorida have increased greatly. In Nashville, the fluid milk sales fromthe plant have doubled since 1984. The plant's sales in Alabama which werenonexistent when the plant first opened are now almost as great as itssales in the Nashville area. In some months, the plant's sales in Alabamahave exceeded its sales in the Nashville area. Recently, Malone andamp; Hyde has acquired supermarkets in the Nashvillemarketing area which will provide new accounts for the plant in 1988. Theplant operator expects its sales in Nashville in 1988 to equal or exceedits sales in the Memphis area. Malone andamp; Hyde procures its raw milk supply primarily from producerslocated in south-central Kentucky and central Tennessee. This milk productionarea provides regular and reserve milk supplies to handlers associatedwith the Nashville, Georgia and other Federal order markets. Current marketing conditions warrant the pooling of the Malone andamp; Hydeplant under the Nashville order. As previously noted, the plant's ClassI sales in Nashville for 1988 are expected to equal or exceed its ClassI sales in the Memphis market. Furthermore, the pooling of the plant onthe basis of its location rather than sales area will avoid the plant shiftingregulation among the Memphis, Nashville and Alabama-West Florida milk orders.In that regard, the plant's Class I sales in the Nashville and Alabamamarkets each accounted for about 19 percent of the plant's distributionand a shift of 400,000 pounds in sales from Memphis to either the Nashvilleor Alabama market would shift regulation of the plant to such market. Anadditional reason for pooling the Malone andamp; Hyde plant under the Nashvilleorder by means of the lock-in provision is that the shifting of regulationamong orders could impair the plant's ability to maintain its producermilk supply.Under the Memphis order, an individual handler pool order, when the Maloneandamp; Hyde plant has a high Class I utilization percentage, it is ableto return to its producers a favorable blend price. During the months offlush production, however, the plant's Class I utilization percentage isless and it must pay producers in excess of the Federal order's blend priceto return a competitive pay price to its producers. The pooling of theMalone andamp; Hyde plant under a marketwide pool order should better enablethe plant operator to retain its milk supply on a year-round basis. As previously noted, the provision that would result in the regulationof the Malone andamp; Hyde plant would also fully regulate the Kroger plantat Murfreesboro, Tennessee, under the Nashville order. The Kroger plantis currently regulated under the Georgia order since a plurality of theplant's distribution is in the Georgia market. The milk supply for theplant comes for dairy farms located in the county where the plant is locatedand from south central Kentucky amd middle Tennessee. The Kentucky andTennessee areas are the same areas from which Purity Dairies and Maloneandamp; Hyde obtain their producer milk supply.In addition to sharing a common milkshed, Malone andamp; Hyde and Krogershare a common distribution area in the Southeast. Both Malone andamp; Hydeand Kroger have significant distribution in the Nashville market. Maloneandamp; Hyde distributes about 20 percent of its plant's Class I sales inthe Nashville market. Kroger's distribution in the Nashville market isbetween 20 and 25 percent of the Murfreesboro plant's total Class I sales.Regulation of the Kroger plant under the Nashville order is appropriatein this instance since it will result in a common set of regulations forthree distributing plants located within 30 miles of each other. As previouslynoted, the three plants procure milk from a common production area anddistribute fluid milk products in a common sales area. Furthermore, theshifting of the Kroger plant to the Nashville market will have no impactupon the Class I price paid for fluid milk products by the plant operatordue to a new pricing zone which will retain the $2.605 Class I differentialthat applies as such plant's location under the Georgia order.It also appears that the pay prices received by producers supplying theKroger plant would not be reduced and may be slightly enhanced by the plant'sregulation under the Nashville order. The representative of a cooperativeassociation that supplies about 40 percent of the Kroger plant's fluidmilk needs supported the pooling of the Kroger plant under the Nashvilleorder. A representative of the Kroger Company who was present at the hearingexpressed no position on the proposal to pool the Kroger plant under theNashville order.A further reason for pooling the three distributing plants under one orderis to facilitate the shifting of milk supplies between the three plants.Such pooling arrangement will permit the milk of dairy farmers to be shippeddirectly from the farm to the plant where the milk is needed. Currently,Malone andamp; Hyde must use plant transfers to ship milk to Purity Dairyand the Kroger plant. As proponent points out, it would be much more efficientfor the milk to move directly from the farm to either Purity Dairy or theKroger plant rather than being received at the Malone andamp; Hyde plantand then transferred to such plants. However, the current regulations makeit impractical for the milk to move directly from the farm to a plant underanother order. If milk were shifted from Malone andamp; Hyde, a Memphis orderplant, to Purity Dairy, a Nashville order plant, during the months of Marchthrough July, the dairy darmer would hage no base under the Nashville orderand would receive only the excess price for such milk shipments. If sucha shift occurred during the months of September-January, the dairy farmerwould lose the opportunity to build a full base under the order. In addition,such shifting of supplies would complicate the accounting and reportingobligations of the plants involved.Counsel for NFO qustions in his brief the legality of pooling a distributingplant on the basis of a plant's physical location. In his opinion the Actauthorizes regulation by either production area or marketing area. He contendsthat the Act does not authorize regulation on the basis of plant location.The proposal uder consideration is merely a means of identifying whichorder should regulate a plant when such plant qualifies as a pool plantunder more than one order. The Malone andamp; Hyde plant and the Kroger plantacquire regulatory status under the Nashville order because they meet thepool standards of the Nashville order. The physical location of the plantbecome relevant only if the plant also qualifies as a pool plant underan other Federal milk order.The determination that a distributing plant which qualifies as a pool plantunder the Nashville order and also qualifies as a pool plant under oneor more other Federal orders should be regulated under the Nashville orderif such plant is physically located in the Nashville marketing area isconsistent with the authority set forth in section 608c(7)(D) of the Act.This subsection specifies that an order may contain various terms thatare incidental to, and not inconsistent with, the terms explicity authorizedby the Act if the incidental terms are found necessary to effectuate theother provisions of the order. The special pooling arrangement adoptedherein is considered essential for the assurance of adequate supplies andthe maintenance of orderly marketing.Counsel for NFO next raises several points why a plant should not be pooledon the basis of its location if the Department concludes such regulationin permitted by the Act. Counsel suggests that the solution to producerblend price equity in the Southeast should be addressed by the merger oforders. Such suggestion is not a viable alternative at this time becauseit is beyond the scope of the hearing notice. Under the circumstances,there appears to be no reason to preclude some measure of producer blendprice equity through the lock-in provision as an interim measure untilthere is a consensus among producers on the need to merge orders and thenumber of milk orders that should be merged.Counsel also contends that the designated pooling of plants will not allowproducers under the Alabama-West Florida, Georgia and possibly other ordersto share in the pool proceeds of such plants. While it is true that producersunder the Alabama-West Florida order would not be able to share in thepool proceeds attributable to the Malone andamp; Hyde plant if the lock-inprovision is adopted, it needs to be pointed out that this works to theiradvantage. A comparison of the Class I utilization percentage of the Maloneandamp; Hyde plant and the Alabama-West Florida market's average Class Iutilization percentage from January 1986 through September 1987 indicatesthat pooling the Malone andamp; Hyde plant under the Alabama-West Floridaorder would have resulted in a lower blend price in 14 of the 21 monthsfor producers regularly associated with the Alabama-West Florida market.With regard to the gains or losses that producers under the Georgia orderwould incur by the Kroger plant being locked-in under the Nashville order,there is no way to estimate such gains or losses precisely since the month-to-monthClass I utilization percentage of the Kroger plant was not placed in evidence.Two witnesses estimated that the Kroger plant's Class I utilization percentagedoes not vary significantly from the Georgia market's Class I utilizationpercentage. If that is the case, a ``lock-in'' of the Kroger plant underthe Nashville order would have little impact on the blend price under theGeorgia order.The final objection by counsel for NFO to ``locking-in'' the Malone andamp;Hyde plant and the Kroger plant under the Nashville order is that the blendprice difference are not sufficient to justify the lock-in provision.Malone andamp; Hyde estimated on the basis of its uniform price under theMemphis order for the months of February through June 1987 that the Krogerplant enjoyed from 16 cents to 32 cents per hundredweight advantage inobtaining its milk supply. For January through September 1987, the costadvantage enjoyed by Kroger (or cost disadvantage of Malone andamp; Hyde)was estimated by Malone andamp; Hyde to amount to $258,000. Such costs arenot inconsequential. When these costs are considered in conjunction withother reasons offered by proponents of the lock-in provision, adoptionof the proposal is warranted.2. <T3>Establishment of a plus 8.5-cent location adjustment zone in countiessouth of Nashville.</T3> A plus 8.5-cent location adjustment zone shouldbe established in Tennessee in an area south and southeast of Nashville.The Tennessee counties that should be included in the plus 8.5-cent zoneare Bedford, Cannon, Coffee, DeKalb, Franklin, Giles, Grundy, Lawrence,Lewis, Lincoln, Marshall, Maury, Moore, Rutherford, Van Buren, Warren,Wayne, and White.Malone andamp; Hyde proposed that a plus 8.5-cent location adjustment applyon milk received at plants located in the Tennessee counties of Cannon,Coffee, DeKalb, Rutherford, Warren, and White. The 8.5-cent location adjustmentzone would establish a Class I differential of $2.605 at the Murfreesboroplant, which is in Rutherford County. Such Class I differential would bethe same as the Class I differential that applies at the Murfreesboro plantunder the Georgia order.At the hearing, Dairymen, Inc., urged a modification of this proposal.The cooperative proposed that milk that is physically received from producersor from a cooperative association acting as a bulk tank handler at plantslocated in the Tennessee counties of Bedford, Cannon, Coffee, DeKalb, Franklin,Giles, Grundy, Lawrence, Lewis, Lincoln, Marshall, Maury, Moore, Rutherford,Van Buren, Warren, Wayne, and White, be subject to a plus location adjustmentof 8.5 cents per hundredweight.DI pointed out that under the Georgia order, the location adjustment applicableat both the Murfreesboro and the Lewisburg plants is a minus 47.5 centsper hundredweight_resulting in a Class I price at both locations 8.5 centshigher than a Nashville. DI also took the position that producer milk deliveredto pool and nonpool plants in the same general geographic location shouldreceive the same blend price. In this regard, the cooperative noted thatthe Kroger plant at Murfreesboro, Tennessee, could request that the milkthat it receives from cooperative members be diverted to a nonpool plantat which no location adjustment applies while at the same time receivingthe milk of independent producurs. Under such arrangement, independentproducers would receive an 8.5-cent higher blend price than cooperativemembers whose milk is diverted to nearby plants.A representative of Southern Milk Sales supported a plus 8.5-cent-per-hundredweightlocation adjustment for milk received at the plant at Lewisburg, Tennessee.SMS plans to divert milk to the Lewisburg plant in the coming months. Thecooperative wanted its members to receive the 8.5-cent higher blend pricewhether the milk of such members was received at the Murfreesboro plantor was diverted to the Lewisburg plant.SMS also suggested an alternative pricing method for milk diverted to theLewisburg plant. The cooperative proposed that milk diverted to the Lewisburgplant be priced at the plant from which the milk was diverted. It opposed,on the other hand, an alternative suggested by counsel for Malone andamp;Hyde, which would price the milk of producers on the basis of the locationof the plant where the majority of the producers' milk is received duringthe month. SMS claimed that this would not solve the problem of pricingmilk diverted to nonpool plants during the months of April, May and June.During such months, SMS would most likely divert its members' milk a greaterpercentage of the time than the milk of the nonmembers is diverted fromthe Kroger plant to nonpool plants. In that event, the milk diverted bythe cooperative would be priced at the location of the Lewisburg plantwhile the milk of the nonmembers would be priced at the Murfreesboro location,an eight and one-half-cent higher priced zone.Malone andamp; Hyde opposed any plus location adjustment in those countiesof south central Tennessee in which manufacturing plants are located. Thehandler noted that DI operates a balancing plant and a cheese plant locatedat Lewisburg in Marshall County, that Kraft operates a cheese plant atFayetteville in Lincoln County, and that another cheese plant is locatedat Ardmore in Giles County. Malone andamp; Hyde expressed concern that adoptionof a plus location adjustment for manufacturing plant locations would tendto encourage the movement of milk to manufacturing in perference to deliveringmilk to fluid milk plants. In addition, such milk movements would reducethe level of the blend price at the central market location in Nashville.NFO, in its brief, also opposed DI's suggestion that the Lewisburg, Tennessee,plant be in a ``plus'' location adjustment zone. The cooperative contendedthat it would be a gross deviation from location pricing practices to granta plus location adjustment to the supply plant in a market. Opponent pointedout that there would be a lower price to producers if milk supplies werediverted from the Lewisburg plant to the fluid milk plants in Nashville.The cooperative contends that DI's objective is to obtain a competitiveadvantage for producers supplying the Lewisburg plant versus producerssupplying the Malone andamp; Hyde plant in Nashville. An 8.5-cent location adjustment to the Class I price and the uniform priceto producers should apply to milk received at plants in the eighteen-countyarea proposed by DI. The eighteen-county area forms a corridor betweenNashville and Chattanooga and Nashville and the Alabama-West Florida marketingarea. Such area with an 8.5-cent plus location adjustment provides a ClassI pricing zone with a Class I differential of $2.605 for plants at Murfreesboroand Lewisburg. Such intermediate pricing zone will provide an appropriatealignment between the $2.52 Class I differential that applies in the Nashvillearea, the $2.77 Class I differential at Chattanooga under the TennesseeValley order, and the $2.85 Class I differential at plants located in thenorthern tier of counties in Alabama under the Alabama-West Florida orders.The objections raised to providing a higher price to producers for milkdelivered to nonpool manufacturing plants than to fluid milk plants arenot without merit. However, there are compelling reasons for adopting thehigher location adjustments for milk received at plants south of Nashville.The addition of 8.5 cents to the blend price on milk received at the Lewisburgplant will price the milk of producers that is diverted from the Krogerplant at Murfreesboro to the Lewisburg plant at the same level as milkrecieved at the Murfreesboro plant. In this case, it is essential thatthe blend price on milk diverted to the Lewisburg plant be equivalent tothe blend price on milk received at the Murfreesboro plant. Such pricingwill provide equity between the two groups of producers who supply theMurfreesboro plant_one group of producers are members of a cooperativeassociation while the other group of producers are not members of a cooperative.As long as the blend price for milk diverted to the Lewisburg plant isequal to the blend price for milk recieved at the Murfreesboro plant, theoperator of the plant and the cooperative association should be indifferentas to which group of producers is diverted to the nonpool manufacturingplant. Another factor to be considered in the pricing of milk diverted to Tennesseenonpool plants located south of Nashville is that the primary milk suppliesfor the Malone andamp; Hyde plant, Purity Dairy at Nashville, and the Krogerplant at Murfreesboro and plants in other sutheastern markets are locatedin central Kentucky and Tennessee counties to the north of Nashville. Insuch instance, the 9.5-cent-higher price is not going to draw milk awayfrom the fluid milk plants located in Nashville because the added costof hauling milk beyond the Nashville area to plants further south willnullify the added returns from the 8.5-cent-higher blend price. Yet, the8.5-cent higher price at plants south of Nashville is needed to reflectadded transportation service provided by those producers in Kentucky andnorthern Tennessee that haul their milk past Nashville to the Kroger plant.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions </ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision. <ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings </ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the Nashville, Tennessee and Georgia orders were firstissued and when they were amended. The previous findings and determinationsare hereby ratified and confirmed, except where they may conflict withthose set forth herein. (a) The tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as hereby proposedto be amended, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, will tend toeffectuate the declared policy of the Act; (b) The parity prices of milk as detemined pursuant to section 2 of theAct are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the marketing areas, and the minimum prices specifiedin the tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as hereby proposedto be amended, are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors, insurea sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and be in the publicinterest; and (c) The tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as hereby proposedto be amended, will regulate the handling of milk in the same manner as,and will be applicable only to persons in the respective classes of industrialand commercial activity specified in, marketing agreements upon which ahearing has been held. <ITAG tagnum="84">Recommended Marketing Agreements and Orders Amending the Orders </ITAG>The recommended marketing agreements for the Nashville, Tennessee, andGeorgia marketing areas are not included in this decision because the regulatoryprovisions thereof would be the same as those contained in the orders,as hereby proposed to be amended. The following order amending the orders,as amended regulating the handling of milk in such marketing areas is recommendedas the detailed and appropriate means by which the foregoing conclusionsmay be carried out. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Parts 1098 and 1007</ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products. 1. The authority citation for CFR Parts 1098 and 1007 continues to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-647.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 1098_MILK IN THE NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE, MARKETING AREA </ITAG>2. In andSection; 1098.7, paragraph (d)(2) is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1098.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Pool plant. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) * * *(2) A distributing plant qualified pursuant to paragraph (a) of this sectionwhich meets the requirements of a fully regulated plant pursuant to theprovisions of another order issued pursuant to the Act and from which agreater quantity of fluid milk products, except filled milk, is disposedof during the month from such plant as route disposition in the marketingarea regulated by the other order than as route disposition in the Nashville,Tennessee, marketing area, except: (i) That such distributing plant which was a pool plant under this orderin the immediately preceding month shall continue to be subject to allof the provisions of this part until the third consecutive month in whicha greater proportion of its route disposition is made in such other marketingarea, unless the other order requires regulation of the plant without regardto its qualifying as a pool plant under this order; (ii) On the basis of a written application made either by the plant operatoror by the cooperative association supplying milk to such operator's plant,at least 15 days prior to the date for which a determination of the Secretaryis to be effective, the Secretary may determine that the route dispositionin the respective marketing areas to be used for purposes of this paragraphshall exclude (for a specified period of time) route disposition made underlimited term contracts to governmental bases and institutions; and (iii) A plant located in the marketing area that qualifies pursuant toparagraph (a) of this section which also meets the pooling requirementsof another Federal order on the basis of route disposition shall be subjectto all the provisions of this part so long as this order's Class I priceapplicable at such plant location is not less than the other order's ClassI price applicable at this same location even though the plant may havegreater route disposition in the order marketing area than in the Nashvillemarketing area. 3. In andSection; 1098.52, paragraphs (b) and (c) are redesignated as paragraphs(c) and (d), and a new paragraph (b) is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1098.52 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plant location adjustment for handlers. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) For such milk that is physically received from producers or from ahandler described in andSection; 1098.9(c) at plants located in the Tennesseecounties of Bedford, Cannon, Coffee, DeKalb, Franklin, Giles, Grundy, Lawrence,Lewis, Lincoln, Marshall, Maury, Moore, Rutherford, Van Buren, Warren,Wayne, and White, the price shall be adjusted by plus 8.5 cents per hundredweight.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1007_MILK IN THE GEORGIA MARKETING AREA</ITAG>4. In 1007.7, paragraph (e)(3) is revised and a new paragraph (e)(4) isadded to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1007.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Pool plant.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e) * * *(3) A plant (except a plant that is a pool plant pursuant to paragraph(d) of this section) that is fully subject to the pricing and pooling provisionsof another order issued pursuant to the Act, unless such plant is qualifiedas a pool plant pursuant to paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section and,except as provided in paragraph (e)(4) of this section, a greater volumeof fluid milk products, except filled milk, is disposed of from such plantin this marketing area as route disposition and to pool plants pursuantto paragraphs (a) or (d) of this section than is disposed of from suchplant in the marketing area regulated pursuant to the other order as routedisposition and to plants qualified as fully regulated plants under suchother order on the basis of route disposition in its marketing area.(4) A distributing plant qualified pursuant to paragraph (a) of this sectionwhich meets the requirements of a fully regulated plant pursuant to theprovisions of another Federal order and from which a greater quantity ClassI milk, except filled milk, is disposed of during the month in the Georgiamarketing area as route disposition than as route disposition in the othermarketing area, and such other order which fully regulates the plant doesnot contain provision to exempt the plant from regulation, even thoughsuch plant has greater route disposition in the marketing area of the Georgiaorder.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on: July 21, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J. Patrick Boyle, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-16764 Filed 7-25-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>