<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88803-0094 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-03-88.f2.A1093</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Release No. IC-16503; 812-6508]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Merrill Lynch California Municipal Bond Trust et al.; Applicationfor Exemption</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">July 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC'').</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of application for exemption under the InvestmentCompany Act of 1940 (``the 1940 Act'').<T3>Applicants: </T3>Merrill Lynch California Municipal Bond Trust, MerrillLynch Multi-State Municipal Series Trust, Merrill Lynch Retirement BenefitInvestment Program, Inc., Merrill Lynch Retirement/Income Fund, Inc., MerrillLynch Basic Value Fund, Inc., Merrill Lynch Capital Fund, Inc., MerrillLynch Corporate Bond Fund, Inc., Merrill Lynch EuroFund, Merrill LynchFund for Tomorrow, Inc., Merrill Lynch Global Convertible Fund, Inc., MerrillLynch Government Fund Inc., Merrill Lynch Institutional Fund, Inc., MerrillLynch International Holdings, Inc., Merrill Lynch Municipal Bond Fund,Inc., Merrill Lynch Municipal Series Trust, Merrill Lynch Natural ResourcesTrust, Merrill Lynch Pacific Fund, Inc., Merrill Lynch Phoenix Fund, Inc.,Merrill Lynch Ready Assets Trust, Merrill Lynch Retirement Equity Fund,Merrill Lynch Retirement Global Bond Fund, Merrill Lynch Retirement SeriesTrust, Merrill Lynch Special Value Fund, Inc., Merrill Lynch StrategicDividend Fund, Merrill Lynch U.S.A. Government Reserves, Sci/Tech Holdings,Inc., and each open-end management investment company to be established,advised or managed in the future by Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Inc.or Fund Asset Management, Inc. or distributed by Merrill Lynch Funds Distributor,Inc. (all of the above being referred to collectively, in whole or in part,as the context requires, as the ``Funds''), Merrill Lynch Asset Management,Inc. (``MLAM'') and Fund Asset Management, Inc. (``FAMI'') (together, the``Advisers''), and Merrill Lynch Funds Distributor, Inc. (``MLFD'') (the``Distributor'') (all of the foregoing being referred to as the ``Applicants'').<T3>Relevant 1940 Act Sections: </T3>Exemption requested under section6(c) of the 1940 Act from the provisions of section 18(f), 18(g), 18(i),2(a)(32), 2(a)(35), 22(c), 22(d) of the 1940 Act and Rule 22c-1 thereunderand approval requested under section 11(a) of the 1940 Act.<T3>Summary of Application: </T3>Applicants are requesting an order ofthe Commission (i) to permit the Funds to sell two classes of securitiesfor the purpose of establishing a dual distribution system, (ii) to permitthe Funds to assess a contingent deferred sales load (``CDSL'') on certainredemptions of a class of their securities, and to waive the CDSL in certaincases, and (iii) to permit certain offers of exchange between shares ofthe Funds. This notice only summarizes a detailed and lengthy application.<T3>Filing Date:</T3> The application was filed on October 21, 1986, andan Amended and Restated Application was filed on February 24, March 17,and June 19, 1987 and June 29, 1988.<T3>Hearing or Notification of Hearing: </T3>If no hearing is ordered,the application will be granted. Any interested person may request a hearingon this application, or ask to be notified if a hearing is ordered. Anyrequests must be received by the SEC by 5:30 p.m., on August 22, 1988.Request a hearing in writing, giving the nature of your interest, the reasonfor the request, and the issues you contest. Serve the Applicants withthe request, either personally or by mail, and also send it to the Secretaryof the SEC, along with proof of service by affidavit, or, for lawyers,by certificate. Request notification of the date of a hearing by writingto the Secretary of the SEC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Secretary, SEC, 450 5th Street NW., Washington, DC20549. Applicants, Box 9011, Princeton, New Jersey 08543-9011 (MerrillLynch Government Fund Inc. and Merrill Lynch Institutional Fund Inc., 125High Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02110).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Staff Attorney Fran Pollack-Matz(202) 272-3024 or Branch Chief Karen L. Skidmore (202) 272-3023 (Divisionof Investment Management).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The following is a summary of the application.The application is available for a fee from either the SEC's Public ReferenceBranch in person or the SEC's commercial copier which may be contactedat (800) 231-3282 (in Maryland (301) 258-4300).<ITAG tagnum="84">Applicants' Representations and Legal Conclusions</ITAG>1. Each of the Funds is a diversified, open-end management investment companyregistered under the 1940 Act. Each Fund has entered into or intends toenter into an investment advisory or management agreement with one of theAdvisers, and a distribution agreement with the Distributor under whichthe Distributor acts as principal underwriter for the Funds.2. Certain of the Funds are currently offered to investors at net assetvalue plus a front-end sales load (``Front-End Load Funds''). Other Funds(``CDSL Funds'') are offered to the public at their net asset value withouta front-end load. Instead, an investor's proceeds from a redemption ofthe CDSL Funds' shares made within a specified period of time after purchase(``CDSL Period'') are subject to a CDSL imposed by the Distributor. Inaddition, the CDSL Funds pay the Distributor a distribution fee under adistribution plan adopted by the Funds pursuant to Rule 12b-1 under the1940 Act (``Rule 12b-1 Plan'') based on the average daily net assets ofa Fund, typically at an annual rate in the 0.5% to 1% range. The ApplicantFunds also include money market funds which are generally offered withouta sales load (the ``Money Market Funds''). Two of the Money Market Fundshave Rule 12b-1 Plans, though different in level of charges from the CDSLFunds' Rule 12b-1 Plans. Another two of the Money Market Funds have adopted``defensive'' Rule 12b-1 Plans, <T3>i.e.</T3>, the Adviser is permitted under these plans to use a portionof its management and advisory fees to pay for the distribution of theseMoney Market Fund shares.Representations Relating to the Dual Distribution System3. Applicants propose the establishment of a dual distribution system (the``Dual Distribution System'') which would enable each of the Funds to provideinvestors with the option of purchasing shares either with a conventionalfront-end sales load (the ``Front-End Load Option'') such as is currentlyoffered by the Front-End Load Funds are subject to a CDSL and a Rule 12b-1Plan charge (the ``Deferred Load Option'') as is currently offered by theCDSL Funds.4. Each Fund would create two classes of shares with ``Class A'' sharesbeing sold under the Front-End Load Option and ``Class B'' shares beingsold under the Deferred Load Option. The two classes would each representinterests in the same portfolio of securities of a fund, and be identicalin all respects, except that (i) Class B shares would bear the expensesof the deferred sales arrangements, <T3>i.e., </T3>the CDSL and the Rule 12b-1 Plan, any incremental transferagency costs resulting from such sales arrangements, and any other incrementalexpenses subsequently identified that should be properly allocated to oneclass which shall be approved by the Commission pursuant to an amendedordered (``Differential Expenses''), (ii) Class B shares would have exclusivevoting rights with respect to the Rule 12b-1 Plan, and (iii) the two classeswould have different exchange privileges. (Sometimes (i), (ii), and (iii)are collectively referred to as the ``Class Dissimilarities.'')5. Under the Front-End Load Option relating to Class A shares, the salesloads would be subject to reductions for larger purchases and under a rightof accumulation and a letter of intent. Certain other reductions wouldalso apply, as set forth in the registration statement of each of the Funds.6. The two classes of shares would represent interests in the same portfolioof securities and would have identical voting, dividend, liquidation andother rights and the same terms and conditions, except for the specifcClass Dissimilarities, noted in andplusmin;4. The net asset value of eachshare would be computed on a pro rata basis for each share regardless ofclass, and all expenses incurred by a Fund would be borne on a pro ratabasis except for the Differential Expenses which would be borne solelyby Class B. The Differential Expenses would cause the net investment incomeattributed to, and the dividends payable on, Class B shares to be lowerthan that for Class A shares since the expenses are deducted from grossinvestment income for each class. And because undistributed net incomeis a component of net asset value, the net asset value of the Class B shareswould be lower than the net asset value of the Class A shares. However,any dividends paid by a Fund with respect to Class A and Class B shareswould be calculated in the same manner, at the same time, on the same day,and would be in the same amount, except for the Differential Expenses.7. In substance, the two classes of a dual-priced fund would be treatedas if they were separate funds that share a common securities portfolio.The effect that the allocations of daily income and expenses, changes inrealized gains and losses, and unrealized appreciation/depreciation wouldhave on the two classes would depend on the type of fund involved. Theapplication contains a more detailed discussion of the Applicants' proposedmethodology for net asset value calculations and expense allocations.8. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner andamp; Smith Incorporated (``MLPFandamp;S'')sales personnel would be paid under different compensation systems forselling Class A or Class B shares, similar to sales of the Front-End Loadand CDSL Funds, respectively. Because financial consultant's compensationwould vary from case to case depending on breakpoints, length of trailer,and the like, it is not possible to generalize as to which class wouldprovide the financial consultant the highest level of compensation.9. The prospectuses of the Funds would (i) describe the services renderedand compensation paid under the Rule 12b-1 distribution plans with respectto such shares and the fees payable by each of the Funds for such services;and (ii) disclose all material information concerning the Class A and ClassB shares in a manner that would enable an investor to make a comparativeanalysis of the two classes of shares and facilitiate the making of aninvestment decision as to which class would be more advantageous to theinvestor.Applicants' Legal Conclusion Relating to the Dual Distribution System10. The proposed Dual Distribution System does not create the potentialfor the abuses relating to complex capital structures and mutuality ofrisk which section 18 was designed to correct. since all shares would participatepro rata in the Fund's income and the Fund's expenses, except for the DifferentialExpenses payable by Class B shares, the proposed arrangement would notincrease the speculative character of the shares of the Funds or disturbthe mutuality of risk among all shareholders. Further, both classes ofshares would be redeemable at all times and no one class of shares wouldhave any preference or priority over the other Fund class in the usualsense, that is, no class would have distribution or liquidation preferenceswith respect to particular assets and no class would be protected by anyreserve or other account.11. The interests of the two classes as to the payment of management andadvisory fees would be the same, and not conflict because these fees wouldbe used solely to compensate the Funds' investment advisers for providingservices common to all investors. Further, the directors/trustees mustanalyze the reasonableness of the advisory fee and the distribution feeunder the standards defined by section 36(b) of the 1940 Act. Thus, theinterests of each class of shareholders would be adequately protected.12. With respect to potential conflicts of interest between the classes,relating to the allocation of certain Fund expenses, there is no greaterpotential for the shifting of expenses between the classes of a dual distributionFund than there is to do likewise between CDSL Funds and Front-End LoanFunds not operating under such Rule 12b-1 Plans within a fund complex.The proposed allocation of expenses and voting rights relating to the Rule12b-1 Plans is equitable and would not discriminate against any group ofshareholders. Investors purchasing Class B shares would bear the deferredcharges, but would also enjoy exclusive shareholder voting rights withrespect to matter affecting such Rule 12b-1 Plans.13. Under the proposed Dual Distribution System, investors would be ableto choose the method of purchasing shares that is most beneficial giventhe amount of their purchase, the length of time the investor expects tohold the shares and other relevant circumstances. Owners of both classesmay be relieved under the Dual Distribution System of a portion of thefixed costs normally associated with open-end investment companies, sincesuch costs would, potentially, be spread over a greater number of shares.In addition, under contracts with Merrill Lynch companies, the advisoryand administrative fees charged some Funds may decrease as the level ofassets under management increases.Representations Relating to Assessment of a CDSL14. The Applicants desire to assess a CDSL on certain redemptions of ClassB shares of the Funds, and to permit the Funds to waive the CDSL with respectto certain types of redemptions. An investor's proceeds from a redemptionof Class B shares made within a specified period (typically four or fiveyears, but not to exceed six years) of their purchase would be subjectto a CDSL imposed by the Distributor or MLPFandamp;S, a registered broker-dealerunder the Security Exchange Act of 1934, which has entered into agreementswith the Distributor. The CDSL typically ranges from 4% to 6% (but canbe higher or lower, not to exceed 8.5%) on shares redeemed in the firstyear of purchase and is reduced typically at a rate of 1% per annum overthe applicable CDSL period, so that redemptions of shares held after thatperiod would not be subject to any CDSL.15. The Deferred Load Option is designed to permit the investor to purchaseClass B shares without the assessment of a front-end sales load and atthe same time permit the Distributor to pay the account executives or financialconsultants of securities dealers selling shares of a Fund, primarily MLPFandamp;S,a commission on the sale of the Class B shares. Proceeds from the distributionfee and the CDSL would be used in whole or in part to defray the expensesof the Distributor and MLPFandamp;S related to providing distribution-relatedservices to the investor choosing the Deferred Load Option.16. The CDSL would not be imposed on redemptions of shares which were purchasedbeyond the applicable CDSL Period prior to the redemptions or on ClassB shares derived from reinvestment of distributions. Furthermore, no CDSLwould be imposed on an amount which represents an increase in the valueof the shareholder's account resulting from capital appreciation abovethe amount paid for shares purchased during the CDSL Period. In determiningwhether a CDSL is applicable, a redemption would be made first of sharesderived from reinvestment of distributions, second of shares purchasedprior to the CDSL Period, and third of shares purchased during the CDSLPeriod. The amount of the CDSL to be imposed would be set forth in theFunds' prospectuses.17. In an exchange between Funds which are not Money Market Funds, theFunds would ``tack'' the period for which the original Class B shares ofa Fund were held onto the holding period of the Class B shares acquiredin the exchange for purposes of determining what, if any, CDSL is applicablein the event that such acquired shares are redeemed following the exchange.An investor would be subject to the CDSL of the Fund with the longest CDSLPeriod or highest CDSL schedule which may have been owed by him, whicheverresults in the greatest CDSL payment. It is expected that the CDSL scheduleand CDSL Period of the Funds would vary depending in part on the front-endsales loads on the Class A shares of a Fund and the compensation paid tofinancial consultants for selling shares of a Fund.18. The Funds are requesting the ability to waive the CDSL: (a) On redemptionsfollowing the death or disability, as defined in section 72(m)(7) of theInternal Revenue Code, of a shareholder, (b) in connection with certaindistributions from an Individual Retirement Account or other qualifiedretirement plan, (c) in whole or in part, in connection with shares soldto certain individuals or groups pursuant to special arrangements, as disclosedin a Fund's registration statement, exactly the same as those under whichthe front-end sales load on Class A shares could be reduced or waived pursuantto Rule 22d-1 under the 1940 Act at the time of the issuance of the orderrequested by this application, and (d) in connection with the exerciseof certain exchange privileges among the Class B shares of the Funds andthe Money Market Funds. If the directors/trustees of a Fund determine tono longer waive or reduce such CDSL, the disclosure in a Fund's prospectuswould be revised. Any Class B shares purchased prior to the terminationof such waiver or reduction would be able to have the CDSL waived or reducedas provided in a Fund's prospectus at the time of the purchase of suchshares.Applicants' Legal Conclusions Relating to the CDSL19. Applicants believe its request for exemptive relief is consistent withthe standards of section 6(c). The imposition of the CDSL on the ClassB shares of the Funds is fair and in the best interests of their shareholders.The proposed Dual Distribution System permits Class B shareholders to havethe advantage of greater investment dollars working for them from the timeof their purchase than if a sales load were imposed at the time of purchase,as in the case with the Class A shares. Furthermore, the CDSL is fair toClass B shareholders because it applies only to amounts representing increasesin the value of an investor's account through capital appreciation, orto amounts representing reinvestment of distributions. In their reviewof the Rule 12b-1 distribution plans, the directors/trustees of the Fundsintend to consider the use by the distributor of revenues raised by theCDSL. 20. Applicants further believe that an order permitting the waivers ofthe CDSL described above would be consistent with the standards of section6(c). Waiver of the CDSL in the extraordinary circumstances of death ortotal disability or in the case of certain retirement distributions isjustified on basic considerations of fairness. The waiver of the CDSL,in whole or in part, in connection with shares sold under the same specialarrangements as those applicable to Class A shares pursuant to Rule 22d-1is justified since, as in the case of the front-end sales load, the Fundsgenerally recognize economies of scale and a reduction of sales relatedexpenses with these programs. Waiver of the CDSL in the case of the excerciseof certain exchange privileges is justified by the fact that the investorwould still be invested in a mutual fund sponsored by the Advisers and,except if the shares are in a Money Market Fund, would be paying a Rule12b-1 distribution fee on Class B shares, and would have to pay any applicableCDSL for redemptions made out of the Funds (including the Money MarketFunds). Moreover, this waiver would not adversely affect other Class Bshareholders of a Fund. Waiver of the charge would not result in the lossof any revenue to a Fund since proceeds from the CDSL would be paid tothe Distributor.Representations Relating to the Proposed Exchange Privilege21. The Applicants desire to permit the proposed exchange privilege amongthe Funds, including the Money Market Funds. The Front-End Load Funds andthe Money Market Funds currently have an exchange program and it is contemplatedthat Class A shares of a Fund would similarly be exchangeable for ClassA shares of the other Funds and Money Market Fund shares. Applicants proposeto allow Class B shares of a Fund to be exchangeable for Class B sharesof the other Funds and Money Market Fund shares. In addition, Money MarketFund shares would be exchangeable for either Class A or Class B sharesof the Funds; however, if Money Market Fund shares were acquired underan exchange privilege, they would only be exchangeable for the class ofshares involved in the original exhange into the Money Market Fund shares.In connection with the exchange privilege, a shareholder would be requiredto hold Class B shares of a Fund or shares of a Money Market Fund for aminimum period of time before they can be exchanged for other shares. Thisminimum time period would be uniformly applied to all offerees of the classspecified.Applicants' Legal Conclusions Relating to the Exchange Privilege22. Applicants argue that the exchange privilege should be permitted undersection 11(a) on the basis that it is in the best interests of the shareholdersof the Funds. The purpose of the exchange privilege is to permit ClassB shareholders of the funds to exchange their shares with one another andwith the Money Market Funds when their investment objectives change orwhen market conditions favor one type of investment over another. The proposedexchange privilege provides shareholders of the Funds with desirable flexibilityfor their financial planning. The directors/trustees of each of the Fundscan elect that the Fund not participate in the exchange privilege programat any time. The proposed exchange privilege is fair and equitable to theshareholders of all of the Funds, while preventing a shareholder from acquiringClass B shares of a Fund with a relatively long applicable CDSL Periodor relatively high CDSL schedule by simply purchasing Class B shares ofanother Fund with a shorter CDSL period or lower CDSL schedule or no salescharge (such as the Money Market Funds) and then exchanging such sharesfor those of the former Fund on the basis of relative net asset value pershare.<ITAG tagnum="84">Applicants' Conditions</ITAG>An order granting the requested exemptions would be subject to the followingconditions set forth in the application:Conditions Relating to the Dual Distribution System1. The Class A and Class B shares would represent interests in the sameportfolio of investments of a Fund, and be identical in all respects, exceptas set forth below. The only differences between Class A and Class B sharesof the same Fund would relate solely to: (a) Priorities with respect tothe payment of dividends and such priorities would reflect only the impactof the Rule 12b-1 plan distribution fee payments made by the Class B sharesof a Fund, any incremental transfer agency costs paid by the Class B sharesof a Fund resulting from the Deferred Load Option sales arrangements andany other incremental expenses subsequently identified that should be properlyallocated to one class which shall be approved by the Commission pursuantto an amended order, (b) voting rights on matters which pertain to Rule12b-1 Plans, (c) the different exchange privileges of the Class A and ClassB shares as descibed in the prospectuses (and as more fully dscribed inthe statements of additional information) of the Funds and consistent withany order granted pursuant to this application, and (d) the designationof each class of shares of a Fund.2. The directors/trustees, of each of the Funds, including a majority ofthe independent directors/trustees would approve the Dual DistributionSystem and at least a majority of the existing shareholders of each ofthe Funds would approve the Dual Distribution by an affirmative vote priorto implementation of the Dual Distribution System by a particular Fund.The minutes of the meetings of the directors/trustees of each of the Fundsregarding the deliberations of the directors/trustees with respect to theapprovals necessary to implement the Dual Distribution System would reflectin detail the reasons for determining that the proposed Dual DistributionSystem is in the best interests of both the Funds and their respectiveshareholders and such minutes would be available for inspection by theCommission staff. 3. On an ongoing basis, the directors/trustees of the Funds, pursuant totheir fiduciary responsibilities under the 1940 Act and otherwise, wouldmonitor each Fund for the existence of any material conflicts between theinterests of the two classes of shares. The directors/trustees, includinga majority of the independent directors/trustees, shall take such actionas is reasonably necessary to eliminate any such conflicts that may develop.MLAM, FAMI and MLFD would be responsible for reporting any potential orexisting conflicts to the directors/trustees. If a conflict arises, theAdvisers and the Distributor at their own cost would remedy such conflictup to and including establishing a new registered management investmentcompany. 4. The Rule 12b-1 Plans relating to Class B shares of each Fund have beenor would be approved and reviewed by the Funds' directors/trustees in accordancewith the requirements and procedures set forth in Rule 12b-1, both currentlyand as that rule may be amended in the future. Any Class B Rule 12b-1 Plansadopted in connection with or subsequent to the implementation of the DualDistribution System (i.e., by Front-End Load Funds or newly organized funds)would be submitted to the Class B shareholders for approval at the nextmeeting of shareholders after the commencement of operation of such Plan(such condition not being applicable to the existing CDSL Funds with existingRule 12b-1 Plans which have already been submitted to shareholders forapproval). 5. The directors/trustees of the Funds would receive quarterly and annualStatements complying with paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of Rule 12b-1, as it maybe amended from time to time. In the Statements, only distribution expendituresproperly attributable to the sale of the Class B shares would be used tojustify the Class B Rule 12b-1 fee. Expenditures not related to the saleof the Class B shares would not be presented to the directors/trusteesto justify Class B Rule 12b-1 fees. The Statements, including the allocationsupon which they are based, would be subject to the review and approvalof the independent directors/trustees in the exercise of their fiduciaryduties under Rule 12b-1.6. Dividends paid by a Fund with respect to its Class A and Class B shares,to the extent any dividends are paid, would be calculated in the same mannerat the same time on the same day and would be in the same amount, exceptthat distribution fee payments made by a Fund under its Rule 12b-1 Planand any incremental transfer agency costs relating to Class B shares wouldbe borne exclusively by that class. 7. The methodology and procedures for calculating the net asset value anddividend/distributions of the two classes and the proper allocation ofexpenses between the two classes has been reviewed by an expert (the ``Expert'')who has rendered a report to the Applicants, which has been provided tothe staff of the Commission, that such methodology and procedures are adequateto ensure that such calculations and allocations would be made in an appropriatemanner. On an on-going basis, the Expert, or an appropriate substituteExpert, would monitor the manner in which the calculations and allocationsare being made and, based upon such review, would render at least annuallya report to the Funds that the calculations and allocations are being madeproperly. The reports of the Expert would be filed as part of the periodicreports filed with the Commission pursuant to sections 30(a) and 30(b)(1)of the 1940 Act and the work papers of the Expert with respect to suchreports, following request by the Funds which the Funds agree to provide,would be available for inspection by the Commission staff. The initialreport of the Expert is a ``Special Purpose'' report on the ``Design ofa System'' and the ongoing reports would be ``Special Purpose'' reportson the ``Design of a System and Certain Compliance Tests'' as defined anddescribed in Statement of Auditing Standards No. 44 of the American Instituteof Certified Public Accountants (``AICPA''), as it may be amended fromtime to time, or in similar auditing standards as may be adopted by theAICPA from time to time. 8. Applicants have adequate facilities in place to ensure implementationof the methodology and procedures for calculating the net asset value anddividend/distributions of the two classes of shares and the proper allocationof expenses between the two classes of shares and this representation hasbeen concurred with by the Expert in the initial report referred to incondition (7) above and would be concurred with by the Expert or an appropriatesubstitute Expert on an ongoing basis at least annually in the ongoingreports referred to in that condition. Applicants agree to take immediatecorrective action if the Expert, or appropriate substitute Expert, doesnot so concur in the ongoing reports. 9. The prospectuses of the Funds would include a statement to the effectthat a financial consultant may receive different compensation for sellingClass A or Class B shares.10. MLPFandamp;S would adopt compliance standards, substantially in the formattached as Exhibit E to the application as to when Class A and Class Bshares may appropriately be sold to particular investors.11. All purchases of shares of the Funds by the directors/trustees madeafter the issuance of a secord class of shares has been authorized wouldbe equally divided between the two classes. Over time, the actual holdingsof the two classes of these newly purchased shares would differ to a minordegree if a director/trustee elects to have dividends reinvested.12. The conditions pursuant to which the exemptive order is granted andthe duties and responsibilities of the directors/trustees of the Fundswith respect to the Dual Distribution System would be set forth in guidelineswhich would be furnished to the directors/trustees and made a part of theMLAM Directors Manual setting forth the duties and responsibilities ofthe directors/trustees of the investment companies advised by MLAM andFAMI.13. Each of the Funds would clearly disclose the difference in the respectiveyields of the Class A and Class B shares of a Fund in its prospectus, shareholderreports and any advertising materials, including newspaper advertisements.For instance, the supplementary financial information, including the pershare table in each Fund's prospectus and the balance sheet in each Fund'sprospectus or statement of additional information, would be separatelypresented for the Class A and Class B shares. Also, the Funds' prospectusesand statements of additional information would disclose the different exchangeprivilege applicable to the different classes of shares. Similarly, theinformation provided by Applicants to any newspaper of similar listingof the Funds' net asset values and public offering prices would separatelypresent the Class A and Class B shares.14. The Applicants acknowledge that the grant of the exemptive order requestedby the Application would not imply Commission approval, authorization oracquiescence in any particular level of payments that the Funds may makepursuant to Rule 12b-1 Plans in reliance on the exemptive order.Conditions Relating to the CDSL and Exchange PrivilegeAny order granted under section 6(c) exempting Applicants from sections2(a)(32), 2(a)(35), 22(c), and 22(d) of the 1940 Act and Rule 22c-1 thereunderand under section 11(a) of the 1940 is conditional on the representationssummarized above and more fully described in the application. For example,these representations state that:a. The Applicants do not anticipate that there would be any administrativefee applicable to any exchanges. However, to the extent any administrativeor similar fee may be applicable, such fees would be disclosed in the Funds'prospectuses and in any sales or advertising literature relating to theexchange privilege. Furthermore, any such administrative fee or scheduledvariation would be uniformly applied to all offerees of the class specified.Any administrative or similar fee applicable to any exchanges would benominal (i.e., $5.00 or less) or Applicants would obtain an amendment toany order granted in connection with the application permitting a higherfee.b. The Applicants would disclose in the Funds' prospectuses and in anysales or advertising literature mentioning the exchange privilege the factthat the Applicants have the right to modify or terminate the exchangeprivilege. c. The Applicants would not terminate or restrict the exchange privilegeof a particular Fund unless the shareholders of a Fund are given writtennotice of such termination or modification at least 60 days prior to suchtermination or modification. The Applicants would not restrict the termsof the exchange privilege described in the application and permitted byany order granted pursuant to section 11(a) of the 1940 Act prior to obtainingan amendment to such order.d. The Applicants would comply with proposed Rule 11a-3 under the 1940Act, or any similar rule relating to exchange privileges, in the form inwhich it is adopted, if and when it is adopted.e. If the Funds waive or reduce the CDSL, such Waiver or reduction wouldbe uniformly applied to all offerees in the class specified.f. In waiving or reducing a CDSL, the Funds would comply with the requirementsof Rule 22d-1 under the 1940 Act.<ITAG tagnum="21">By the Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jonathan G. Katz,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-17460 Filed 8-2-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 8010-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>