<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881206-0014 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.12-06-88.f2.A1013</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Parts 1124 and 1125</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. AO-368-A16 and AO-226-A32; DA-88-108]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Milk in the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland Marketing Areas;Decision on Proposed Amendments to Marketing Agreements and to Orders </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This decision merges the Oregon-Washington and PugetSound-Inland Federal orders, based on industry proposals considered ata public hearing held November 17-18, 1987. In addition to the presentlyregulated marketing areas, the merged ``Pacific Northwest'' marketing areawould include five additional Washington counties, the unregulated portionof another Washington county, and three central Oregon counties. The ClassI differentials at Portland, Oregon, and Spokane, Washington, are reducedfrom $1.95 to $1.90; and the Class I differential at Seattle, Washington,is increased from $1.85 to $1.90.The provisions of the merged order are patterned largely after those ofthe present Puget Sound order, with some modifications to accommodate specificmarketing conditions of the Oregon-Washington order area. Provisions ofthe merged order that represent significant changes in regulation for handlersand producers currently pooled under the Oregon-Washington order includea single butterfat differential for adjusting order prices for variationsin butterfat content, payment to producers on the basis of a uniform pricefor all production rather than a base-excess plan, and determination ofhandler obligations to the marketwide pool on an equalization basis (thedifference between the use value of producer receipts and the value ofthose receipts at the uniform price).The merger is needed to reflect changes in market structure in that thetwo separately regulated areas have become, in effect, one common market.Cooperative associations will be polled to determine whether producersfavor the issuance of the merged order.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Constance M. Brenner, MarketingSpecialist, USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968,South Building, P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-7183.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This administrative action is governedby the provisions of Sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291.The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires the Agency toexamine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to 5U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The amended order will promotemore orderly marketing of milk by producers and regulated handlers.Prior documents in this proceeding;Notice of Hearing: Issued October 26, 1987; published October 29, 1987(52 FR 41566).Recommended Decision: Issued September 7, 1988; published September 19,1988 (53 FR 36291).<ITAG tagnum="74">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>A public hearing was held upon proposed amendments to the marketing agreementsand the orders regulating the handling of milk in the Oregon-Washingtonand Puget Sound-Inland marketing areas. The hearing was held, pursuantto the provisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937,as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicable rules of practice (7CFR Part 900), at Portland, Oregon on November 17-18, 1987. Notice of suchhearing was issued on October 26, 1987 and published October 29, 1987 (52FR 41566).Upon the basis of the evidence introduced at the hearing and the recordthereof, the Administrator, AMS, on September 7, 1988, filed with the HearingClerk, United States Department of Agriculture, his recommended decisioncontaining notice of the opportunity to file written exceptions thereto.The material issues, findings and conclusions, rulings, and general findingsof the recommended decision are hereby approved and adopted and are setforth in full herein, subject to the following modifications:1. Under the heading ``6. Classification of milk.'', one paragraph is addedat the end.2. Under the heading ``7. Class prices, location adjustments and butterfatdifferential.'', two paragraphs are added after paragraph 9.3. Under the heading ``8. Handler obligations to the pool.'', one paragraphis added after paragraph 4.4. Under the heading ``9. Payments to producers.'', one paragraph is addedat the end.The material issues on the record of the hearing relate to:1. Whether the handling of milk produced for sale in the proposed mergedand expanded marketing area is in the current of interstate commerce ordirectly burdens, obstructs, or affects interstate commerce in milk orits products; 2. Whether the marketing areas of the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inlandorders should be included under one order;3. Whether the proposed merged marketing area should be expanded to includeadditional territory;4. Milk to be priced and pooled;5. Handler reports;6. Classification of milk;7. Class prices, location adjustments and butterfat differential;8. Handler obligations to the pool;9. Payments to producers;10. Administrative provisions.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof:1. <T3>Character of commerce. </T3>The handling of milk in the proposed andexpanded marketing area is in the current of interstate commerce and directlyburdens, obstructs and affects interstate commerce in milk and milk products.The marketing area specified in the proposed order, hereinafter referredto as the ``Pacific Northwest marketing area'', includes 72 contiguouscounties, of which 37 are in the State of Washington, 29 in Oregon andsix in Idaho. The principal cities in the marketing area are Eugene andPortland, Oregon; and Seattle and Spokane, Washington. The specific territoryincluded in the marketing area is set forth in the marketing area discussion.Handlers located in the Oregon-Washington area have route sales in Oregonand Washington, while handlers regulated under the Puget Sound-Inland orderdistribute milk in the States of Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington.Handlers located in the States of California, Idaho, Montana, Oregon andWashington distribute milk within the proposed marketing area.Similarly, milk procurement for the proposed merged area crosses stateboundaries. Handlers regulated by the Puget Sound-Inland order procuremilk from producers located in Idaho, Oregon and Washington. The milk neededto supply Oregon-Washington distributing plants is procured from California,Idaho, Oregon and Washington.There are numerous manufacturing plants located within the proposed marketingarea that manufacture dairy products. These products are sold in California,Oregon, Washington and other states in competition with manufactured productsproduced in many other states.2. <T3>Need for merger of the orders. </T3>Marketing conditions in the twoseparately regulated marketing areas under consideration justify the issuanceof a single order regulating the handling of milk in these areas. Thissingle order would be the most appropriate means of effectuating the declaredpolicy of the Act.Federal regulation of milk marketing in northwestern Washington State wasinitiated May 1, 1951, when the Puget Sound order became effective. Themarketing area was later amended in December 1952 and July 1966 to includeIsland and San Juan Counties and most of the remaining portions of GraysHarbor, King, Lewis, Skagit, Snohomish and Whatcom Counties. Milk marketingin northeastern Washington State and northern Idaho came under Federalregulation March 1, 1956, when the Inland Empire order became effective.The Inland Empire marketing area was later amended in October 1957 andin March 1962 to add the Idaho Counties in Benewah, Boundary, Latah andShoshone and the remaining unregulated portions of Bonner and KootenaiCounties; and Whitman County, Washington. The Puget Sound and Inland Empiremarketing areas were merged to become the Puget Sound-Inland order effectiveJanuary 1, 1984. The Washington Counties of Adams, Chelan, Douglas, Ferry,Grant, Kittitas, Lincoln and Okanogan, and the remaining unregulated portionsof Pend Oreille and Stevens Counties, were included in the merged PugetSound-Inland order in addition to the already regulated areas. Milk marketing in western Oregon and southwestern Washington became federallyregulated under the Oregon-Washington order on January 1, 1970. The marketingarea of the Oregon-Washington order has not changed since it became effective.The merger of the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland orders was proposedby six cooperative associations representing dairy farmer members whosemilk is pooled under the two orders. The merger proponents represent asubstantial majority of the producers whose milk would be pooled underthe merged order.The principal proponent witness, a representative of Northwest Dairymen'sAssociation (NDA) stated that the merged order is needed because the proposedmarketing area is becoming one competitive market. He stated that NDA,which represents about 60 percent of the producers delivering milk to thetwo Federal order marketing areas, has producer members located in almostevery county in the proposed marketing area and supplies bulk milk to handlersoperating plants with distribution in all parts of the proposed marketingarea. The witness testified that the existence of two Federal orders inan area that has become one competitive marketing area has required NDAto alter the movement of member milk to plants in order to prevent inequitiesbetween the prices paid to NDA members supplying different markets. Healso stated that operating within the constraints of two separate orderssometimes causes difficulty and inefficiency in supplying the demands ofeach order market as those demands vary over time.The NDA witness concluded that a merger would increase the efficiency ofadministering marketing order regulations in the Pacific Northwest, andwould reduce the complexity of reports which must be filed by regulatedhandlers. No opposition to a merger of the two orders was expressed atthe hearing.The record indicates that the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inlandmarketing areas have become interrelated to such an extent that a mergeris the most appropriate means of regulating milk marketing in the areainvolved. When the two orders were promulgated, they regulated the handlingof milk in areas that were clearly distinguishable as separate marketsfor particular handlers and producer groups. Changes in marketing practiceand market structure since that time, however, have caused these separatelyregulated areas to become substantially interrelated in both distributionand supply arrangements.In September 1987, a majority of the pooled handlers regulated under thePuget Sound-Inland milk order distributed fluid milk products within theOregon-Washington marketing area. At the same time, 20 percent of Oregon-Washingtonpooled handlers distributed milk within the Puget Sound-Inland order. Thefact that one-third of the handlers regulated under the two orders distributemilk in competition with handlers regulated under the other order is anindication of the degree of interrelationship that has developed betweenthe two markets. A merger of the two marketing areas under one order willassure that fully regulated handers competing with each other are subjectto the same regulatory provisions and aligned prices.NDA markets the milk of producers located throughout the proposed mergedmarketing area, and Darigold, Inc., NDA's marketing agent, distributesfluid milk products throughout the proposed area from its five bottlingplants that are currently pooled under the two orders. Many of NDA's memberproducers are located in production areas from which the milk producedon neighboring farms is delivered to pool plant regulated under the twodifferent Federal orders. The differing provisions of the two orders preventthe cooperative from easily being able to shift the milk of a producerfrom a plant pooled under one order to a plant regulated by the other order,even when such a shift would be the most efficient means of moving milkto where it is needed. The Oregon-Washington order's base-excess plan isone such provision that prevents an easy interchange of producer milk betweenthe two orders. The milk of baseholding producers cannot be pooled underthe Puget Sound-Inland order without those producers losing the benefitof their earned bases. At the same time, producers previously pooled underthe Puget Sound-Inland order have not earned Oregon-Washington productionbases and thus would receive less for their milk if it were pooled underthe Oregon-Washington order. Because of this feature of regulation by thetwo separate orders, it is not practicable for a handler such as NDA tohaul the milk of some neighboring producers in the same loads.An occasional need to deliver the milk of producers customarily pooledunder one order to a plant location normally priced under the other orderis another situation in which the existence of the two interconnected orderscauses marketing problems for handlers. Problems arise because of the differinglocation adjustments under the two orders. Milk produced in the YakimaValley and customarily pooled under the Oregon-Washington order that issurplus to the market's fluid needs is usually hauled to Chehalis, Washington,where there is no location adjustment under the Oregon-Washington order.If the Chehalis facility is already operating at capacity, however, themilk must be moved to manufacturing plants at Issaquah or Lynden, Washington,where the Oregon-Washington location adjustments are minus 25.5 and 40.5cents, respectively. If the same milk from Yakima Valley were pooled underthe Puget Sound-Inland order at Issaquah or Lynden, however, it would besubject to location adjustments of zero or minus six cents.The differences in Class I and producer prices under the two orders atthe same location is also a factor that causes marketing difficulties forDarigold, and for any other handler attempting to market milk under bothorders in an efficient manner. Specifically, larger amounts of the milksurplus to the fluid needs of each order area are delivered to a Darigoldmanufacturing plant in Chehalis, Washington. Chehalis is located in theproduction area of both Federal order markets, and is approximately equidistantfrom Portland, Oregon, and Seattle, Washington. The Puget Sound-Inlandlocation adjustment at Chehalis is a minus six cents, while there is noprice adjustment at Chehalis under the Oregon-Washington order. Becauseof the 10-cent difference between the two orders' Class I prices, the ClassI price difference at Chehalis is actually 16 cents.However, because the milk received at Chehalis is used for manufacturedproducts rather than for Class I use, the difference in producer pay pricesbetween the two orders at the same location is the primary cause of inequityat Chehalis. The price difference between the two orders extends to producerpayments because the orders' minimum uniform prices are subject to thesame location adjustments as are the Class I prices.Although the difference in Class I prices as Chehalis is 16 cents, thedifference in order prices due to producers for milk delivered to Chehalisunder the Puget Sound-Inland and Oregon-Washington orders is normally less,but nevertheless significant. During 1986 and the months of 1987 precedingthe hearing, the Oregon-Washington uniform price to producers exceededthe Puget Sound-Inland uniform price by an average of 6.7 cents, with thedifference ranging from two to 13 cents. When the six-cent location adjustmentunder the Puget Sound-Inland order is taken into account, prices paid tosimilarly located producers for milk delivered to Chehalis under the twoorders differed by an average of 12.7 cents per hundredweight, and by asmuch as 19 cents. The location adjustment differences at the same locationunder the two orders, therefore, result in a significant difference inreturns to producers whose milk is delivered to the same location.For the reasons described above, a merger of the Oregon-Washington andPuget Sound orders will represent the most effective means of achievingefficient and orderly handling and marketing of milk in the Pacific Northwest.The merger will permit the minimizing of hauling expenses by allowing surplusmilk supplies to be better matched to the nearest plant location withoutconsideration of the regulatory effects of the two orders. Similarly locatedhandlers and producers will be subject to more equitable pooling provisionsunder a single order than under the two separate orders. Accordingly, themerger should be adopted.3. <T3>Merged and expanded marketing area.</T3> The marketing area of theproposed merged order should include all of the territory in the presentlydesignated marketing areas of the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inlandorders. Certain additional territory adjacent to the two present marketingareas also should be part of the merged marketing area. The additionalterritory to be included are the entire Washington counties of Asotin,Columbia, Garfield, Kitsap and Mason, and the portion of Pierce Countythat is currently unregulated; and the Oregon counties of Crook, Lake andWheeler. All territory within the boundaries of the designated marketingarea which is occupied by government (municipal, State or Federal) reservations,installations, institutions or other establishments, likewise should bepart of the marketing area. Where such an establishment is partly withinand partly without such territory, the entire establishment should be includedin the marketing area.The merged and expanded marketing area consists of 37 Washington Statecounties (omitting only Clallam and Jefferson), 29 western and centralOregon counties, and the same six northern Idaho counties that are includedin the present Puget Sound-Inland marketing are. The total population ofthe merged and expanded marketing area, according to the 1980 census, wasapproximately 6,738,000 people, or about 224,000 more people than the twoseparate order areas contain. The territory proposed to be added to themerged order, therefore, increases the population of the merged marketingarea by less than four percent over that of the separate marketing areas.Data obtained from 1986 population estimates of the proposed merged areagive approximately the same results.The territory to be added to the merged marketing area was proposed forinclusion by Darigold. Proponent witness states that no additional handlerswould become regulated as a result of adding the proposed areas to themerged marketing area. He also testified that all of the route distributionin the areas to be added is by handlers regulated under one or both ofthe two orders proposed to be merged. The witness stated that incorporatingthe proposed additional area into the merged order would eliminate muchof the recordkeeping currently required of handlers to report out-of-areasales, and would improve the efficiency of order administration by reducingthe complexity of handlers' exports.On the basis of the evidence received and in view of the fact that therewas no opposition to the addition of the proposed territory to the marketingarea or contradiction of proponent's characterization of the counties proposedto be added as supplied with fluid milk products entirely by handlers currentlyregulated under the two existing orders, the marketing area of the mergedorders should be defined as proposed.4. <T3>Milk to be priced and pooled.</T3> It is necessary to designate clearlywhat milk and which persons would be subject to the merged order. Thisis accomplished by providing definitions to describe the persons, plantsand milk to which the applicable provisions of the order relate.The following definitions included in the proposed order will serve toidentify the specific types of milk and milk products to be subject toregulation and the persons and facilities involved with the handling ofsuch milk and milk products. Definitions relating to handling and facilitiesare ``route disposition,'' ``plant,'' ``distributing plant,'' ``supplyplant,'' ``pool plant'' and ``nonpool plant''. Definitions of persons include``handler,'' ``producer-handler,'' ``cooperative reserve supply unit,''``producer'' and ``cooperative association.'' Definitions relating to milkand milk products include ``producer milk,'' ``other source milk,'' ``fluidmilk product,'' ``fluid cream product'' and ``filled milk.'' Some of thesedefinitions were of particular issue at the hearing or are substantiallydifferent than those presently contained in either the Oregon-Washingtonor Puget Sound-Inland orders. Such definitions are discussed below.<T3>Plant.</T3> The definition of a ``plant'' included in the proposedmerged order should be adopted as proposed. However, due to some contradictorytestimony in the hearing record, some clarification is needed. Milk maybe considered a receipt for accounting and pricing purposes only at a ``plant'',and may not be considered a receipt for either purpose at a reload pointat which bulk milk is transferred from one tank truck to another.<T3>Pool plant.</T3> It is necessary to establish minimum performance requirementsto distinguish between plants that serve the fluid milk needs of the regulatedmarket and those that do not serve the market to a degree that warrantstheir sharing in the Class I utilization of the market by being includedin the marketwide pool. The pooling standards for distributing plants andsupply plants that are included in the attached order are the most appropriatemeans of determining which plants should be eligible to share in the marketwidepool under the marketing conditions present in the merged marketing area.The pool plant definition of the merged order should be based on thosecontained in the two present orders. Because the pool status of handlersthat customarily have been pooled under the two separate orders shouldnot be altered by the provisions of the merged order, the pooling standardsadopted for the merged order should reflect the more liberal of the poolingstandards contained in the separate orders.The proposed pool distributing plant definition, based on the definitionin the Puget Sound-Inland order, should be adopted with some modification.The proposed pool supply plant definition, based on the definition in theOregon-Washington order, also should be incorporated in the merged orderin a modified form. The proposed definition of a cooperative supply plantshould not be adopted. A provision allowing the Director of the Dairy Divisionto revise temporarily the pooling standards for distributing and supplyplants should be included in the merged order.The Darigold witness testified that the percentage of receipts disposedof as route dispositions within the marketing area required for pool statusunder the present Puget Sound-Inland Federal order would be an appropriatestandard for determining pool qualifications under the proposed mergedorder. He stated that the Oregon-Washington order's separate requirementthat a minimum of 30 percent of a handler's total receipts be distributedon routes is probably not necessary for the merged order, as most of theout-of-area sales by handlers currently regulated under the two separateorders are within the marketing area of the other order. Therefore, heconcluded, handlers regulated under the merged order should have a relativelysmall volume of route dispositions outside the marketing area, and shouldbe subject only to a requirement that 10 percent of their receipts be distributedon routes within the marketing area. The witness also advocated adoptionof a provision of the present Oregon-Washington order that allows a handleroperating more than one distributing plant to have those plants consideredon a combined basis for the purpose of meeting pooling qualifications.The Darigold witness supported adoption of the same supply plant poolingrequirements currently in effect under the Oregon-Washington order. Heurged that the pool supply plant definition continue as part of the mergedorder so that organizations currently operating nonpool plants that receivesubstantial quantities of Grade A milk by diversion from handlers or cooperativeassociations may qualify as pool supply plants if they so desire. The percentageof receipts proposed to be required of pool supply plants as shipmentsto pool distributing plants is the same as that contained in the presentOregon-Washington order. During the months of September through November,a pool supply plant would have to ship to pool distributing plants or distributeon routes in the marketing area at least 40 percent of the producer milkphysically received at the plant or diverted directly from producers' farmsto another plant. The applicable percentage for other months would be 30percent. Direct shipments of producer milk could be counted for qualificationonly to the extent they do not exceed transfers of bulk milk from the supplyplant.The witness explained that at present, there is only one pool supply plantregulated under the Oregon-Washington order, and none under the Puget Sound-Inlandorder. The witness pointed out that at times in the past more than onesupply plant has been regulated under the Oregon-Washington order, andthat the possibility that there may be other supply plants in the futurewould justify inclusion of a provision that would allow two or more supplyplant operators to have their plants' pool qualifications determined ona combined basis. Such a provision, he explained, is included in the presentOregon-Washington order. In addition to the definition for a pool distributing plant and a poolsupply plant, the Darigold representative supported adoption of a provisiondefining a ``cooperative supply plant'' as a pool plant. The witness explainedthat cooperative associations generally provide services to the marketwhich are not provided by proprietary plants, such as operating a plantthat separates milk and provides skim milk to pool distributing plantsas required. He stated that because of seasonal variations in demand forbulk skim milk, a cooperative association operating such a plant may findit difficult to meet the necessary volume of milk shipments required tomeet pooling qualifications. For this reason, the witness advocated definingas a pool plant a cooperative association plant that ships at least 30percent of its receipts of producer milk to pool distributing plants byany combination of direct shipments (from farm to plant) and transfersfrom the supply plant to distributing plants. The Darigold witness also supported adoption of a provision not currentlycontained in either order that would allow the Director of the Dairy Divisionto make temporary adjustments in the performance standards for the poolingqualification of distributing plants, supply plants, and cooperative supplyplants. The witness stated that such a provision would give the order flexibilityin dealing with sudden or marked increases or decreases in supply, demand,or both, without necessitating emergency hearings to amend the poolingstandards. A spokesman for Tillamook County Creamery Association (TCCA) testifiedthat modifications to the proposed ``cooperative supply plant'' definitionwould be necessary if the provision is to meet TCCA's needs and currentoperations. He proposed limiting the months during which such a supplyplant would be required to meet the proposed order's 30-percent shippingrequirement to the months of September through February, and adding a provisionthat would allow a ``cooperative supply plant'' that met the order's shippingrequirements for those months to be pooled for the months of March throughAugust without having to meet required shipping percentages. The witnessstated that such modifications are necessary to assure the continued poolingof TCCA members' milk without requiring uneconomic and inefficient handlingsolely for the purpose of maintaining the producers' association with thepool. He observed that TCCA would have failed to qualify for pooling underthe proposed standards in three summer months of each of the past two years,and barely would have met the standards in three additional months duringthat period. According to the witness, a lower percentage of shipping requirementis also necessary to accommodate the pooling of the rapidly increasingvolume of milk produced by TCCA members. The witness testified that TCCAcurrently is pooled under the existing pool supply plant definition ofthe Oregon-Washington order, and suggested that the proposed ``cooperativepool supply plant'' definition would better accommodate TCCA's operationsif it were modified to more closely resemble the order's present pool supplyplant definition. A witness representing Olympia Cheese Company, a proprietary cheese plant,testified that the small cooperative associations that supply milk to OlympiaCheese are facing increased difficulties in meeting the order's requirementsfor pooling their members' milk. The witness stated that if the OlympiaCheese operation, which is currently a nonpool plant, were able to qualifyas a pool supply plant by separating milk and supplying skim milk to distributingplants, the cooperative associations supplying milk to the cheese plantwould be assured of the pool status of their members' milk, and OlympiaCheese would be assured of a continued supply of milk. For Olympia Cheeseto achieve pool supply plant status, the witness suggested, the proposedpool supply plant definition should be modified to require only 30 percentof a supply plant's receipts year-round to be shipped to pool distributingplants. He stated that such a modification would eliminate what he characterizedas the proposed definition's discrimination against proprietary supplyplants and in favor of cooperative-owned supply plants. The proposed pool distributing plant definition should be adopted withonly minor modification. Although the proposed percentage of receipts usedin route disposition, in total and within the marketing area, (10 percent)is quite low for the purpose of defining a plant primarily engaged in theprocessing and distributing of fluid milk, the proposed percentage apparentlyis necessary to ensure the continued pool status of a plant that historicallyhas been pooled under the Puget Sound-Inland order. An exhibit in the hearingrecord indicates that during at least one month of the 17 months precedingthe hearing, the distributing plant in question exceeded the 10-percentrequirement by only one percentage point. According to the exhibit, allof the other distributing plants pooled under the two orders during thefour months covered in the exhibit disposed of at least 40 percent of theirreceipts as fluid milk products on routes. Although the proposed standardof route dispositions as a percentage of receipts may not be high enoughto avoid pooling plants that are not primarily distributing plants, thatlevel has existed in the Puget Sound-Inland order for some time and therewas no testimony that would support increasing it. Because the total percentage of receipts required to be disposed of onroutes to assure pool status is to be set at such a minimal level, thereis no reason to incorporate in the merged order the provision of the presentOregon-Washington order that allows a handler operating two or more distributingplants to have their operations considered on a combined basis for thepurpose of meeting pooling standards. The Oregon-Washington order requiresa pool distributing plant to distribute at least 30 percent of its receiptsas route dispositions. Under such a requirement, it is possible that ahandler who would find it more economical to concentrate milk by-productprocessing in one of its distributing plants could still justify havingsuch a plant pooled on the basis of the combined receipts and route dispositionsfrom two or more distributing plants. It would be difficult, however, toconsider any plant that distributes less than 10 percent of its receiptson routes as qualifying as a distributing plant regardless of the extentof fluid milk dispositions from any of its operator's other plants. The two proposed pool supply plant definitions should be combined intoone. According to the hearing record, the only plant that either of thetwo proposed definitions would apply to at the present time is the TCCAplant. Adoption of the ``cooperative supply plant'' definition would resultin the TCCA plant being pooled under that definition only when it failedto meet the shipping standards of the regular ``pool supply plant'' definition.Such changes in regulation are needlessly confusing. The TCCA witness testifiedthat certain modifications of the proposed ``cooperative supply plant''definition would assure the continued pooling of the TCCA supply plant.Application of the suggested modifications and certain features of theproposed ``cooperative supply plant'' definition to the regular ``poolsupply plant'' definition would eliminate the need for a second ``supplyplant'' definition. It would also allow the order to avoid establishingdiffering pool standards for cooperative and proprietary pool plants.The pool supply plant definition should establish a year-round shippingstandard of 30 percent, rather than a higher standard for certain fallmonths. This standard would allow TCCA to maintain the pool status of itsmembers' milk and would accommodate the increasing volume of producer milkhandled by the association. In addition, a cooperative's member producermilk which is delivered directly to pool distributing plants should beincluded as qualifying shipments without any limit on the quantity whichmay be so included. Such shipments represent as great a commitment by acooperative to supplying the market's fluid milk needs as do transfersfrom a supply plant. One of the principal distinctions between the proposed``supply plant'' and ``cooperative supply plant'' definitions is that the``supply plant'' definition limits the amount of direct-shipped milk thatmay be included in a supply plant's qualifying shipments to the amountof milk transferred from the supply plant to pool distributing plants.Maintaining such a limit serves no real purpose under either definition,and therefore should not constitute a reason to define a special categoryof pool supply plants.The inclusion of a supply plant's route dispositions of fluid milk productswithin the marketing area as a qualifying shipment should be continuedunder the merged order, as should the provision enabling a supply plantthat qualified for pooling during the months of September through Februaryto continue to be pooled in each of the following months of March throughAugust. These are provisions that have been included in the Oregon-Washingtonorder and apparently are necessary to maintain the pool status of the TCCAsupply plant and TCCA's member producers.The proposed provision that would allow the Director of the Dairy Divisionto revise pool plant performance standards temporarily if such revisionis found to be appropriate should be adopted. Such a provision will givethe merged order needed flexibility to deal with fluctuations in supplyand demand. Without such a provision, the only possible adjustments torapidly changing marketing conditions are suspensions, which leave an orderwith no pooling standards at all, or amendatory proceedings, which do notallow timely action. Allowing the Director the discretion to temporarilyadjust pooling standards, with appropriate input from the industry, isa means by which timely reaction to changed marketing conditions may beachieved.Under the paragraph in the ``pool plant'' definition that describes plantsthat are not to be considered pool plant is a description of a ``portionof a plant that is physically separated from the Grade A portion of suchplant, is operated separately, and is not approved by any regulatory agencyfor the receiving, processing, or packaging of any fluid milk productsfor Grade A disposition.'' In his testimony, the principal Darigold witnessadvocated that such a portion of a plant be allowed to be connected bypipeline to the Grade A or pooled portion of the plant for the purposeof easily moving surplus milk and cream from the pool plant to the nonpoolplant. Such an arrangement may make it difficult to assure that milk ismoving through the pipeline only in the amounts and direction reportedby the handler. If milk is to be allowed to move by pipeline from a poolplant to a nonpool plant located on the same premises, each individualarrangement must meet with the market administrator's approval by complyingwith specific guidelines developed by the market administrator. Only underfairly close scrutiny can it be assured that a pipeline arrangement froma pool plant to a nonpool plant is operated in conformity with the order.<T3>Handler. </T3>The impact of regulation under an order is primarilyon handlers. The handler definition identifies persons who will have responsibilityfor filing reports and/or making payments for milk under the merged order.The handler definition proposed by proponents should be adopted. As hereinprovided, the following persons are defined as handlers under the order:(1) The operator of one or more pool plants;(2) A cooperative association with respect to the milk of producers thatit causes to be picked up at the farms and delivered to a pool plant unlessthe cooperative and the pool plant operator agree that the pool plant operatorwill be the handler on such milk, or diverted for the cooperative's accountto a nonpool plant;(3) The operator of an other order plant from which milk is disposed ofin the marketing area;(4) A producer-handler;(5) The operator of a partially regulated distributing plant;(6) The operator of an unregulated supply plant; and(7) The operator of an exempt plant.All such persons are now defined as handlers under the Puget Sound-Inlandorder, and most are so defined under the present Oregon-Washington order.Each person that may incur an obligation (reporting and/or financial) underthe order should be designated a handler. This will assure that all informationnecessary to determine their regulatory status under the order can be readilydetermined by the market administrator.Proponent witness testified that the proposed definition is essentiallythe same as those contained in the separate orders and is intended to servethe same purpose. Specifically, the definition is identical to the onecontained in the present Puget Sound-Inland order. Adoption of the handlerdefinition described above should help to assure orderly marketing in themerged marketing area.A proposal to adopt a ``cooperative reseve supply unit'' should be adopted,but not as part of the handler definition. The ``cooperative reserve supplyunit'' is discussed below.<T3>Producer-handler. </T3>The merged order should continue the exemptionnow contained in each of the two individual orders of a ``producer-handler''from the pooling and pricing provisions of the order. Under the mergedorder, the definition of a producer-handler should be the same as thatnow contained in the Puget Sound-Inland order. Proponent witness stated that retaining the provision of the present PugetSound-Inland order that requires a producer-handler to distribute a dailyaverage of at least 300 pounds of fluid milk products on routes will eliminatefrom producer-handler status 5 of the operations that currently have producer-handlerstatus under the Oregon-Washington order. The witness for proponents observed that the percentages of Class I dispositionby producer-handlers in the Puget Sound-Inland and Oregon-Washington marketingareas are, respectively, the highest and third highest of any Federal ordersin the United States. He cited such activity as evidence that the producer-handlerprovisions in these orders are not unduly restrictive. The witness statedthat any relaxation of the present and proposed provisions would provideproducer-handlers an additional unfair advantage in their competition withregulated handlers for the sale of fluid milk products on routes in themarketing area. In addition to testimony about the provisions proposed for the actual producer-handlerdefinition, proponent witness testified that the proposed order shouldinclude a provision of the present Oregon-Washington order that directsthat fluid milk producers received or acquired for disposition by a pooledhandler from a producer-handler be allocated to the extent possible firstto Class III, then to Class II, and finally to Class I use. The witnessstated that the provision had been incorporated into the Oregon-Washingtonorder at its promulgation in response to a situation in which a handlerwished to receive unlimited quantities of packaged products from a producer-handlerat a location outside the handler's plant without accounting to the poolfor such receipts. A primary basis for exempting a producer-handler from the pricing and poolingprovisions of the order is that such a person customarily has a relativelysmall operation and is operating in a self-sufficient manner. The milkthat is processed, packaged and distributed by a producer-handler is obtainedfrom the producer-handler's own production. Any fluctuation in a producer-handler'sdaily and seasonal milk needs is met through his own farm production, andany excess milk supplier are disposed of at his own expense. Under thisarrangement, a producer-handler seldom can be a major competitive factorin the market for regulated handlers, nor can such a person have a preferredmarket for his milk relative to producers who supply the regulated handlersand share in the proceeds of the marketwide pool. If a producer-handler processes milk from his own farm but also relieson pool plants for substantial supplies, either in bulk or packaged form,his operations are not significantly different than the operations conductedby a pool handler. Since his operation is not fully regulated, the pooldoes not receive the benefits of the producer-handler's Class I sales.At the same time, the other producers in the market are bearing the costof balancing his operation by carrying such operator's necessary reservemilk supplies. Such an operator should not have producer-handler statusunder the merged order, but should be accorded pool status similar to thatof any other handler receiving milk directly from dairy farms. There was no opposition to adoption of the producer-handler definitionas proposed. In view of the fact that producer-handlers supply a significantshare of the fluid milk dispositions in the marketing area, and yet arenot subject to the same pricing and pooling provisions of the order asare regulated handlers, it is appropriate to require producer-handlersto rely almost totally on their own milk production to balance their fluidsales and to find outlets for their surplus production outside the fluidmarket. Only in this way can there be any reasonable assurance that theirexemption would not have an adverse impact on the market. Therefore, as adopted herein, a producer-handler would be allowed, withinthe limitations on supplemental purchases, to purchase fluid milk productsin bulk or packaged form. This change would not undermine the concept ofself-sufficiency, but rather would provide a producer-handler with theflexibility to purchase supplemental fluid milk products in the form thatfits his needs. It is appropriate to include handlers who produce and distributeless than 300 pounds of milk per day in the order's ``exempt plant'' definition.Such handlers represent far too small a share of the total market for fluidmilk production to justify the same degree of administrative attentionnecessary to assure that larger producer-handlers operate within the parametersof the producer-handler definition adopted herein. The provision of the Oregon-Washington order directing that products acquiredfrom a producer-handler for sale by a regulated handler be reported asreceipts and allocated first to Class III, then to Class II, and finallyto the handler's Class I use, should be included in the merged order. Adoptionof this provision also requires that any such receipts allocated to ClassI will be subject to a compensatory payment to the producer-settlementfund at a rate determined by the difference between the Class I and ClassIII prices. Without such a provision, a producer-handler would be able to find a fluidoutlet for any of its milk production that might exceed demand for itsfluid milk products sold through customary channels. In addition, regulatedhandlers associated with retail outlets would have access to unregulatedand potenially lower-cost supplies of fluid milk products, giving thema competitive advantage over other pooled handlers who must pay the order'sClass I price for fluid milk products disposed of on routes.<T3>Cooperative reserve supply unit. </T3>A proposal to include in themerged order a ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' should be adopted. Sucha provision will assure the continued pooling of the milk of coooperativeassociation members having an historical relationship with the market.In order to qualify as a reserve supply unit, a cooperative associationmust have been a handler of producer milk under the merged order or oneof its two predecessor orders for at least the immediately preceding twelvemonths. In addition, a cooperative reserve supply unit must supply milkto pool distributing plants located within 125 miles of the majority ofits producers as directed by the market administrator when the market administratorhas determined that such shipments are necessary to assure consumers anadequate supply of fluid milk products. The ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' provision was proposed on behalfof two cooperative associations whose members' milk is pooled under theOregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland orders. A witness representingone of the cooperatives, Northwest Independent Milk Producers Association(NWI), testified that the production of NWI members represents approximately1 percent of the milk pooled under the two Northwest orders. He statedthat NWI historically has marketed 25-30 percent of its members' productionto a pool distributing plant, with the balance diverted to a nonpool cheeseplant, and asserted the cooperative's willingness to continue to supplythe fluid market. However, the witness testified, NWI's sole pool distributingplant customer signed a full-supply agreement with Darigold in October1986 for necessary shipments of milk to supplement the plant's nonmembermilk supply. He stated that he contracted and met with out the pool plantoperators in the marketing area in an unsuccessful attempt to arrange foralternative pool outlets for the cooperative's milk. The witness describedNWI's position as a participant in the marketwide pool as vulnerable, althoughthe cooperative's pool plant customer has continued to receive enough ofNWI's production to assure the pool status of the cooperative's members.He urged adoption of the ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' provisionas a means of correcting the potential inequity of being excluded fromthe marketwide pool. The witness stated that failure to qualify the cooperative'smember producers' milk for pooling would result in their receiving 65 to70 cents per hundredweight less for their milk than pooled producers receive.The NWI witness recommended that the ``call area'' from which the marketadministrator could require milk to be shipped by cooperative reserve supplyunits from members' farms to pool distributing plants be defined as 100miles. He stated that this would represent a reasonable distance over whichmilk supplies needed for fluid use might be required to be shipped. Thewitness observed that adequate supplies of milk for fluid use are producedwithin 100 miles of both Portland and Seattle, and that expanding a ``callarea'' much beyond 100 miles would result in inefficient and prohibitivelyexpensive hauling. The witness representing Darigold and NDA testified that those organizationswould have no objection to a ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' provisionas long as certain safeguards are included so that producers not actuallyassociated with the market would not be eligible to participate in themarketwide pool. The Darigold representative proposed that a ``cooperativereserve supply unit'' be required to have qualified for pool status forthe 24 consecutive months immediately preceding its reserve supply unitstatus, and that the headquarters and all of the producer members of theassociation should be located within the marketing area. The witness basedthe need for such modifications on the possibility that producer groupshaving no real historical supply relationship with the market might otherwiseattempt to be pooled under the provision.The provision defining a ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' should beincluded in the merged order to assure the continued pooling of the milkof producers historically associated with the market. The provision willprotect the member producers of marketing cooperatives who have been associatedwith the market over a significant period of time and have demonstratedtheir willingness and ability to supply milk to the fluid market from losingtheir association with the pool as a result of forces beyond their control.The order's requirement that such an association supply milk to pool distributingplants as specified by the market administrator in order to retain poolstatus will assure that the milk supplies of a ``cooperative reserve supplyunit'' would be made available for fluid use whenever needed by the market.The specific order language proposed by proponent should be modified tobetter reflect the role that a cooperative reserve supply unit would playin the merged order. It is not necessary to define such an entity as a``handler'' since the only means it has of marketing its members' milkis by moving it to either pool plants or nonpool plants. Both of thosepossible movements, when directed by a cooperative, are already includedin the handler definition. Therefore, a ``cooperative reserve supply unit''has been defined in a separate section, and an exemption from the constraintsof diversion limits has been included in the ``producer milk'' definition.In addition, the concept of a ``call area'' to determine the area containingthe producers whose milk is required to be shipped and the pool distributingplants to which the milk is to be shipped is not appropriate in the contextof this provision. The area encompassing the locations of producers' farmsis likely to be more difficult to delineate than the supply plants fromwhich milk supplies are ``called'' under similar provisions in other orders.The market administrator has the information necessary to determine whetherthe members of any ``cooperative reserve supply units'' are within a reasonabledistance of pool distributing plants in need of milk supplies and, if so,how much milk should be shipped. The testimony dealing with the distanceover which such shipments should be required indicated that some producersin Whatcom County, Washington, are more than 100 miles from Seattle, thenearest likely market for their milk. Therefore, a reserve supply unitshould not be ``called'' upon for milk needed at locations more than 125miles from the majority of its producers. It would not be reasonable tocompel such a unit to move milk several hundred miles if there is an adequatesupply nearer to the area experiencing a shortage. It also would not bereasonable to require shipments from a cooperative reserve supply unitat a percentage level of its supply that exceeds the percentage of milksupplied to pool distributing plants by other pooled handlers.Another change needed in the proposed definition is in the penalty forfailure of a unit to comply with any announced shipping requirements. Thepenalty proposed by proponent, that loss of reserve supply unit statuswould preclude the unit from qualifying for such status for a period ofone year, leaves unclear the status of the cooperative for the next yearand the steps that must be taken for such a unit to regain ``cooperativereserve supply unit'' status. Instead of the proposed language, the mergedorder should require a cooperative that loses reserve supply unit statusto meet the order's pooling requirements for 12 consecutive months beforeagain becoming eligible for ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' status.Darigold's proposed modification to the provision, that a cooperative reservesupply unit be required to meet the order's pooling standards for its producers'milk for 24 consecutive months, is not necessary and should not be adopted.A handler whose producers have been pooled for 12 consecutive months hasdemonstrated a considerable association with the fluid milk market. Extendingthe period to 24 months would serve no useful purpose beyond delaying fora year a handler's ability to pool milk under the ``cooperative reservesupply unit'' provision. Darigold's argument that a handler can obtaina 12-month milk supply contract to meet the order's delivery requirementsis not sufficient to require a 24-month association with the market. Theorder cannot erect unreasonable barriers to the entry of producers or producergroups that are not currently included in the marketwide pool.Another proposed modification, that the headquarters and all of the membersof a reserve supply unit be located within the marketing area, is not areasonable restriction. The market statistics clearly show that milk productionfor the two orders is not normally limited to the marketing areas of theorders. Production from counties on the Olympic Peninsula and from othercounties near the boundaries of the present marketing areas is currentlypooled under both of the present orders. There is no basis on which tolimit the membership of cooperatives operating reserve supply units tothe marketing area when other cooperatives are not so limited. However,because a reserve supply unit will be required to ship milk only to pooldistributing plants located within 125 miles of the majority of its producers,only those units having a majority of their member producers located within125 miles of a pool distributing plant should qualify for reserve supplyunit status.Changes in other order provisions that will accommodate the pooling ofmilk handled by a ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' should be made wherenecessary.<T3>Producer milk. </T3>For the most part, the producer milk definitionshould be very similar to the one proposed by proponents, which is thesame as the current Puget Sound-Inland definition, and similar to the presentOregon-Washington definition. However, some changes in the producer milkdefinition of the merged order will be necessary to accommodate the continuedpooling of the milk currently pooled under the two orders, and to conformwith other features of the merged order. As in the case of pool provisionsfor handlers, the pool status of producers that customarily have been pooledunder the two separate orders should not be altered by the provisions ofthe merged order. Therefore, the pooling standards adopted for producersand producer milk under the merged order should reflect the more liberalof the pooling standards contained in the separate orders.Adoption of the ``cooperative reserve supply unit'' provision will necessitateomission of references to ``diversion from'' particular kinds of plants.By definition, milk pooled by a reserve supply unit will have no attachmentto any particular pool plant, and therefore cannot be considered as being``diverted from'' a pool plant. Milk delivered directly to manufacturingplants can be considered to be ``diverted from'' the fluid market ratherthan from a pool distributing plant or a pool supply plant. This changein the terminology relating to diverted milk will result in non-substantivechanges in the wording of some of the paragraphs of the ``producer milk''definition. Additionally, it will require that the proposed distinctionbetween the percentages of allowable diversions from pool distributingplants and pool supply plants be omitted.The language requiring different levels of allowable diversions from pooldistributing and pool supply plants is contained in the present Puget Sound-Inlandorder. The only supply plant expected to be pooled under the merged orderis operated by Tillamook County Creamery Association. The plant is currentlya supply plant under the Oregon-Washington order, which applies the samediversion limits to all producer milk, regardless of the type of pool plantfrom which it is diverted.The limits on diversions of producer milk proposed for the merged orderare taken from the Puget Sound-Inland order, and are slightly more liberalthan those in the present Oregon-Washington order. Allowances for the movementof producer milk direct from producers' farms to nonpool plants enablehandlers to move milk more economically and efficiently than if all producermilk were required to be received first at pool plants. The proposed 80-percentlimit on diversions of producer milk during the months of September throughApril, with no limit during May through August, will permit handlers thesame degree of flexibility and efficiency in handling milk that they nowenjoy under the Puget Sound-Inland order.Also as proposed by proponents, the merged order should contain no restrictionson the amount of an individual producer's milk that may be diverted tononpool plants (commonly referred to as ``touch-base'' requirements). Proponentwitness testified that a large portion of the milk pooled under the PugetSound-Inland order is produced in Whatcom County, Washington, located 110-120miles from Seattle and from most of the order's pool plants. Accordingto the witness, most of the Whatcom County milk is delivered directly toa nearby manufacturing plant. The Darigold witness stated that milk producedin such locations, much closer to manufacturing outlets than to any poolplants, should not be required to be delivered to a pool plant simply todemonstrate an association with the market.The present Puget Sound-Inland order has no requirement that any particularpercentage or amount of each producer's milk be received at pool plants,and there is no basis in the record of this proceeding on which more demandingdelivery requirements could be adopted. Therefore, in accordance with theapproach of adopting the more liberal pooling requirements of the two presentorders, the merged order should contain no ``touch-base'' requirement.5. <T3>Handler reports. </T3>Reports required to be submitted by handlersshould be the same as those currently required under the Puget Sound-Inlandorder, and similar to those proposed by proponents. Exempt plants and unregulatedsupply plants should not be required to report in the same detail as pooledhandlers are required to do. Instead, any requirements of such handlersto file reports would be at the discretion of the market administrator.The adopted requirements for handler reports, payroll reports and otherreports are identical to those currently contained in the Puget Sound-Inlandorder and very similar to those of the present Oregon-Washington order.Proponenet failed to establish sufficient reason for requiring exempt andunregulated supply plants to be subject to the same reporting requirementsas regulated handlers. There was no testimony that any current difficultiesexist in evaluating the status of such plants. Therefore, such handlersshould be required to file no more reports, nor in any greater detail,than prescribed by the market administrator.6. <T3>Classification of milk. </T3>The merged order should use essentiallythe same uniform classification plan that is commonly provided in mostother Federal milk orders. However, the plan should be modified in severalrespects to conform to local market conditions. Basically, the plan adoptedherein provides, as is the case under the individual orders, for the classificationof milk according to use, including rules for determining the classificationof milk moved from one plant to another and the classification of shrinkage.The plan also sets forth a procedure for allocating a handler's receiptsof milk and milk products from various sources to his utilization in eachclass in order to determine the classification of producer milk.Under the classification plan here adopted, Class I milk would includeall skim milk and butterfat disposed of in the form of milk, skim milk,lowfat milk, milk drinks, buttermilk, filled milk, milkshakes and ice milkmixes containing less than 20 percent total solids and mixtures of creamand milk or skim milk containing less than 15 percent butterfat. Skim milkand butterfat disposesd of in any such product that is flavored, cultured,modified with added nonfat milk solids, concentrated (if in a consumer-typepackage), or reconstituted likewise should be classified as Class I milk.Such classification should apply whether the products are disposed of influid or frozen form. Skim milk disposed of in any product described above that is modified bythe addition of nonfat milk solids should be Class I milk only to the extentof the weight of the skim milk in an equal volume of an unmodified productof the same nature and butterfat content. The remaining volume of the product,which represents the skim milk equivalent of added nonfat milk solids,would be classified as Class III.Each product designated herein as a Class I product would be considereda ``fluid milk product'' as defined in the order. In addition to thesefluid milk products, Class I milk would include any skim milk and butterfatnot specifically accounted for in Class II or III, other than shrinkagepermitted as Class III classification.Class III milk should include products which are make from surplus GradeA milk and which compete in a national market with similar products madefrom manufacturing grade milk. These products include cheese (other thancottage cheese, lowfat cottage cheese, and dry curd cottage cheese), butter,any milk product in dry form (such as nonfat dry milk), any concentratedmilk product in bulk, fluid form that is used to produce a Class III product,and evaporated or condensed milk (plain or sweetened) in a consumer-typepackage. Additionally, Class III milk should include any product not specifiedin Class I or Class II. An intermediate class, Class II, should apply to certain products whichcan command a higher value than Class III products but which must be competitivelypriced below Class I in order to compete with non-dairy substitute productsor manufactured dairy products that can be used in making Class II products.Class II milk should include skim milk and butterfat disposed of in theform of a ``fluid cream product,'' eggnog, yogurt, and any product containing6 percent or more nonmilk fat (or oil) that resembles one of these products.As defined in the order, ``fluid cream product'' means cream (other thanplastic cream or frozen cream), sour cream, or a mixture (including a culturedmixture) of cream and milk or skim milk containing 15 percent or more butterfat,with or without the addition of other ingredients. Class II milk would also include bulk fluid milk products and bulk creamproducts disposed of to any commercial food processing establishment atwhich food products (other than milk products and filled milk) are processedand from which there is no disposition of fluid milk products or fluidcream products other than those received in consumer-type packages. Inaddition, it would include milk used to produce cottage cheese, lowfatcottage cheese, dry curd cottage cheese, milkshake and ice milk mixes containing20 percent or more total solids, frozen desserts, frozen dessert mixes,milk or milk products sterilized and packaged in hermetically sealed metalor glass containers, and certain other products as specified in the order.The classification plan adopted herein was proposed by the merger proponentand embraces the basic features of the uniform classification plan containedin many other Federal orders. This plan was developed from exhaustive hearingsheld on the broad issue of classification in 1971 for 39 markets. A fulldiscussion and appropriate order language on the uniform classificationplan is contained in a final decision issued February 19, 1974 (34 FR 8202,8452, 8712, 9012). This decision was duly noted on the record of this proceeding.Proponent testified that this classification system, with certain minorrevisions, would be fully appropriate for the merged order and would comportwith the need for greater uniformity among those essential provisions ofmarketing orders that should be uniform. The minor revisions to the uniform classification plan applicable to mostorders, which were proposed by the merger proponent and adopted herein,concern the classification of certain fluid cream products and ending inventoriesof packaged fluid milk products. Under the adopted classification plan,any mixtures of cream and milk or skim milk containing less than 15 percentbutterfat would continue to be Class I. Such products are Class II underthe 39-market uniform classification plan. Although inventories of fluidmilk products in packaged form on hand at the end of the month are includedin Class III in most other Federal orders, they should be classified inClass I under the merged order. Such inventories in bulk form, however,should be classified in Class III. This procedure for handling fluid milkproduct inventories is identical with that provided under both the presentPuget Sound-Inland and Oregon-Washington orders. Such revisions to the 39-market uniform classification plan that are hereinadopted make allowance for the provisions under which Northwest handlersare accustomed to operating. On the basis of the hearing record, thereis no reason to change the classification of cream and milk mixtures containingless than 15 percent butterfat (half-and-half) from Class I to Class II.Proponent witness supported retaining such products in Class I on the basisthat they are customarily used in coffee as a beverage and as an alternativeto whole milk for many purposes. The witness explained that the limit onthe butterfat content of fluid milk products should be reduced from 18percent to 15 percent in order to eliminate any possibility of sour creambeing classified as a fluid milk product instead of a fluid cream product.A brief filed on behalf of Carnation Company, a proprietary handler operatingthree pool distributing plants in the proposed merged marketing area, proposedlowering the limit on butterfat content of fluid milk products from thecurrent level of 18 percent to 9 percent. The handler supported such achange by stating that half-and-half and related by-products are classifiedin Class II by Federal orders in surrounding states, and that such productsare moving greater distances than before from processing plants throughgrocery chain warehouse deliveries. The Carnation brief also advocatedClass II classification for ``biscuit mix'', a skim milk formula with addedstabilizer, salt and biscuit flour. The handler observed that such a producthas been classified as Class II in the Ohio Valley Federal order. Although the uniform classification plan does classify a milk and creammixture containing 9 percent or more butterfat in Class II, there is noevidence that the proposed merged order should do so. The only Federalorder in a state adjoining the proposed marketing area is the SouthwestIdaho-Eastern Oregon order. The nearest distributing plant in that marketis in Boise, Idaho, located nearly 400 miles from distributing plants inSpokane, Washington, and over 400 miles from distributing plants in Eugeneor Portland, Oregon. Although milk products such as half-and-half may bemoving greater distances than before, there is no testimony or data inthe hearing record that would support a conclusion that handlers in theproposed merged marketing area are competing for sales of half-and-halfwith handlers from other areas who are subject to a lower price. Similarly,there is nothing in the hearing record that would support a Class II classificationfor ``biscuit mix''. At the hearing, proponents' principal witness testified that certain disversionprovisions in each of the two orders should not be included in the mergedorder. The merged order proposed by proponents would omit the Oregon-Washingtonorder provision allowing pooled handlers to divert milk from producers'farms to other pool plants at Class III use if so requested by both handlers.The witness suggested that the Puget Sound-Inland order provision allowingproducer milk to be diverted to a commercial food processor located inPacific County, Washington, and classified as Class II not be includedin the merged order because the commercial food processor affected by theprovision has moved its operation to Seattle and no longer receives divertedproducer milk. The ability of handlers to divert milk from producers' farms to other poolplants and to commercial food processing plants should be retained in themerged order, with diversions between pool plants accommodated in all threeclasses of use. Direct shipments of producer milk are the most efficientand economical means of moving milk from farms to the plants in which itultimately will be used. Such efficiencies should not be prohibited byorder provisions. Although the food processing plant that previously receivedsuch shipments apparently has ceased to do so, such a means of disposingefficiently of producer milk surplus to the fluid needs of the market shouldcontinue to be available to other milk handlers and commercial food processors.The order should continue to assure that the records of a commercial foodprocessing plant receiving Class II milk by transfers or diversions fromregulated handlers will be available to the market administrator for auditand verification purposes.Two changes in the order language included with the recommended decisionhave been made in the order language accompanying this decision to reflectaccommodation of producer milk diversions to pool, as well as to nonpool,plants.7. <T3>Class prices, location adjustments and butterfat differential. </T3>TheClass I price for the merged Pacific Northwest market should be the basicformula price for the second preceding month plus a Class I differentialof $1.90. This price should apply to plants located within zones establishedto approximate distances of 90 miles from Spokane and Seattle, Washington;and Eugene and Portland, Oregon. For the purpose of applying location adjustments,the marketing area should be divided into four pricing zones. Zone 1, whichwould be the base zone and would have no price adjustment, should includenorthern Idaho and most of eastern Washington; western Washington, exceptfor the counties of Clallam, Jefferson, San Juan and Whatcom; and westernOregon north of, and including, Douglas County. Zone 2, with a locationadjustment of minus 6 cents, should consist of Whatcom County, Washington.Zone 3 would have a location adjustment of minus 8 cents, and would includethree southern Oregon counties. Zone 4 would have a minus 15-cent locationadjustment, and would include the Idaho counties of Lewis and Nez Perce,twelve central and northeastern Oregon counties, fourteen central and southeasternWashington counties, and three northwestern Washington counties. The ClassII and Class III prices to be effective under the merged order should beadopted as proposed.The location adjustment for each zone, the resulting Class I differential(shown parenthetically), and the territory that should be included in eachzone are as follows:<ITAG tagnum="44">Zone 1_No Adjustment ($1.90)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">Idaho Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="43">Benewah</ITAG><P>Bonner</P><P>Boundary</P><P>Kootenai</P><P>Latah</P><P>Shoshone</P><ITAG tagnum="44">Oregon Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="43">Benton</ITAG><P>Clackamas</P><P>Clatsop</P><P>Columbia</P><P>Douglas</P><P>Hood River</P><P>Lane</P><P>Lincoln</P><P>Linn</P><P>Marion</P><P>Multnomah</P><P>Polk</P><P>Tillamook</P><P>Washington</P><P>Yamhill</P><ITAG tagnum="44">Washington Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="43">Clark</ITAG><P>Cowlitz</P><P>Ferry</P><P>Grays Harbor</P><P>Island</P><P>King</P><P>Kitsap</P><P>Lewis</P><P>Lincoln</P><P>Mason</P><P>Pacific</P><P>Pend Oreille</P><P>Pierce</P><P>Skagit</P><P>Snohomish</P><P>Skamania</P><P>Spokane</P><P>Stevens</P><P>Thurston</P><P>Wahkiakum</P><P>Whitman</P><ITAG tagnum="44">Zone 2_Minus 6 cents ($1.84)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">Whatcom County, Washington</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">Zone 3_Minus 8 cents ($1.82)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">Oregon Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="43">Coos</ITAG><P>Jackson</P><P>Josephine</P><ITAG tagnum="44">Zone 4_Minus 15 cents ($1.75)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">Idaho Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Lewis</ITAG><P>Nez Perce</P><ITAG tagnum="44">Oregon Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="43">Crook</ITAG><P>Deschutes</P><P>Gilliam</P><P>Jefferson</P><P>Klamath</P><P>Lake</P><P>Morrow</P><P>Sherman</P><P>Umatilla</P><P>Wallowa</P><P>Wasco</P><P>Wheeler</P><ITAG tagnum="44">Washington Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="43">Adams</ITAG><P>Asotin</P><P>Benton</P><P>Chelan</P><P>Clallam</P><P>Columbia</P><P>Douglas</P><P>Franklin</P><P>Garfield</P><P>Grant</P><P>Jefferson</P><P>Kittitas</P><P>Klickitat</P><P>Okanogan</P><P>San Juan</P><P>Walla Walla</P><P>Yakima</P>At plant locations outside the zones specified above, the Class I priceand the uniform price to producers should be reduced by 1.5 cents for each10 miles that the plant is from the nearer of the county courthouse inSpokane, Washinton; the Multnomah County Courthouse in Portland, Oregon;or the city hall in Eugene, Oregon.The single butterfat differential currently in use under the Puget Sound-Inlandorder should be adopted for the merged order, rather than the provisionsof the Oregon-Washington order under which the price of milk used by handlersin Class I is adjusted by a different butterfat differential than the priceof milk used in Classes II and III.<T3>Class I price. </T3>The Class I price differentials effective at theprimary population centers of the merged marketing area should be changedto $1.90. Currently, the Class I price differential at Portland, Oregon,and Spokane, Washington, is $1.95, while the corresponding differentialat Seattle, Washington, is $1.85.  The Darigold witness testified that adequate supplies of milk are producedwithin short distances of each of the Pacific Northwest cities in whichpopulation and distributing plants are concentrated. He also observed thatpackaged Class I milk products move freely between the population centerswithout being impeded by the price differences. The witness stated thatthe proposed reduction in the Class I price level at Portland and Spokanewould more than offset the effect of the proposed increase at Seattle onprices to producers.  A producer from the Spokane area opposed the proposed 5-cent reductionof the Class I differential at Spokane. Instead, he suggested, the differentialshould be increased to $2.00. The witness expressed his concern that theproposed 5-cent increase in the Class I differential at Seattle would causedairy farmers to move their operations to the Seattle area for the benefitsof a higher Class I price and lower hauling costs. He also stated thatthe proposed change would cost him 5 cents per hundredweight.  Adoption of the $1.90 Class I differential for all of the marketing area'spopulation centers will bring the prices for fluid milk at those locationsinto line without significantly changing total returns to producers. Inview of the volume of milk supplies produced in the vicinity of all themarket's population centers, there is no reason to maintain a higher pricelevel at some of the metropolitan areas than at others. The hearing recordprovides no support for the Spokane-area producer's concerns about a reductionin his returns for milk or a migration of dairy farmers from eastern WashingtonState to the Seattle area. The effect of the decrease in the Class I differentialat Spokane and Portland will be largely offset by the increase in the ClassI differential at Seattle. As a result, little change in the uniform pricepaid to producers should be attributable to the changes in Class I differentials.As a result of the merger of the two orders, however, the uniform pricepaid to producers currently pooled under the Puget Sound-Inland order shouldincrease by several cents. Such an increase would result from the relativelyhigher percentage of milk used in Class I in the Oregon-Washington market. As for the possibility of eastern Washington producers moving to the Seattlearea because of the increase in the Class I price there, in combinationwith lower hauling rates, such a shift in production area is unlikely.For one thing, producers in both parts of the marketing area will be receivingthe same uniform price, regardless of the class in which their milk isused. For another, the Washington area that appears to be experiencingmarked increases in milk production is Yakima County. Milk received atplants located in central Washington is subject to significant locationadjustments under both of the two separate orders, reducing prices to producersby 15 or 20 cents below the uniform price. Milk produced in Yakima Countythat is surplus to the fluid milk needs of central Washington handlersmust be hauled over 150 miles to the nearest plants in Spokane, Portlandor the Seattle area, at substantial hauling costs to producers. In spiteof these advantages in price and hauling cost, Yakima County appears tobe one of the fastest-growing areas of milk production in the merged marketingarea. It is apparent that there are factors beyond the local Class I differentialand effective hauling rates that influence milk production trends in anygiven area.  Proponents originally proposed that the Commodity Credit Corporation allowancefor manufacturing butter and powder (currently $1.22) be used in the computationof the Class III price under the merged order instead of the 48-cent manufacturingallowance provided for in the two separate orders. At the hearing, proponentswithdrew that proposed change, and stated that they wished to use the formulacurrently used in the two separate orders. Modification of the proposalwas not discussed in the recommended decision, nor was the change incorporatedinto the order language accompanying the decision. Two of the merger proponentsand Northwest Independent Milk Producers Association filed exceptions toadoption of the Class III price computation as originally proposed, notingcorrectly that failure to adopt the language as modified at the hearingmust be the result of an error.  The Class III price computation in the merged order should reflect themodification proposed at the hearing by proponents. If adopted as originallyproposed, the Class III price under the merged order could fall as muchas 74 cents below the current Class III price level, depending on the marginby which the Minnesota-Wisconsin, or basic formula, price exceeds the butter-powdersnubber price computed with the use of the designated manufacturing allowance.Such a price reduction would significantly reduce the blend prices to bepaid to producers, and would give Pacific Northwest manufacturing plantoperators a significant advantage in competing for sales of butter, cheeseand nonfat dry milk with manufacturing operations elsewhere in the UnitedStates. Therefore, the Class III price computation procedure under themerged order should be changed from that contained in the recommended decisionto the procedure followed in the two individual orders.  <T3>Location adjustments. </T3>A system of establishing location adjustmentsby the zone in which a plant is located is appropriate for the merged order,since location pricing under the separate orders is determined largelyby zones. The amounts of most of the proposed adjustments are also appropriate,and should be adopted. The Darigold witness testified that location adjustmentsshould be reduced at all locations in the marketing area that are subjectto adjustments to the Class I and uniform prices. He supported proponents'proposal that location adjustments be reduced from 10 cents to 8 centsin southern Oregon; from 18 and 20 cents to 15 cents in central Oregon;and from 20 cents under the Oregon-Washington order to 15 cents in centralWashington. The 15-cent adjustment of this latter area, however, wouldmean a 5-cent greater adjustment than now exsits under the Puget Sound-Inlandorder. The witness also supported the elimination of location adjustmentsat locations between Seattle and Portland, and the reduction of the present6-cent adjustment at locations in Whatcom County, Washington, to 3 cents. The Darigold witness based his support of a reduction in the adjustmentsto be made in Class I and uniform prices on two principal arguments. First,he stated, location adjustments to producer prices under the Oregon-Washingtonorder have been applied only to the amount of each producer's base production,and not to producers' total production. With the elimination of the base-excessplan, he said, location adjustments will be applied to the unform pricefor all of each producer's milk, and will have a greater impact on producerreturns.      <ITAG tagnum="54">According to the witness, another reason for reducing the amountsof location adjustments is to ``modernize'' the merged order. He citedrecent Federal order decisions in which location adjustments were reduced,eliminated or not adopted as evidence of such a trend.</ITAG>Opposition to the proposal to reduce the location adjustment at Darigold'sLynden, Washington, manufacturing plant in Whatcom County from 6 to 3 centswas expressed in two briefs received by the Department. Both NorthwestIndependent Milk Producers Association and Carnation Company protestedthat the current 6-cent location adjustment rate is too low when comparedto the cost of handling milk from Whatcom County to Seattle. The handlersstated that Darigold's ability to charge its producers a very low haulingrate because of their proximity to Darigold's manufacturing plant makesit very difficult for other handlers to procure milk supplies in that areafor the Seattle fluid milk market. The handlers argued that the locationadjustment for Whatcom County should, if changed at all, be increased tomore closely reflect the actual cost of hauling milk from Whatcom Countyto Seattle.The location adjustments in most parts of the marketing area should bechanged as proposed. Most of the locations affected by such price adjustmentsobtain milk supplies from producers currently pooled under the Oregon-Washingtonorder. The location adjustments deducted from the prices paid for theseproducers' milk are calculated on the basis of the producers' base production.According to the Darigold witness, base production under the Oregon-Washingtonbase-excess plan generally represents about 80 percent of producers' totalproduction. Under the proposed merged order, each producer's entire productionwill be subject to the full price adjustment at the location of the plantat which it is received. Accordingly, a slight (approximately 20 percent)reduction in the location adjustment rates at those locations will resultin a minimal impact on producer returns when considered with the eliminationof the base-excess plan.The proposed changes in location adjustments at locations in the Oregon-Washingtonmarketing area should have little or no effect on the handlers at thoselocations. Most of the southern and central Oregon and central Washingtonhandlers have, according to the Darigold witness, more than adequate suppliesof milk available nearby and no nearby competition for producer milk suppliesfrom manufacturing plants. The handlers in these areas are located at greatenough distance from each other and from handlers in the zero locationadjustment zone that changes of 2 to 5 cents in location adjustment ratesshould not affect their competitive relationships with other distributingplants.The location adjustments effective at locations between Portland and Seattleunder the two separate orders should be eliminated. Areas within 90 milesof Eugene, Portland, Seattle and Spokane should be free of location adjustments.The record indicates that ample milk supplies for the market's populationcenters are available within 90 miles of those centers. The distance betweenPortland and Seattle is less than 180 miles, so any plant located betweenthe two cities must be less than 90 miles from either Portland or Seattle.Location adjustments for the northern Olympic Peninsula and San Juan County,Washington, should be reduced by 1 cent, from 16 cents to 15 cents, asproposed. It appears that there are no pool plants in this area to whichlocation adjustments could be applied. Therefore, the 1-cent change isunlikely to make any real difference.Proponents' arguments for reducing the present 6-cent location adjustmentat locations in Whatcom County, Washington, are less persuasive. The locationadjustment should not be reduced. One reason given for such a reductionwas that the nearby manufacturing plant in Lynden provides an outlet formilk surplus to the market's fluid needs, while location adjustments arestill needed at locations in southern and central Oregon and central Washingtonprecisely because no nearby manufacturing plants exist to provide an outletfor surplus milk produced in those areas. In fact, the situation thus describedby the Darigold witness should result in a greater location adjustmentfor Whatcom County than, for instance, Jackson County, Oregon. The receiptof milk at a manufacturing plant located in an area of heavy milk productionat some distance from the market's center is the classic situation to whichlocation adjustments were designed to apply. Prices paid for such milkare adjusted downward for location to compensate for the fact that themilk has not had to be hauled to distant bottling plants but instead hasbeen shipped a relatively short distance at a significantly lower haulingcost.Another reason advanced by the Darigold witness for a reduction in thelocation adjustment rate at Whatcom County was the need to ``modernize''the order. According to the witness, reduction and elimination of locationadjustments in Federal orders generally has become a trend that shouldbe followed in the merged order. The witness cited 3 relatively recentdecisions relating to the Southwestern Idaho-Eastern Oregon, Eastern Ohio-WesternPennsylvania and Greater Kansas City orders in which location adjustmentshad been, respectively, not adopted, eliminated and reduced.None of the reasons given in the cited decisions for the actions takenare relevant to marketing conditions in the Pacific Northwest. The SouthwesternIdaho-Eastern Oregon decision found that no location adjustments were necessaryfor that marketing area because all of the distributing plants that wereexpected to be regulated by the order were located in counties in whichenough milk was produced to satisfy the local distributing plant's demandfor fluid milk. Also, the distributing plants were found to be distributedthroughout the marketing area, not concentrated in one or two large populationcenters.In the Eastern Ohio-Western Pennsylvania decision, location adjustmentsat locations in the marketing area were eliminated because most of thedistributing plants had moved out of the population centers nearer to theproduction areas, leaving the leading population centers as no longer significantfluid milk processing centers. The decision reiterated the traditionalrationale for location adjustments, but determined that the conditionsfor which location adjustments were designed no longer existed in the EasternOhio-Western Pennsylvania marketing area.The Greater Kansas City decision referred to by proponent expanded theorder's location adjustment-free area to assure that prices at a pool supplyplant located south of Kansas City and closer to a higher-priced orderwould not be subject to a negative adjustment. The decision was part ofa 6-market proceeding held to consider location adjustment changes forthe purpose of assuring inter-market price alignment after Class I priceswere legislatively amended in many Federal orders. In the six orders affectedby the decision, location adjustments were increased in 3, reduced in 1,and unchanged in 2.The decisions cited by the Darigold witness address marketing conditionsthat differ markedly from those in the proposed merged marketing area.However, the witness failed to cite decisions affecting the New Englandand New York-New Jersey orders in which location adjustments were increasedto reflect increases in hauling costs. These markets, with manufacturingplants located in the heavy production areas distant from most distributingplant locations, are more comparable to the situation of Whatcom County.Such increases, that update location adjustments to correspond to the significantincreases in hauling costs that have been experienced since most locationadjustment provisions were written, are actually the only means of ``modernizing''location adjustments. It is very possible that it would be appropriateto ``modernize,'' or increase, the location adjustment at Whatcom County,as urged by Northwest Independent Milk Producers Association and CarnationCompany. However, there is inadequate data and testimony in the recordof this proceeding to determine an appropriate change in the level of locationadjustment for Whatcom County. Therefore, there should be no change inthe present 6-cent adjustment.<T3>Butterfat differential.</T3> The merged order should provide for asingle butterfat differential for adjusting order prices to the butterfatcontent of the milk being priced. The differential should be the Chicago92-score butter price for the month multiplied by a factor of 0.115, roundedto the nearest 0.1 cent. Such differential should be announced on the fifthday after the end of the month to which it applies.This differential is now used under the present Puget Sound-Inland order.However, the Oregon-Washington order provides for three separate butterfatdifferentials. The Class I butterfat differential for handlers is determinedby multiplying the Chicago butter price for the preceding month by 0.12,while the handler Class II and III differentials are determined by multiplyingthe butter price for the current month by 0.115. The butterfat differentialapplicable in adjusting the uniform price to producers is the average ofthe Class I, Class II and Class III butterfat differentials weighted bythe proportion of buttefat in producer milk in each class.Presently, the Class I, Class II, and Class III differentials for the Oregon-Washingtonorder are announced on the fifth day of the month. The Class I differentialapplies to the month in which announced, while the Class II and Class IIIdifferentials apply to the preceding month. The producer butterfat differentialis announced on the 14th day of each month and applies to milk receivedduring the preceding month.The merger proponents proposed that all class prices and uniform pricesunder the merged order be subject to an adjustment by a butterfat differentialbased on the Chicago butter price times the factor of 0.115. No oppositionto the use of this single factor was presented at the hearing.As proposed and as herein adopted, using a single factor of 0.115 for computingclass butterfat differentials will change the relationship of Class I skimmilk and butterfat values of those handlers that are presently regulatedby the Oregon-Washington order. The impact of this change will increasesuch handlers' cost of skim milk since less value will be assigned to thebutterfat component of Class I milk. However, the absolute effect on ahandler's cost for Class I milk is dependent on the average test of hisClass I products.Nevertheless, adopting a lower Class I butterfat differential for the Oregon-Washingtonportion of the proposed merged marketing area gives recognition to thereduced demand and the related lower market value of butterfat in fluidmilk products in Class I. This lower value for Class I butterfat will bereflected in returns to producers which, in turn, should provide less incentiveto produce high-test milk that consumers do not want.8. <T3>Handler obligations to the pool.</T3> The value of producer milk tohandlers should continue to be determined on the basis of its use in thethree classes of utilization, and the prices associated with each class.As proposed by proponents, each handler's obligation to the producer-settlementfund should be determined by ``equalization'', as is currently the caseunder the Puget Sound-Inland order. In an ``equalization'' pool, a handlerpays to the producer-settlement fund the amount by which the handler'suse value of producer milk exceeds the value of the producer milk at theuniform price. If the value of the producer milk at the uniform price exceedsthe handler's use value, the handler receives the difference from the producer-settlementfund in order to pay the producers the uniform price. In this way, eachhandler pays the total use value of producer milk received and each handleris left with a sum great enough to pay all of the handler's producers fortheir milk at the uniform price.Under the Oregon-Washington order, handlers are required to pay the fullclass use value of their producer milk to the producer-settlement fund.The market administrator then pays nonmember producers, handlers, cooperativeassociations and the Oregon State Division of Milk Stabilization for themilk supplied by them or by the producers for whose milk they are responsiblefor paying. With the cessation of payments to the State of Oregon (seebelow), it is no longer necessary to require handlers to pay the full usevalue of their milk to the producer-settlement fund. Operation of the PacificNorthwest pool as an ``equalization'' pool will reduce the amount of moneypaid into and out of the producer-settlement fund, and should improve handlers'cash flow.<T3>Late payment charge.</T3> The merged order should include a late paymentcharge to be applied to handlers' payments to the producer-settlement fund,as a result of audit adjustments, and for administrative and marketingservice assessments that are received after the date such payments aredue under the order. The charge should be 1 percent of the amount due,and should be applied on the first day after the due date. The late paymentcharge should also be applied to any unpaid balance (including any previouslyunpaid overdue charges) on the due date for such obligation in each followingmonth.Proponent proposed the late payment charge on the basis that such a provisionhad been found necessary in the Oregon-Washington order to assure timelypayment of handlers' obligations to the producer-settlement fund and foradministrative and marketing service assessments. The Darigold witnesstestified that the late payment charge provision, as proposed, should bemodified to remove a requirement that late payment charges be assessedunder the order on late payments for milk purchased from cooperative associationplants by other handlers. He explained that agreements between cooperativesand their customers may enable cooperatives to impose such a charge outsidethe order.Some of the wording in paragraph (b) of the section on late payment chargesin the recommended decision order language appears to correspond to thatpart of the originally proposed section that proponents testified shouldnot be adopted. The requirement that ``All charges on overdue accountsshall be paid to the fund or to the person to whom the account was due. . .'' appears to be related to the original proposal that would haveinstructed the market administrator to apply such charges not only to accountsoverdue to the market administrator, but accounts overdue to cooperativeassociations and nonmember producers as well. The order language thereforeis changed to reflect the omission of such an application of late paymentcharges.Two briefs opposing adoption of a late payment charge were received. CarnationCompany, a proprietary handler operating distributing plants under bothof the two orders, objected to the imposition of a late payment chargein months when billings from cooperatives or the market administrator arriveafter the date payments are due. The Carnation brief stated that the companydoes accept billing information by telephone so that payments can be madeon time, but considers a late payment charge unreasonable unless the billingsarrive on time. Carnation also stated that the 1 percent charge for a paymentone day late is unreasonable. Olympia Cheese Company, a nonpool cheeseplant operator, also objected to adoption of a late payment charge forthe merged order. The brief filed by the handler stated that cooperativesand other handlers are able to charge late payment fees on overdue accountsoutside the Federal order. Olympia Cheese's brief also stated that theproposed provision would disrupt the operation of the order, goes beyondthe intent of the Act, and violates usury laws.The late payment charge, modified as suggested by the Darigold witness,is necessary to assure that payments to the funds maintained by the marketadministrator will be made promptly. Prompt payment is essential in orderfor the market administrator to make payments to handlers on the datesspecified in the order so that those handlers, in turn, may pay producersaccording to the timetable required by the order. Failure on the part ofa handler to meet the order's due dates unnecessarily delays payments toproducers and gives the late-paying handler a financial advantage overhandlers who comply with the order's payment dates. Allowing a period afterthe due date when no late payment charge would be imposed would only encouragehandlers to put off payment until the day before the charge is effective.A charge for late payments will enable the order to operate smoothly, andwill assure that producers will receive payment for their milk, some ofwhich was used by handlers over a month earlier, in a timely manner. Eliminationof the proposed provision subjecting handlers' late payments to cooperativeassociations for milk received from cooperatives' plants will enable themarket administrator to avoid unnecessary involvement in business dealingsbetween regulated handlers.A charge of one percent of the amount overdue should not be consideredexcessive. A lesser rate would constitute little deterrent to late payments.Furthermore, since handler obligations under the merged order will reflectonly their equalization value (the difference between the class use valueof the milk and its value at the uniform price), the amount of late paymentcharge imposed should not be unduly burdensome. The late payment chargeis not considered interest, and is not subject to usury laws. The latepayment charge assures that timely payment of a handlers' obligations tothe pool will represent the most economic use of the handler's financialresources.9. <T3>Payments to producers.</T3> Marketwide pooling of producer returnsshould be provided under the merged order as the basis of distributingamong producers the proceeds from the sale of their milk. This type ofpooling is now being used in each of the individual markets to be mergedand was the only alternative proposed or supported for use under the mergedorder.A single marketwide uniform price, adjusted for butterfat content and forlocation of the plant to which the milk is delivered, should be the basisof distributing total pool proceeds from producer milk in making paymentsto individual producers. Under this payment arrangement, each producerwould share equally in the higher-valued Class I milk of the market aswell as in the lower-valued Class II and Class III uses of milk. A singleuniform price to producers is now applicable under the Puget Sound-Inlandorder.The present Oregon-Washington order provides for a 12-month operating baseplan, which is another method of distributing the total proceeds from handlersto producers. This plan provides for producers to earn daily bases thatrepresent the producer's daily average production during the market's fourlowest months of production for the previous year. For deliveries withina producer's base, the producer receives a ``base'' price that includesa share of the value of the market's Class I sales. For marketings in excessof his base, the producer receives an ``excess'' price which is comparableto the lower manufacturing, or Class III, price. In addition to the ``base-excess''plan, the Oregon-Washington order includes authorization for the marketadministrator to pay pool proceeds to the Oregon State Milk Audit and StabilizationDivision at the base and excess values for producers and cooperative associationsparticipating in the ``Oregon Base Plan.''Proponents proposed that both the Oregon-Washington Federal order baseplan and provisions facilitating operation of the Oregon State Base Planbe omitted from the proposed order. The Darigold witness testified thatparticipation by Oregon-Washington producers in the Oregon Base Plan haddeclined from nearly 100 percent at the time the Oregon-Washington orderwas promulgated to approximately 18 percent at the time of the hearingin this proceeding. He stated further that the State of Oregon was expectedto discontinue operation of its base plan at the end of 1987. There wasno opposition, at the hearing or in briefs, to the omission of both theFederal order base plan and the Oregon base plan from the merged order.Because no support was expressed for retention of the Federal order baseplan or provisions facilitating operation of the Oregon State Base Planin the merged order, the provisions associated with those plans shouldnot be included.Adoption of the equalization method of pooling the value of producers'milk will necessitate adoption of the proposed procedure for paying producers.The Oregon-Washington order currently requires the market administratorto pay the full amounts due to producers directly to nonmember producers,cooperative associations, the Oregon State Department of Agriculture or,upon request, to the handler of nonmember producer milk. Such a paymentscheme would not be possible with an equalization system under which onlythe differences between the values of milk at class prices and at the uniformprice are paid to and from the producer-settlement fund. The market administratorwould not have the necessary funds to pay for all of the milk productionof individual producers. Therefore, the producer payment provisions ofthe present Puget Sound-Inland order should be adopted.In testimony, the Darigold witness proposed two corrections to the proposedorder language relating to payments to producers. He requested that thedate by which handlers are required to pay cooperative associations formilk received from cooperatives' plants be changed from the 17th to the15th day after the end of the month in which the milk is moved. The changeshould be adopted. Under the merged order, the cooperative association,as the handler of the milk, must account to the pool for such milk on the16th day after the end of the month. The cooperative should have accessto the money needed to pay for the milk before such payment is due to theproducer-settlement fund.The other proposed modification to the proposed order was to change a referencein the provision dealing with the application of location adjustments topayments for milk delivered by a cooperative association from producers'farms directly to the plant of another handler. The requested change wouldcause the provision to be applied instead to transfers from a cooperativeassociation's plant to another handler's plant. Application of locationadjustments to such milk movements are already covered in the order. Achange of the provision referred to would result in no location adjustmentbeing applied to a cooperative's milk received directly at another handler'splant. The proposed modification should not be adopted.One change from the payment provisions of the present Puget Sound-Inlandorder, and from the recommended decision, should be made for the reasonof consistency. Payments by handlers to cooperative associations are tobe made 2 days prior to the dates specified for payments to producers.In andSection; 1124.73(d)(2), final payment by handlers receiving milk forwhich a cooperative association is the handler under andSection; 1124.9(c)should be made on or before the 17th day after the end of the month, ratherthan the 18th as specified in the recommended decision. Such payment tocooperative associations on the 17th day would correspond to final paymentto producers on the 19th day after the end of the month.10. <T3>Administrative provisions_administrative assessment. </T3>The maximumrate of payments by handlers for the cost of administering the merged ordershould be 4 cents per hundredweight. Such payments are required if themarket administrator is to perform the necessary function of administeringthe merged order. The 4-cent per hundredweight rate is the same as underthe two separate orders, and was proposed at the hearing without objection.Continuation of the 4-cent rate should enable the market administratorto administer the merged order effectively. If experience indicates thatthe merged order can be administered at a lesser rate, the order providesthat the Secretary may adjust the rate downward without the necessity ofa hearing.<T3>Deduction for marketing services. </T3>The maximum rate of deductionfrom payments to nonmember producers for the cost of providing marketingservices such as butterfat testing and market information should be 5 centsper hundredweight. The marketing service deduction is necessary to reimbursethe market administrator for providing such services to producers to whomthe services are not provided by a cooperative association.Currently, the maximum rates under the separate orders are 6 cents underthe Oregon-Washington order, and 5 cents under the Puget Sound-Inland order.A 5-cent rate, which was proposed at the hearing without objection, shouldenable the market administrator to provide adequate testing and informationservices to nonmember producers. The marketing service deduction rate,like the administrative assessment, may be adjusted downward if the maximumrate is higher than necessary.<T3>Merger of the administrative expense, marketing service and producer-settlementfunds. </T3>To accomplish the merger of the two orders effectively andequitably, the reserves in the administrative expense funds that have accumulatedunder the individual orders should be combined. Similar procedures shouldbe followed with respect to the marketing service and producer-settlementfund reserves of the individual orders. Any liabilities of such funds underthe individual orders should be paid from the appropriate new funds establishedunder the merged order. Similarly, obligations that are due the severalfunds under the individual orders should be paid from the appropriate combinedfund under the merged order.The money paid to the administrative expense fund is each handler's proportionateshare of the cost of administering the order. It is anticipated that allhandlers currently regulated under the two orders will continue to be regulatedunder the merged order. In view of this, it would be an unnecessary administrativeand financial burden to allocate back to handlers the reserve funds underthe individual orders and then accumulate an adequate reserve for the mergedorder. It is equally equitable and more efficient to combine the administrativemonies accumulated under the individual orders and to pay any liabilitiesagainst such funds from the consolidated fund of the merged order.The money accumulated in the marketing service funds of the individualorders is that which has been paid by producers for whom the market administratoris performing services. The producers who have contributed to the marketingservice fund of each order are expected to continue to supply milk forthe merged Pacific Northwest market. The consolidation of the reservesin the individual marketing service funds is therefore appropriate in viewof the continuation of the marketing service program for these producersunder the merged order.The producer-settlement fund balances in the two orders should be combinedso that the producer-settlement fund under the merged order may be continuedwithout interruption. The producers currently supplying the individualmarkets are expected to continue to supply milk for the merged PacificNorthwest market. Thus, monies now in the producer-settlement funds ofthe individual orders would be reflected in the uniform prices of the producerswho will benefit from the merged order. The combined fund would also serveas a contingency fund from which money would be available to meet obligations[resulting from audit adjustments and otherwise] accruing under one orthe other of the separate funds.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings</ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland orderswere first issued and when they were amended. The previous findings anddeterminations are hereby ratified and confirmed, except where they mayconflict with those set forth herein.(a) The tentative marketing agreement and the Pacific Northwest order whichamends and merges the present Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inlandorders, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, will tend to effectuatethe declared policy of the Act;(b) The parity prices of milk as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the Pacific Northwest marketing area, and the minimumprices specified in the tentative marketing agreement and the Pacific Northwestorder are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors, insure a sufficientquantity of pure and wholesome milk, and be in the public interest;(c) The tentative marketing agreement and the Pacific Northwest order willregulate the handling of milk in the same manner as, and will be applicableonly to persons in the respective classes of industrial and commercialactivity specified in, marketing agreements upon which a hearing has beenheld;(d) All milk and milk products handled by handlers as defined in the tentativemarketing agreement and the merged Pacific Northwest order are in the currentof interstate commerce or directly burden, obstruct, or affect interstatecommerce in milk or its products; and(e) It is hereby found that the necessary expense of the market administratorfor the maintenance and functioning of such agency will require the paymentby each handler, as his prorata share of such expense, 4 cents per hundredweightor such lesser amount as the Secretary may prescribe with respect to milkspecified in andSection; 1124.85 of the tentative marketing agreement andthe Pacific Northwest order.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Exceptions</ITAG>In arriving at the findings and conclusions, and the regulatory provisionsof this decision, each of the exceptions received was carefully and fullyconsidered in conjunction with the record evidence. To the extent thatthe findings and conclusions and the regulatory provisions of this decisionare at variance with any of the exceptions, such exceptions are herebyoverruled for the reasons previously stated in this decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">Marketing Agreement and Order</ITAG>Annexed hereto and made a part hereof are two documents, a Marketing Agreementregulating the handling of milk, and an Order amending the order regulatingthe handling of milk in the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland marketingarea, which have been decided upon as the detailed and appropriate meansof effectuating the foregoing conclusions.It is hereby ordered that this entire decision and the two documents annexedhereto be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.<ITAG tagnum="84">Determination of Producer Approval and Representative Period </ITAG>September 1988 is hereby determined to be the representative period forthe purpose of ascertaining whether the issuance of the attached order,amending and merging the orders regulating the handling of milk in theOregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland marketing areas is approved orfavored by producers, as defined under the terms of the attached orderwho during such representative period were engaged in the production ofmilk for sale within the marketing area defined in such attached order.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Parts 1124 and 1125</ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on November 29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert Melland,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Deputy Secretary for Marketing and Inspection Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="85">Order Amending and Merging the Orders Regulating the Handling of Milkin the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland Marketing Areas</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(This order shall not become effective unless and until the requirementsof andSection; 900.14 of the rules of practice and procedure governing proceedingsto formulate marketing agreements and marketing orders have been met.)</ITAG>Findingsand DeterminationsThe findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the orders were first issued and when they were amended.The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,except where they may conflict with those set forth herein. (a) Findings. A public hearing was held upon certain proposed amendmentsto the tentative marketing agreements and to the orders regulating thehandling of milk in the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland marketingareas. The hearing was held pursuant to the provisions of the AgriculturalMarketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and theapplicable rules of practice and procedure (7 CFR Part 900).Upon the basis of the evidence introduced at such hearing and the recordthereof, it is found that:(1) The Pacific Northwest order, which amends and merges the Oregon-Washingtonand Puget Sound-Inland orders, and all of the terms and conditions thereof,will tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act;(2) The parity prices of milk, as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct, are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the Pacific Northwest marketing area; and the minimumprices specified in the Pacific Northwest order are such prices as willreflect the aforesaid factors, insure a sufficient quantity of pure andwholesome milk, and be in the public interest;(3) The Pacific Northwest order regulates the handling of milk in the samemanner as, and is applicable only to persons in the respective classesof industrial or commercial activity specified in, a marketing agreementupon which a hearing has been held;(4) All milk and milk products handled by handlers, as defined in the PacificNorthwest order, are in the current of interstate commerce or directlyburden, obstruct, or affect interstate commerce in milk or its products;and(5) It is hereby found that the necessary expense of the market administratorfor the maintenance and functioning of such agency will require the paymentby each handler, as his pro rata share of such expense, 4 cents per hundredweightor such lesser amount as the Secretary may prescribe, with respect to milkspecified in andSection; 1124.85.Order Relative to HandlingIt is therefore ordered that on and after the effective date hereof, thehandling of milk in the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland marketingareas (Parts 1124 and 1125, respectively) shall be amended and merged intoone order. Part 1125 is superseded thereby, and such vacated part designationshall be reserved for future assignment. The handling of milk in the mergedmarketing area, to be designated as the ``Pacific Northwest marketing area''(Part 1124), shall be in conformity to and in compliance with the termsand conditions of the orders, as amended, and as hereby amended and mergedas follows:The provisions of the proposed marketing agreement and order amending andmerging the Oregon-Washington and Puget Sound-Inland orders contained inthe recommended decision issued by the Administrator, AMS, on September7, 1988, and published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on September 19, 1988, (53 FR 36291), shall beand are the terms and provisions of this order, and are set forth in fullherein, subject to the following modifications:1. In andSection; 1124.9, paragraph (b) is revised. 2. In andSection; 1124.13, paragraph (c)(1) is revised. 3. In andSection; 1124.50, paragraph (c)(3) is revised. 4. In andSection; 1124.73, paragraph (d)(2) is revised. 5. In andSection; 1124.78, paragraph (b) is revised. Accordingly, 7 CFR Part 1125 is proposed to be removed and Part 1124 isproposed to be revised as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1125_[REMOVED] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 1124_MILK IN THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST MARKETING AREA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart_Order Regulating Handling </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">General Provisions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.1 General provisions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Definitions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.2 Pacific Northwest marketing area. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.3 Route disposition. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.4 Plant. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.5 Distributing plant. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.6 Supply plant. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.7 Pool plant. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.8 Nonpool plant. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.9 Handler. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.10 Producer-handler. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.11 Cooperative reserve supply unit. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.12 Producer. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.13 Producer milk. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.14 Other source milk. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.15 Fluid milk product. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.16 Fluid cream product. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.17 Filled milk. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.18 Cooperative association. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.19 Product prices. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Handler Reports </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.30 Reports of receipts and utilization. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.31 Payroll reports. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.32 Other reports. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Classification of Milk </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.40 Classes of utilization. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.41 Shrinkage. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.42 Classification of transfers and diversions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.43 General classification rules. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.44 Classification of producer milk. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.45 Market administrator's reports and announcements concerningclassification. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Class Prices </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.50 Class prices. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.51 Basic formula price. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.51a Basic Class II formula price. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.52 Plant location adjustments for handlers. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.53 Announcement of class prices. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.54 Equivalent price. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Uniform Price </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.60 Handler's value of milk for computing uniform price. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.61 Computation of uniform price. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.62 Announcement of uniform price and butterfat differential.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Payments for Milk </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.70 Producer-settlement fund. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.71 Payments to the producer-settlement fund. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.72 Payments from the producer-settlement fund. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.73 Payments to producers and to cooperative associations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.74 Butterfat differential. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.75 Plant location adjustments for producers and on nonpool milk.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.76 Payments by a handler operating a partially regulated distributingplant. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.77 Adjustment of accounts. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.78 Charges on overdue accounts. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Administrative Assessment and Marketing Service Deduction </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.85 Assessment for order administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1124.86 Deduction for marketing services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart_Order Regulating Handling </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">General Provisions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General provisions. </ITAG>The terms, definitions, and provisions in Part 1000 of this chapter arehereby referenced and made a part of this order.<ITAG tagnum="84">Definitions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Pacific Northwest marketing area. </ITAG>``Pacific Northwest Marketing Area'' (hereinafter called the ``MarketingArea'') means all territory geographically within the places listed belowincluding all territory fully or partly therein occupied by government(municipal, state or federal) reservations, facilities, installations,or institutions:Idaho Counties:Benewah, Bonner, Boundary, Kootenai, Latah, and Shoshone. Washington Counties:Adams, Asotin, Benton, Chelan, Clark, Columbia, Cowlitz, Douglas, Ferry,Franklin, Garfield, Grant, Grays Harbor, Island, King, Kitsap, Kittitas,Klickitat, Lewis, Lincoln, Mason, Okanogan, Pacific, Pend Oreille, Pierce,San Juan, Skagit, Skamania, Snohomish, Spokane, Stevens, Thurston, Wahkiakum,Walla Walla, Whatcom, Whitman and Yakima. Oregon Countries:Benton, Clackamas, Clatsop, Columbia, Coos, Crook, Deschutes, Douglas,Gilliam, Hood River, Jackson, Jefferson, Josephine, Klamath, Lake, Lane,Lincoln, Linn, Marion, Morrow, Multnomah, Polk, Sherman, Tillamook, Umatilla,Wasco, Washington, Wheeler, and Yamhill.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Route disposition. </ITAG>``Route disposition'' means any delivery of a fluid milk product classifiedas Class I milk from a plant to a retail or wholesale outlet (includingany delivery through a distribution point as provided by this section,by a vendor, from a plant store or through a vending machine). The term``route disposition'' does not include: (a) A delivery to a plant. However,packaged fluid milk products that are transferred to a pool distributingplant from another pool distributing plant, and classified as Class I underandSection; 1124.42(a), shall be considered route disposition from the transferor-plantfor the sole purpose of qualifying it as a pool distributing plant underandSection; 1124.7(a), and the transferor-plant shall be assigned in-areadispositions but not in excess of the in-area dispositions of the transfereeplant;(b) A delivery in bulk to a commerical food processing establishment pursuantto andSection; 1124.40(b)(3); or(c) A delivery to a military or other ocean transport vessel leaving themarketing area, of fluid milk products which originated at a plant locatedoutside the marketing area and were not received or processed at any poolplant.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plant.</ITAG>``Plant'' means the buildings, facilities and equipment, whether ownedor operated by one or more persons, constituting a single operating unitor establishment, which is maintained and operated primarily for the receiving,handling and/or processing of milk or milk products (including filled milk).Separate facilities used only as a distribution point for storing packagedfluid milk products in transit for route disposition or separate facilitiesused only as a reload point for transferring bulk milk from one tank truckto another shall not be a ``plant'' under this definition.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Distributing plant.</ITAG>``Distributing plant'' means a plant in which a fluid milk product approvedby a duly constituted regulatory agency for fluid consumption, or filledmilk, is processed or packaged and that has route disposition in the marketingarea during the month.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.6 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Supply plant.</ITAG>``Supply plant'' means a plant from which a fluid milk product approvedby a duly constituted regulatory agency for fluid consumption, or filledmilk, is transferred during the month to a pool distributing plant.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Pool plant.</ITAG>Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, ``pool plant'' means:(a) A distributing plant from which there is route disposition (exceptfilled milk) in the marketing area during the month equal to not less than10 percent of receipts of Grade A milk at such plant (exclusive of transfersof packaged fluid milk products from plants qualifying as pool plants pursuantto this paragraph, filled milk, and milk received at such plant as divertedmilk from another plant, which milk is classified in Class III under thisorder and is subject to the pricing and pooling provisions of this or anotherorder issued pursuant to the Act) or diverted thereform pursuant to andSection;1124.13;(b) A supply plant from which during any month not less than 30 percentof the total quantity of milk that is physically received at such plantfrom dairy farmers eligible to be producers pursuant to andSection; 1124.12(excluding milk received at such plant as diverted milk from another plant,which milk is classified in Class III under this order and is subject tothe pricing and pooling provisions of this or another order issued pursuantto the Act) or diverted as producer milk to another plant pursuant to andSection;1124.13, is shipped in the form of a fluid milk product (except as filledmilk) to a pool distributing plant or is a route disposition in the marketingarea of fluid milk producets (except filled milk) processed and packagedat such plant; <T3>Provided, </T3>That: (1) With respect to a supply plant operated by a cooperative association,the producer milk of its members which it caused to be delivered directlyfrom their farms to pool distributing plants, shall for the purpose ofthis paragraph, be considered as a receipt at the cooperative's supplyplant and a shipment from the supply plant to pool distributing plants;(2) A plant which qualified as a pool plant pursuant to this paragraphin each month of September through February shall be a pool plant in eachof the following months of March through August unless a written applicationis filed with the Market Administrator prior to the first day of any suchmonth requesting that the plant be designated a nonpool plant for suchmonth and each subsequent month through August during which it would nototherwise qualify as a pool plant; and (3) For the purpose of this paragraph, the operations of two or more supplyplants may be combined and considered as the operation of one plant ifso requested in writing to the Market Administrator by the handler(s) operatingsuch plants prior to the first day of the month for which such considerationis requested.(c) The Director of the Dairy Division may reduce or increase up to 10percentage points from the levels set forth therein the pool plant performancestandards in paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, if the Director findssuch revision is necessary to obtain needed shipments or to prevent uneconomicshipments. Before making such a finding, the Director shall investigatethe need for revision either at the Director's own initiative or a therequest of interested persons. If the investigation shows that a revisionmight be appropriate, the Director shall issue a notice stating that therevision is being considered and invite data, views, and arguments.(d) The term ``pool plant'' shall not apply to the following plants:(1) A producer-handler plant;(2) A plant qualified pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section which alsomeets the pooling requirements of another Federal Order and from which,the Secretary determines, there is a greater quantity of route dispositionduring the month in such other Federal Order marketing area than in thismarketing area, except that if such plant was subject to all the provisionsof this part in the immediately preceding month it shall continue to besubject to all the provisions of this part until the fourth consecutivemonth in which a greater proportion of its route disposition is made insuch other marketing area unless, notwithstanding the provisions of thisparagraph, it is regulated under such other order; (3) A plant qualified pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section which alsomeets the pooling requirements of another Federal order on the basis ofroute disposition in such other marketing area and from which, the Secretarydetermines, there is a greater quantity of route disposition in this marketingarea than in such other marketing area but which plant maintains poolingstatus for the month under such other Federal order;(4) A plant qualified pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section which alsomeets the pool plant requirements of another Federal order and from whichgreater shipments are made during the month to plants regulated under suchother order than are made to plants regulated under this order;(5) A distributing plant from which total route disposition (except filledmilk) in the marketing area during the month averages 300 pounds or lessper day; or (6) That portion of a plant that is physically separated from the GradeA portion of such plant, is operated separately, and is not approved byany regulatory agency for the receiving, processing, or packaging of anyfluid milk products for Grade A disposition.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nonpool plant.</ITAG>``Nonpool plant'' means any plant other than a pool plant. The followingcategories of nonpool plants are further defined as follows:(a) ``Other order plant'' means a plant that is fully subject to the pricingand pooling provisions of another order issued pursuant to the Act.(b) ``Producer-handler plant'' means a plant operated by a producer-handleras defined in any order (including this part) issued pursuant to the Act.(c) ``Partially regulated distributing plant'' means a nonpool plant thatis neither an other order plant nor a producer-handler plant, from whichduring the month an average of more than 300 pounds daily of fluid milkproducts is disposed of as route disposition in the marketing area.(d) ``Unregulated supply plant'' means a nonpool plant that is neitheran other order plant nor a producer-handler plant, from which fluid milkproducts are moved to a pool plant during the month.(e) ``Exempt distributing plant'' means a plant, other than a pool supplyplant or a regulated plant under another Federal order that meets all therequirements for status as a pool distributing plant except that its routedisposition (exclusive of filled milk) in the marketing area in the monthdoes not exceed an average of 300 pounds daily. For purposes of this paragraph,route disposition shall not include receipts from a transferor-plant pursuantto the proviso of andSection; 1124.3(a).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Handler.</ITAG>``Handler'' means:(a) The operator of one or more pool plants;(b) Any cooperative association with respect to producer milk which itcaused to be diverted for the account of such cooperative association toanother plant or pursuant to andSection; 1124.40(b)(3);(c) Any cooperative association with respect to milk that it receives forits account from the farm of a producer for delivery to a pool plant ofanother handler in a tank truck owned and operated by, or under the controlof, such cooperative association, unless both the cooperative associationand the operator of the pool plant notify the market administrator priorto the time that such milk is delivered to the pool plant that the plantoperator will be the handler for such milk and will purchase such milkon the basis of weights determined from its measurement at the farm andbutterfat tests determined from farm bulk tank samples. Milk for whichthe cooperative association is the handler pursuant to this paragraph shallbe deemed to have been received by the cooperative association at the locationof the pool plant to which such milk is delivered;(d) Any person who operates a plant defined in andSection; 1124.8 (a) through(e).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.10 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Producer-handler.</ITAG>``Producer-handler'' means a person who is engaged in the production ofmilk and also operates a plant from which during the month an average ofmore than 300 pounds daily of fluid milk products, except filled milk,is disposed of as route disposition within the marketing area and who hasbeen so designated by the market administrator upon determination thatall of the requirements of this section have been met, and that none ofthe conditions therein for cancellation of such designation exists. Alldesignations shall remain in effect until canceled pursuant to paragraph(c) of this section. Any State institution shall be a producer-handlerexempt from the provisions of this section and andSection;andSection; 1124.30and 1124.32 with respect to milk of its own production and receipts frompool plants processed or received for consumption in State institutionsand with respect to movements of milk to or from a pool plant.(a) <T3>Requirements for designation. </T3>(1) The producer-handler has andexercises (in its capacity as a handler) complete and exclusive controlover the operation and management of a plant at which it handles and processesmilk received from its milk production resources and facilities (designatedas such pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section), the operation andmanagement of which are under the complete and exclusive control of theproducer-handler (in its capacity as a dairy farmer).(2) The producer-handler neither receives at its designated milk productionresources and facilities nor receives, handles, processes or distributesat or through any of its milk handling, processing or distributing resourcesand facilities (designated as such pursuant to paragraph (b)(2) of thissection) milk products for reconstitution into fluid milk products, orfluid milk products derived from any source other than (i) its designatedmilk production resources and facilities, (ii) pool plants within the limitationspecified in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, or (iii) nonfat milk solidswhich are used to fortify fluid milk products.(3) The producer-handler is neither directly nor indirectly associatedwith the business control or management of, nor has a financial interestin, another handler's operation; nor is any other handler so associatedwith the producer-handler's operation.(4) Designation of any person as a producer-handler following a cancellationof its prior designation shall be preceded by performance in accordancewith paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section for a period of 1month.(b) <T3>Resources and facilities. </T3>Designation of a person as a producer-handlershall include the determination and designation of the milk production,handling, processing and distributing resources and facilities, all ofwhich shall be deemed to constitute an integrated operation, as follows:(1) As milk production resources and facilities: All resources and facilities(milking herd(s), buildings housing such herd(s), and the land on whichsuch buildings are located) used for the production of milk:(i) Which are directly, indirectly or partially owned, operated or controlledby the producer-handler;(ii) In which the producer-handler in any way has an interest includingany contractual arrangement; and(iii) Which are directly, indirectly or partially owned, operated or controlledby any partner or stockholder of the producer-handler. However, for purposesof this paragraph any such milk production resources and facilities whichthe producer-handler proves to the satisfaction of the market administratordo not constitute an actual or potential source of milk supply for theproducer-handler's operation as such shall not be considered a part ofthe producer-handler's milk production resources and facilities; and(2) As milk handling, processing and distributing resources and facilities:All resources and facilities (including store outlets) used for handling,processing and distribution any fluid milk product:(i) Which are directly, indirectly or partially owned, operated or controlledby the producer-handler; or (ii) In which the producer-handler in any way has an interest, includingany contractual arrangement, or with respect to which the producer-handlerdirectly or indirectly exercises any degree of management or control.(c) <T3>Cancellation. </T3>The designation as a producer-handler shall be canceledunder any of the conditions set forth in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of thissection or upon determination by the market administrator that any of therequirements of paragraphs (a)(1),(2), and (3) of this section are notcontinuing to be met, such cancellation to be effective on the first dayof the month following the month in which the requirements were not met,or the conditions for cancellations occurred.(1) Milk from the designated milk production resources and facilities ofthe producer-handler is delivered in the name of another person as producermilk to another handler.(2) The producer-handler handles fluid milk products derived from sourcesother than the designated milk production facilities and resources, withthe exception of purchases from pool plants in the form of fluid milk productswhich do not exceed in the aggregate a daily average during the month of100 pounds.(d) <T3>Public announcement. </T3>The market administrator shall publicly announcethe name, plant location and farm location(s) of person designate as producer-handlers,of those whose designations have been canceled and the effective datesof producers-handler status or loss of producer-handler status for each.Such announcements shall be controlling with respect to the accountingat plants of other handlers for fluid milk products received from any producer-handler.(e) <T3>Burden of establishing and maintaining producer-handler status. </T3>Theburden rests upon the handler who is designated as a producer-handler toestablish through records required pursuant to andSection; 1000.5 of thischapter that the requirements set forth in paragraph (a) of this sectionhave been and are continuing to be met, and that the conditions set forthin paragraph (c) of this section for cancellation of designation do notexist.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Cooperative reserve supply unit.</ITAG>``Cooperative reserve supply unit'' means any cooperative association orits agent that is a handler pursuant to andSection; 1124.9(b) or (c) thatdoes not own or operate a plant, if such cooperative has been qualifiedto receive payments pursuant to andSection; 1124.73 and has been a handlerof producer milk under this or its predecessor order(s) during each ofthe 12 previous months, and if a majority of the cooperative's member producersare located within 125 miles of a pool distributing plant. A cooperativereserve supply unit shall be subject to the following conditions:(a) The cooperative shall file a request with the market administratorfor cooperative reserve supply unit status at least 15 days prior to thefirst day of the month in which such status is desired to be effective.Once qualified as a cooperative reserve supply unit pursuant to this paragraph,such status shall continue to be effective unless the cooperative requeststermination prior to the first day of the month that change of status isrequested, or the cooperative fails to meet all of the conditions of thissection;(b) The cooperative reserve supply unit supplies fluid milk products topool distributing plants located within 125 miles of a majority of thecooperative's member producers in compliance with any announcement by themarket administrator requesting a minimum level of shipments as furtherprovided below:(1) The market administrator may require such supplies of bulk fluid milkfrom cooperative reserve supply units whenever the market administratorfinds that milk supplies for Class I use at pool distributing plants areneeded for plants defined in andSection; 1124.7(a). Before making such afinding, the market administrator shall investigate the need for such shipmentseither on the market administrator's own initiative or at the request ofinterested persons. If the market administrator's investigation shows thatsuch shipments might be appropriate, the market administrator shall issuea notice stating that a shipping announcement is being considered and invitingdata, views and arguments with respect to the proposed shipping announcement.(2) Failure of a cooperative reserve supply unit to comply with any announcedshipping requirements, including making any significant change in the unit'smarketing operation that the market administrator determines has the impactof evading or forcing such an announcement, shall result in immediate lossof cooperative reserve supply unit status until such time as the unit hasbeen a handler pursuant to andSection; 1124.9(b) and (c) for at least 12consecutive months.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.12 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Producer.</ITAG>(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, ``producer'' meansany persons who produces milk approved by a duly constituted regulatoryagency for disposition as Grade A milk and whose milk is:(1) Received at a pool plant directly from such person;(2) Received by a handler described in andSection; 1124.9(c); or(3) Diverted in accordance with andSection; 1124.13;(b) ``Producer'' shall not include:(1) A producer-handler as defined in any order (including this part) issuedpursuant to the Act;(2) Any person with respect to milk produced by such person that is divertedto a pool plant from an other order plant if the other order designatessuch person as a producer under that order and such milk is allocated toClass II or Class III utilization pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(9)(iii)and the corresponding step of andSection; 1124(b);(3) Any person with respect to milk produced by such person that is reportedas diverted to an other order plant if any portion of such person's milkso moved is assigned to Class I under the provisions of such order;(4) Any person who during the month has disposed of as route dispositionor to consumers at the farm an average of more than 110 pounds daily offluid milk or fluid cream products; and(5) Any person (known as a dairy farmer for other markets) whose milk wasreceived at a nonpool plant or a commercial food processing establishmentduring the month as other than producer milk under this or any other Federalmilk order.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Producer milk.</ITAG>``Producer milk'' means the skim milk and butterfat in milk of a producerthat is:(a) Received or diverted by a handler defined in andSection; 1124.9(a) underone of the following conditions:(1) Received at such handler's pool plant directly from the farm of suchproducer;(2) Received at such handler's plant from a handler defined in andSection;1124.9(c) for all purposes other than those specified in paragraph (b)(2)(i)of this section; and(3) Diverted for the account of the operator of the pool plant, subjectto the conditions set forth in paragraph (c) of this section.(b) Received or diverted by a cooperative defined in andSection; 1124.9 (b)or (c) under one of the following conditions:(1) Milk diverted for the account of the cooperative association. Exceptfor milk moved by a cooperative reserve supply unit defined in andSection;1124.11, such diversions shall be subject to the conditions set forth inparagrpah (c) of this section;(2) Milk for which the cooperative association is a handler pursuant toandSection; 1124.9(c) to the following extent:(i) For purposes of reporting pursuant to andSection;andSection; 1124.30(c)and 1124.31(a) and making payments to producers pursuant to andSection; 1124.73(a);and (ii) For all purposes, with respect to any such milk which is not deliveredto the pool plant of another handler;(c) The following conditions shall apply to diverted producer milk:(1) A cooperative association or its agent may divert for its account themilk of any producer. The total quantity of milk diverted may not exceed80 percent during the months of September through April of the total quantityof producer milk which the association or its agent causes to be deliveredto pool distributing plants or diverted. No percentage limit shall applyduring the months of May through August. The percentage limits on diversionsspecified in this paragraph shall not apply to a cooperative reserve supplyunit defined in andSection; 1124.11;(2) A handler other than a cooperative association that operates a poolplant may divert milk for its account to other plants or pursuant to andSection;1124.40(b)(3). The total quantity of milk so diverted may not exceed 80percent during the months of September through April of the milk receivedat such handler's pool plant or diverted by such handler from any producerother than a member of a cooperative association which markets milk underparagraph (c)(1) of this section and for which the operator of such plantis the handler during the month. No percentage limit shall apply duringthe months of May through August;(3) Milk diverted in excess of the limits specified shall not be consideredproducer milk, except for milk diverted by a cooperative reserve supplyunit. The diverting handler shall specify the producers whose milk is ineligibleas producer milk. If a handler fails to designate such producers, producermilk status shall be forfeited with respect to all milk diverted by thehandler during the month;(4) Two or more cooperative associations may have their allowable diversionscomputed on the basis of their combined deliveries of producer milk whichthe associations cause to be delivered to pool plants or diverted duringthe month if each association has filed a request in writing with the marketadministrator on or before the first day of the month the agreement isto be effective. This request shall specify the basis for assigning overdivertedmilk to the producer deliveries of each cooperative according to a methodapproved by the market administrator;(5) Diverted milk shall be priced at the location of the plant or commercialfood processing establishment to which diverted; and(d) In the case of any bulk tank load of milk originating at farms andsubsequently divided among plants, the proportion of the load receivedat each plant shall be prorated among the individual producers involvedon the basis of their respective percentage of the total load.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.14</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Other source milk.</ITAG>``Other source milk'' means all skim milk and butterfat contained in orrepresented by:(a) Receipts of fluid milk products and bulk products specified in andSection;1124.40(b)(1) from any source other than producers, handlers describedin andSection; 1124.9(c), or pool plants;(b) Receipts in packaged form from other plants of products specified inandSection; 1124.40(b)(1);(c) Products (other than fluid milk products, products specified in andSection;1124.40(b)(1), and products produced at the plant during the same month)from any source which are reprocessed, converted into, or combined withanother product in the plant during the month; and(d) Receipts of any milk product (other than a fluid milk product or aproduct specified in andSection; 1124.40(b)(1)) for which the handler failsto establish a disposition.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.15</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Fluid milk product.</ITAG>(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, ``fluid milk product''means any of the following products in fluid or frozen form: milk, skimmilk, lowfat milk, milk drinks, buttermilk, mixtures of cream and milkor skim milk containing less than 15 percent butterfat (including thosewhich are sterilized or aseptically packaged), filled milk, and milkshakeand ice milk mixes containing less than 20 percent total solids, includingany such products that are flavored, cultured, modified with added nonfatmilk solids, concentrated (if in a consumer-type package), or reconstituted.(b) The term ``fluid milk product'' shall not include:(1) Evaporated or condensed milk (plain or sweetened), evaporated or condensedskim milk (plain or sweetened), formulas especially prepared for infantfeeding or dietary use and milk or milk products (including filled milk)that are sterilized and packaged in hermetically sealed glass or all-metalcontainers, any product that contains by weight less than 6.5 percent nonfatmilk solids, and whey; and(2) The quantity of skim milk in any modified product specified in paragraph(a) of this section that is in excess of the quantity of skim milk in anequal volume of an unmodified product of the same nature and butterfatcontent.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.16</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Fluid cream product.</ITAG>``Fluid cream product'' means cream (other than plastic cream or frozencream), sour cream, or a mixture (including a cultured mixture) of creamand milk or skim milk containing 15 percent or more butterfat, with orwithout the addition of other ingredients.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.17</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Filled milk.</ITAG>``Filled milk'' means any combination of nonmilk fat (or oil) with skimmilk (whether fresh, cultured, reconstituted or modified by the additionof nonfat milk solids), with or without milkfat, so that the product (includingstabilizers, emulsifiers, or flavoring) resembles milk or any other fluidmilk product; and contains less than 6 percent nonmilk fat (or oil).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Cooperative association.</ITAG>``Cooperative association'' means any cooperative marketing associationof producers, which the Secretary determines, after application by thecooperative association:(a) To be qualified under the provisions of the Act of Congress of February18, 1922, known as the ``Capper-Volstead Act'', and any amendments thereto;(b) To have full authority in the sale of milk of its members and to beengaged in making collective sales of or marketing milk for its members;and(c) To have its entire activities under the control of its members.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.19</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Product prices.</ITAG>The following product prices shall be used in calculating the basic ClassII formula price pursuant to andSection; 1124.51a:(a) <T3>Butter price. </T3>``Butter price'' means the simple average, for thefirst 15 days of the month, of the daily prices per pound of Grade A (92-score)butter. The prices used shall be those of the Chicago Mercantile Exchangeas reported and published weekly by the Dairy Division, Agricultural MarketingService. The average shall be computed by the Director of the Dairy Division,using the price reported each week as the daily price for that day andfor each following work-day until the next price is reported. A work-dayis each Monday through Friday, except national holidays. For any week thatthe Exchange does not meet to establish a price, the price for the followingweek shall be the last price that was established.(b) <T3>Cheddar cheese price. </T3>``Cheddar cheese price'' means the simpleaverage, for the first 15 days of the month, of the daily prices per poundof cheddar cheese in 40-pound blocks. The prices used shall be those ofthe National Cheese Exchange (Green Bay, WI), as reported and publishedweekly by the Dairy Division, Agricultural Marketing Service. The averageshall be computed by the Director of the Dairy Division, using the pricereported each week as the daily price for that day and for each followingwork-day until the next price is reported. A work-day is each Monday throughFriday, except national holidays. For any week that the Exchange does notmeet to establish a price, the price for the following week shall be thelast price that was established.(c) <T3>Nonfat dry milk price. </T3>``Nonfat dry milk price'' means the simpleaverage, for the first 15 days of the month, of the daily prices per poundof nonfat dry milk, which average shall be computed by the Director ofthe Dairy Division as follows:(1) The prices used shall be the prices (using the midpoint of any pricerange as one price) of high heat, low heat and Grade A nonfat dry milk,respectively, for the Central States production area, as reported and publishedweekly by the Dairy Division, Agricultural Marketing Service.(2) For each week, determine the simple average of the prices reportedfor the three types of nonfat dry milk. Such average shall be the dailyprice for the day that such prices are reported and for each precedingwork-day until the day such prices were previously reported. A work-dayis each Monday through Friday except national holidays.(3) Add the prices determined in paragraph (c)(2) of this section for thefirst 15 days of the month and divide by the number of days for which thereis a daily price.(d) <T3>Edible whey price. </T3>``Edible whey price'' means the simple average,for the first 15 days of the month, of the daily prices per pound of ediblewhey powder (nonhygroscopic). The prices used shall be the prices (usingthe midpoint of any price range as one price) of edible whey powder forthe Central States production area, as reported and published weekly bythe Dairy Division, Agricultural Marketing Service. The average shall becomputed by the Director of the Dairy Division, using the price reportedeach week as the daily price for that day and for each preceding work-dayuntil the day such price was previously reported. A work-day is each Mondaythrough Friday, except national holidays.<ITAG tagnum="84">Handler Reports</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.30</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reports of receipts and utilization.</ITAG>On or before the 9th day of each month each handler shall report to themarket administrator, in the detail and on forms prescribed by the marketadministrator, the following information for the preceding month:(a) Each handler operating a pool plant(s) shall report separately foreach pool plant:(1) The quantities of skim milk and butterfat contained in:(i) Milk received directly from producers, showing separately any milkof own-farm production;(ii) Milk received from a cooperative association pursuant to andSection;1124.9(c);(iii) Fluid milk products and bulk fluid cream products received from otherpool plants showing filled milk separately;(iv) Other source milk showing filled milk separately; and(v) Inventories at the beginning and end of the month of fluid milk productsand products specified in andSection; 1124.40(b)(1).(2) The utilization of all skim milk and butterfat required to be reported,including separate statements of quantities in route disposition insideand outside the marketing area.(b) Each producer-handler shall report:(1) The quantities of skim milk and butterfat contained in:(i) Milk of own-farm production;(ii) Receipts of fluid milk products and fluid cream products from poolplants, showing separately receipts in packaged form and in bulk; and(iii) Other source milk, showing separately any receipts from another dairyfarmer.(2) As specified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.(c) Each cooperative association shall report with respect to milk forwhich it is the handler pursuant to either andSection; 1124.9 (b) or (c):(1) The quantities of skim milk and butterfat received from producers;(2) The utilization of skim milk and butterfat for which it is the handlerpursuant to andSection; 1124.9(b); and(3) The quantities of skim milk and butterfat delivered to each pool plantpursuant to andSection; 1124.9(c).(d) Each handler who operates a partially regulated distributing plantshall report as specified in paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this sectionexcept that receipts from dairy farmers in Grade A milk shall be reportedin lieu of those in producer milk. Such report shall include separate statements,respectively, showing the respective amounts of skim milk and butterfatdisposed of as route disposition in the marketing area as Class I milkand the quantity of reconstituted skim milk in fluid milk products disposedof as route disposition in the marketing area.(e) Each handler who operates an other order plant with route dispositionof fluid milk products in the marketing area shall report the quantitiesof skim milk and butterfat in such disposition.(f) Each handler who operates an exempt plant or an unregulated supplyplant shall report as specified in paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this sectionexcept that receipts from dairy farmers in Grade A milk shall be reportedin lieu of those in producer milk.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1123.31</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payroll reports.</ITAG>On or before the 22nd day of each month handlers shall report to the marketadministrator as follows:(a) Each handler with respect to each of its pool plants and each cooperativeassociation which is a handler pursuant to andSection; 1124.9 (b) or (c)shall submit its producer payroll for deliveries (other than own-farm production)in the preceding month which shall show:(1) The total pounds of milk received from each producer, the pounds ofbutterfat contained in such milk, and the number of days on which milkwas delivered by such producer in such month;(2) The amount of payment to each producer and cooperative association;and(3) The nature and amount of any deductions or charges involved in suchpayments; and(b) Each handler operating a partially regulated distributing plant whowishes computations pursuant to andSection; 1124.76(a) to be considered inthe computation of its obligation pursuant to andSection; 1124.76 shall submitits payroll for deliveries of Grade A milk by dairy farmers which shallshow:(1) The total pounds of milk and the butterfat content thereof receivedfrom each dairy farmer;(2) The amount of payment to each dairy farmer (or to a cooperative associationon behalf of such dairy farmer); and(3) The nature and amount of any deductions or charges involved in suchpayments.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.32</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Other reports.</ITAG>At such time and in such manner as the market administrator may prescribe,each handler shall report to the market administrator such informationin addition to that required under andSection;andSection; 1124.30 and 1124.31as may be requested by the market administrator with respect to milk andmilk products (including filled milk) handled by the handler.<ITAG tagnum="84">Classification of Milk</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.40</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Classes of utilization.</ITAG>Except as provided in andSection; 1124.42 all skim milk and butterfat requiredto be reported by a handler pursuant to andSection; 1124.30 shall be classifiedas follows:(a) <T3>Class I milk.</T3> Class I milk shall be all skim milk and butterfat:(1) Disposed of in the form of a fluid milk product, except as otherwiseprovided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section;(2) In packaged inventory of fluid milk products at the end of the month;and(3) Not specifically accounted for as Class II or Class III milk.(b) <T3>Class II milk.</T3> Class II milk shall be all skim milk and butterfat:(1) Disposed of in the form of a fluid cream product, eggnog, yogurt, andany product containing 6 percent or more non-milk fat (or oil) that resemblesa fluid cream product, eggnog, or yogurt, except as otherwise providedin paragraph (c) of this section;(2) In packaged inventory at the end of the month of the products specifiedin paragraph (b)(1) of this section;(3) In all bulk fluid milk products and bulk fluid cream products disposedof or diverted to any commercial food processing establishment, subjectto the conditions of andSection; 1124.42(e), at which food products (otherthan milk products and filled milk) are processed and from which thereis no disposition of fluid milk products or fluid cream products otherthan those received in consumer-type packages; and(4) Used to produce:(i) Cotton cheese, lowfat cottage cheese, and dry curd cottage cheese;(ii) Milkshake and ice milk mixes (or bases) containing 20 percent or moretotal solids, frozen desserts, and frozen dessert mixes;(iii) Any concentrated milk product in bulk fluid form other than thatspecified in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section.(iv) Plastic cream, frozen cream and anhydrous milkfat.(v) Custards, puddings, and pancake mixes;(vi) Formulas especially prepared for infant feeding or dietary use thatare packaged in hermetically sealed glass or all-metal containers; and(vii) Any milk or milk products sterilized and packaged in hermeticallysealed metal or glass containers.(c) <T3>Class III milk.</T3> Class III milk shall be all skim milk and butterfat:(1) Used to produce:(i) Cheese (other than cottage cheese, lowfat cottage cheese, and dry curdcottage cheese);(ii) Butter;(iii) Any milk product in dry form;(iv) Any concentrated milk product in bulk fluid form that is used to producea Class III product;(v) Evaporated or condensed milk (plain or sweetened) in a consumer-typepackage and evaporated or condensed skim milk (plain or sweetened) in aconsumer-type package; and(vi) Any product not otherwise specified in this section;(2) In inventory at the end of the month of fluid milk products in bulkform and products specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section in bulkform;(3) In fluid milk products and products specified in paragraph (b)(1) ofthis section that are disposed of by a handler for animal feed;(4) In fluid milk products and products specified in paragraph (b)(1) ofthis section that are dumped by a handler if the market administrator isnotified of such dumping in advance and is given the opportunity to verifysuch disposition;(5) In skim milk in any modified fluid milk product that is in excess ofthe quantity of skim milk in such product that was included within thefluid milk product definition pursuant to andSection; 1124.15; and(6) In shrinkage assigned pursuant to andSection; 1125.41(a) to the receiptsspecified in andSection; 1124.41(a)(2) and in shrinkage specified in andSection;1124.41 (b) and (c).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.41</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Shrinkage.</ITAG>For purposes of classifying all skim milk and butterfat to be reportedby a handler pursuant to andSection; 1124.30, the market administrator shalldetermine the following:(a) The pro rata assignment of shrinkage of skim milk and butterfat, respectively,at each pool plant to the respective quantities of skim milk and butterfat:(1) In the receipts specified in paragraphs (b)(1) through (6) of thissection on which shrinkage is allowed pursuant to such paragraph; and(2) In other source milk not specified in paragraphs (b)(1) through (6)of this section which was received in the form of a bulk fluid milk productor a bulk fluid cream product.(b) The shrinkage of skim milk and butterfat, respectively, assigned pursuantto paragraph (a) of this section to the receipts specified in paragraph(a)(1) of this section that is not in excess of:(1) Two percent of the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in producermilk (excluding milk diverted by the plant operator to another plant orpursuant to andSection; 1124.40(b)(3) and milk received from a handler describedin andSection; 1124.9(c));(2) Plus 1.5 percent of the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in milkreceived from a handler described in andSection; 1124.9(c) and in milk divertedto such plant by the operator of another pool plant, except that if theoperator of the plant to which the milk is delivered purchases such milkon the basis of weights determined from its measurement at the farm andbutterfat tests determined from farm bulk tank samples, the applicablepercentage under this paragraph shall be 2 percent;(3) Plus 0.5 percent of the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in producermilk diverted by the plant operator to another plant or pursuant to andSection;1124.40(b)(3), except that if the operator of the plant or establishmentto which the milk is delivered purchases such milk on the basis of weightsdetermined from its measurement at the farm and butterfat tests determinedfrom farm bulk tank samples, the applicable percentage under this paragraphshall be zero;(4) Plus 1.5 percent of the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in bulkfluid milk products received by transfer from other pool plants;(5) Plus 1.5 percent of the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in bulkfluid milk products received by transfer from other order plants, excludingthe quantity for which Class II or Class III classification is requestedby the operator of both plants;(6) Plus 1.5 percent of the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in bulkfluid milk products received from unregulated supply plants, excludingthe quantity for which Class II or Class III classification is requestedby the handler; and(7) Less 1.5 percent of the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in bulkfluid milk products transferred to other plants that is not in excess ofthe respective amounts of skim milk and butterfat to which percentagesare applied in paragraphs (b) (1), (2), (4), (5), and (6) of this section. (c) The quantity of skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in shrinkageof milk from producers for which a cooperative association is the handlerpursuant to andSection;1124.9 (b) or (c), but not in excess of 0.5 percentof the skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in such milk. If the operatorof a plant or a commerical food processing establishment pursuant to andSection;1124.40(b)(3)to which the milk is delivered purchases such milk on the basis of weightsdetermined from its measurement at the farm and butterfat tests determinedfrom farm bulk tank samples, the applicable percentage under this paragraphfor the cooperative association shall be zero.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1124.42  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Classification of transfers and diversions.  </ITAG>(a) <T3>Transfers and diversions to pool plants. </T3>Skim milk or butterfattransferred or diverted in the form of a fluid milk product or a bulk fluidcream product from a pool plant to another pool plant shall be classifiedas Class I milk unless the operators of both plants request the same classificationin another class. The classification of such transfers and diversions shallbe subject to the following conditions:  (1) The skim milk or butterfat classified in each class shall be limitedto the amount of skim milk and butterfat, respectively, remaining in suchclass at the receiving handler's plant after the computation pursuant toandSection;1124.44(a)(13) and the corresponding step of andSection;1124.44(b); (2) If the transferor-plant or divertor-plant received during the monthother source milk to be allocated pursuant to andSection;1124.44(a)(8) orthe corresponding step of andSection;1124.44(b), the skim milk or butterfatso transferred shall be classified so as to allocate the least possibleClass I utilization to such other source milk; and  (3) If the transferor-handler or divertor-handler received during the monthother source milk to be allocated pursuant to andSection;1123.44(a) (12)or (13) or the corresponding steps of andSection;1124.44(b), the skim milkor butterfat so transferred or diverted up to the total of the skim milkand butterfat, respectively, in such receipts of other source milk, shallnot be classified as Class I milk to a greater extent than would be thecase if the other source milk had been received at the transferee-plantor divertee-plant.  (b) <T3>Transfers and diversions to other order plants. </T3>Skim milk or butterfattransferred or diverted in the form of a fluid milk product or a bulk fluidcream product from a pool plant to another order plant shall be classifiedin the following manner. Such classification shall apply only to the skimmilk or butterfat that is in excess of any receipts at the pool plant fromthe other order plant of skim milk and butterfat, respectively, in fluidmilk products and bulk fluid cream products, respectively, that are inthe same category as described in paragraph (b) (1), (2), or (3) of thissection:  (1) If transferred as packaged fluid milk products, classification shallbe in the classes to which allocated as a fluid milk product under theother order;  (2) If transferred in bulk form, classification shall be in the classesto which allocated under the other order (including allocation under theconditions set forth in paragraph (b)(3) of this section);  (3) If the operators of both plants so request in their reports of receiptsand utilization filed with their respective market administrators, transfersor diversions in bulk form shall be classified as Class II or Class IIImilk to the extent of such utilization available for such classificationpursuant to the allocation provisions of the other order;  (4) If information concerning the classes to which such transfers or diversionswere allocated under the other order is not available to the market administratorfor the purpose of establishing classification under this paragraph, classificationshall be as Class I, subject to adjustments when such information is available; (5) For purposes of this paragraph, if the other order provides for a differentnumber of classes of utilization than is provided for under this part,skim milk or butterfat allocated to a class consisting primarily of fluidmilk products shall be classified as Class I milk, and skim milk or butterfatallocated to the other classes shall be classified as Class II milk; and (6) If the form in which any fluid milk product that is transferred toanother order plant is not defined as a fluid milk product under such otherorder, classification under this paragraph shall be in accordance withthe provisions of andSection;1124.40.  (c) <T3>Transfers and diversions to producer-handlers. </T3>Skim milk or butterfattransferred or diverted in the following forms from a pool plant to a producer-handlerunder this or any other Federal order shall be classified:  (1) As Class I milk is transferred or diverted in the form of a fluid milkproduct; and  (2) In accordance with the utilization assigned to it by the market administrator,if transferred in the form of a bulk fluid cream product. For this purpose,the transferee's utilization of skim milk and butterfat in each class,in series beginning with Class III, shall be assigned to the extent possibleto the transferee's receipts of skim milk and butterfat, respectively,in bulk fluid cream products, pro rata to each source.  (d) <T3>Transfers and diversions to other nonpool plants. </T3>Skim milk orbutterfat transferred or diverted in the following forms from a pool plantto a nonpool plant that is not another order plant or a producer-handlerplant shall be classified:  (12) As Class I milk, if transferred in the form of a packaged fluid milkproduct; and  (2) As Class I milk, if transferred or diverted in the form of a bulk fluidmilk product or a bulk fluid cream product, unless the following conditionsapply:  (i) If the conditions described in paragraphs (d)(2)(i) (A) and (B) ofthis section are met, transfers or diversions in bulk form shall be classifiedon the basis of the assignment of the nonpool plant's utilization to itsreceipts as set forth in paragraphs (d)(2) (ii) through (viii) of thissection:  (A) The transferor-handler or divertor-handler claims such classificationin its report of receipts and utilization filed pursuant to andSection;1124.30for the month within which such transaction occurred; and  (B) The nonpool plant operator maintains books and records showing theutilization of all skim milk and butterfat received at such plant whichare made available for verification purposes if requested by the marketadministrator;      (ii) Route disposition in the marketing area of each Federal milk orderfrom the nonpool plant and transfers of packaged fluid milk products fromsuch nonpool plant to plants fully regulated thereunder shall be assignedto the extent possible in the following sequence:(A) Pro rata to receipts of packaged fluid milk products at such nonpoolplant from pool plants;(B) Pro rata to any remaining unassigned receipts of packaged fluid milkproducts at such nonpool plant from other order plants;(C) Pro rata to receipts of bulk fluid milk products at such nonpool plantfrom pool plants; and(D) Pro rata to any remaining unassigned receipts of bulk fluid milk productsat such nonpool plant from other order plants;(iii) Any remaining Class I disposition of packaged fluid milk productsfrom the nonpool plant shall be assigned to the extent possible pro ratato any remaining unassigned receipts of packaged fluid milk products atsuch nonpool plant from pool plants and other order plants;(iv) Transfers of bulk fluid milk products from the nonpool plant to aplant fully regulated under any Federal milk order, to the extent thatsuch transfers to the regulated plant exceed receipts of fluid milk productsfrom such plant and are allocated to Class I at the transferee-plant, shallbe assigned to the extent possible in the following sequence:(A) Pro rata to receipts of fluid milk products at such nonpool plant frompool plants; and(B) Pro rata to any remaining unassigned receipts of fluid milk productsat such nonpool plant from other order plants;(v) Any remaining unassigned Class I disposition from the nonpool plantshall be assigned to the extent possible in the following sequence:(A) To such nonpool plant's receipts from dairy farmers who the marketadministrator determines constitute regular sources of Grade A milk forsuch nonpool plant; and(B) To such nonpool plant's receipts of Grade A milk from plants not fullyregulated under any Federal milk order which the market administrator determinesconstitute regular sources of Grade A milk for such nonpool plant;(vi) Any remaining unassigned receipts of bulk fluid milk products at thenonpool plant from pool plants and other order plants shall be assignedpro rata among such plants, to the extent possible first to any remainingClass I utilization, then to Class III utilization, and then to Class IIutilization at such nonpool plant;(vii) Receipts of bulk fluid cream products at the nonpool plant from poolplants and other order plants shall be assigned, pro rata among such plants,to the extent possible first to any remaining Class III utilization, thento any remaining Class II utilization, and then to Class I utilizationat such nonpool plant; and(viii) In determining the nonpool plant's utilization for purposes of thisparagraph, any fluid milk products and bulk fluid cream products transferredfrom such nonpool plant to a plant not fully regulated under any Federalmilk order shall be classified on the basis of the second plant's utilizationusing the same assignment priorities at the second plant that are set forthin this paragraph.(e) <T3>Transfers and diversions to a commercial food processing establishment.</T3>Skim milk and butterfat transferred or diverted to a commercial foodprocessing establishment shall be classified:(1) Subject to the provisions of andSection; 1124.13(c) and, except as providedin paragraph (e)(2) of this section, as Class II milk; or (2) Transfers of diversions shall be classified as Class I milk unlessthe market administrator is permitted to audit the records of the commercialfood processing establishment for the purpose of verification.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.43</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General classification rules.</ITAG>In determining the classification of producer milk pursuant to andSection;1124.44, the following rules shall apply:(a) Each month the market administrator shall correct for mathematicaland other obvious errors all reports filed pursuant to andSection; 1124.30and shall compute separately for each pool plant and for each cooperativeassociation with respect to milk for which it is the handler pursuant toandSection; 1124.9(b) or (c) the pounds of skim milk and butterfat, respectively,in each class in accordance with andSection;andSection;  1124.40, 1124.41,and 1124.42;(b) If any of the water contained in the milk from which a product is madeis removed before the product is utilized or disposed of by a handler,the pounds of skim milk in such product that are to be considered underthis part as used or disposed of by the handler shall be an amount equivalentto the nonfat milk solids contained in such product plus all of the wateroriginally associated with such solids;(c) The classification of producer milk for which a cooperative associationis the handler pursuant to andSection; 1124.9(b) or (c) shall be determinedseparately from the operations of any pool plant operated by such cooperativeassociation; and(d) For classification purposes, pursuant to andSection;andSection;  1124.40through 1124.45, butterfat in skim milk, either disposed of to others orused in the manufacture of milk products shall be accounted for at a butterfatcontent of 0.060 percent unless the handler has adequate records of theactual butterfat content of such skim milk.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.44</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Classification of producer milk.</ITAG>For each month the market administrator shall determine the classificationof producer milk of each handler described in andSection; 1124.9(a) for eachof the handler's pool plants separately and of each handler described inandSection; 1124.9(b) and (c) by allocating the handler's receipts of skimmilk and butterfat to its utilization as follows:(a) Skim milk shall be allocated in the following manner:(1) Subtract from the total pounds of skim milk in Class III the poundsof skim milk in shrinkage specified in andSection; 1124.41(b);(2) Subtract from the total pounds of skim milk in Class I the pounds ofskim milk in receipts of packaged fluid milk products from an unregulatedsupply plant to the extent that an equivalent amount of skim milk disposedof to such plant by handlers fully regulated under any federal milk orderis classified and priced as Class I milk and is not used as an offset forany other payment obligation under any order;(3) Subtract from the pounds of skim milk remaining in each class the poundsof skim milk in fluid milk products received in packaged form from an otherorder plant, except that to be subtracted pursuant to paragraph (a)(8)(vi)of this section, as follows:(i) From Class III milk, the lesser of the pounds remaining or 2 percentof such receipts; and(ii) From Class I milk, the remainder of such receipts;(4) Subtract from the remaining pounds of skim milk in Class I the poundsof skim milk in packaged fluid milk products in inventory at the beginningof the month. This paragraph shall apply only if the pool plant was subjectto the provisions of this paragraph or comparable provisions of anotherFederal milk order in the immediately preceding month;(5) Subtract from the pounds of skim milk in Class II the pounds of skimmilk in products specified in andSection; 1124.40(b)(1) that were receivedin packaged form from other plants, but not in excess of the pounds ofskim milk remaining in Class II;(6) Subtract from the remaining pounds of skim milk in Class II the poundsof skim milk in products specified in andSection; 1124.40(b)(1) that werein inventory at the beginning of the month in packaged form, but not inexcess of the pounds of skim milk remaining in Class II. This paragraphshall apply only if the pool plant was subject to the provisions of thisparagraph or comparable provisions of another Federal milk order in theimmediately preceding month;(7) Subtract from the remaining pounds of skim milk in Class II the poundsof skim milk in other source milk (except that received in the form ofa fluid milk product or a fluid cream product) that is used to produce,or added to any product specified in andSection; 1124.40(b) but not in excessof the pounds of skim milk remaining in Class II;(8) Subtract in the order specified below from the pounds of skim milkremaining in each class, in series beginning with Class III, the poundsof skim milk in each of the following:(i) Other source milk (except that received in the form of a fluid milkproduct) and, if paragraph (a)(6) of this section applies, packaged inventoryat the beginning of the month of products specified in andSection; 1124.40(b)(1)that was not subtracted pursuant to paragraphs (a)(5), (6), and (7) ofthis section;(ii) Receipts of fluid milk products (except filled milk) for which GradeA certification is not established;(iii) Receipts of fluid milk products from unidentified sources;(iv) Receipts of fluid milk products received or acquired for distributionfrom a producer-handler as defined under this or any other Federal Order;(v) Receipts of reconstituted skim milk in filled milk from an unregulatedsupply plant that were not subtracted pursuant to paragraph (a)(2) of thissection;(vi) Receipts of reconstituted skim milk in filled milk from an other orderplant that is regulated under any Federal milk order providing for individual-handlerpooling, to the extent that reconstituted skim milk is allocated to ClassI at the transferor-plant; and(vii) Receipts of fluid milk products from a person described in andSection;1124.12(b)(5);(9) Subtract in the order specified below from the pounds of skim milkremaining in Class II and Class III, in sequence beginning with Class III:(i) The pounds of skim milk in receipts of fluid milk products from anunregulated supply plant that were not subtracted pursuant to paragraphs(a)(2) and (8)(v) of this section for which the handler requests a classificationother than Class I, but not in excess of pounds of skim milk remainingin Class II and Class III combined;(ii) The pounds of skim milk in receipts of fluid milk products from anunregulated supply plant that were not subtracted pursuant to paragraphs(a)(2), (8)(v), and (9)(i) of this section which are in excess of the poundsof skim milk determined pursuant to paragraph (a)(9)(ii)(A) through (C)of this section. Should the pounds of skim milk to be subtracted from ClassII and Class III combined exceed the pounds of skim milk remaining in suchclasses, the pounds of skim milk in Class II and Class III combined shallbe increased (increasing as necessary Class III and then Class II to theextent of available utilization in such classes at the nearest other poolplant of the handler, and then at each successively more distant pool plantof the handler) by an amount equal to such excess quantity to be subtractedand the pounds of skim milk in Class I shall be decreased by a like amount.In such case, the pounds of skim milk remaining in each class at this allocationstep at the handler's other pool plants shall be adjusted in the reversedirection by a like amount:(A) Multiple by 1.25 the sum of the pounds of skim milk remaining in ClassI at this allocation step at all pool plants of the handler (excludingany duplication of Class I utilization resulting from reported Class Itransfers between pool plants of the handler);(B) Subtract from the above result the sum of the pounds of skim milk inreceipts at all pool plants of the handler of producer milk, fluid milkproducts from pool plants of other handlers, and bulk fluid milk productsfrom other order plants that were not subtracted pursuant to paragraph(a)(8)(vi) of this section; and (C) Multiply any plus quantity resulting above by the percentages thatthe receipts of skim milk in fluid milk products from unregulated supplyplants that remain at this pool plant are of all such receipts remainingat this allocation step at all pool plants of the handler; and (iii) The pounds of skim milk in receipts of bulk fluid milk products froman other order plant that are in excess of bulk fluid milk products transferredor diverted to such plant and that were not subtracted pursuant to paragraph(a)(8)(vi) of this section, if Class II or Class III classification isrequested by the operator of the other order plant and the handler butnot in excess of the pounds of skim milk remaining in Class II and ClassIII combined;(10) Subtract from the pounds of skim milk remaining in each class, inseries, beginning with Class III, the pounds of skim milk in fluid milkproducts and products specified in andSection; 1124.40(b)(1) in inventoryat the beginning of the month that were not subtracted pursuant to paragraph(a)(4), (6), and (8)(i) of this section;(11) Add to the remaining pounds of skim milk in Class III the pounds ofskim milk subtracted pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section;(12) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (a)(12) (i) and (ii) of thissection, subtract from the pounds of skim milk remaining in each classat the plant, pro rata to the total pounds of skim milk remaining in ClassI and in Class II and Class III combined at this allocation step at allpool plants of the handler (excluding any duplication of utilization ineach class resulting from transfers between pool plants of the handler),with the quantity pro rated, to Class II and Class III combined being subtractedfirst from Class III and then from Class II, the pounds of skim milk inreceipts of fluid milk products from an unregulated supply plant that werenot subtracted pursuant to paragraphs (a)(2), (8)(v), (9)(i), and (ii)of this section and that were not offset by transfers or diversions offluid milk products to the same unreglated supply plant from which fluidmilk products to be allocated at this step were received;(i) Should the pounds of skim milk to be subtracted from Class II and ClassIII combined pursuant to this paragraph exceed the pounds of skim milkremaining in such classes, the pounds of skim milk in Class II and ClassIII combined shall be increased (increasing as necessary Class III andthen Class II to the extent of available utilization in such classes atthe nearest other pool plant of the handler, and then at each successivelymore distant pool plant of the handler) by an amount equal to such excessquantity to be subtracted, and the pounds of skim milk in Class I shallbe decreased by a like amount. In such case, the pounds of skim milk remainingin each class at this allocation step at the handler's other pool plantsshall be adjusted in the reverse direction by a like amount; and(ii) Should the pounds of skim milk to be subtracted from Class I pursuantto this paragraph exceed the pounds of skim milk remaining in such class,the pounds of skim milk in Class I shall be increased by an amount equalto such excess quantity to be subtracted, and the pounds of skim milk inClass II and Class III combined shall be decreased by a like amount (decreasingas necessary Class III and then Class II). In such case, the pounds ofskim milk remaining in each class at this allocation step at the handler'sother pool plants shall be adjusted in the reverse direction by a likeamount, beginning with the nearest plant at which Class I utilization isavailable;(13) Subtract in the manner specified below from the pounds of skim milkremaining in each class the pounds of skim milk in receipts of bulk fluidmilk products from an other order plant that are in excess of bulk fluidmilk products transferred or diverted to such plant and that were not subtractedpursuant to paragraphs (a)(8)(vi) and (9)(iii) of this section:(i) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (a)(13) (ii), (iii), and (iv)of this section, such subtraction shall be pro rata to the pounds of skimmilk in Class I and in Class II and Class III combined, with the quantityprorated to Class II and Class III combined being subtracted first fromClass III and then from Class II, with respect to whichever of the followingquantities represents the lower proportion of Class I milk:(A) The estimated utilization of skim milk of all handlers in each classas announced for the month pursuant to andSection; 1124.45(a); or(B) The total pounds of skim milk remaining in each class at this allocationstep at all pool plants of the handler (excluding any duplication of utilizationin each class resulting from transfers between pool plants of the handler);(ii) Should the proration pursuant to paragraph (a)(13)(i) of this sectionresult in the total pounds of skim milk at all pool plants of the handlerthat are to be subtracted at this allocation step from Class II and ClassIII combined exceeding the pounds of skim milk remaining in Class II andClass III at all such plants, the pounds of such excess shall be subtractedfrom the pounds of skim milk remaining in Class I after such prorationat the pool plants at which such other source milk was received;(iii) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(13)(ii) of this section, shouldthe computations pursuant to paragraph (a)(13) (i) or (ii) of this sectionresult in a quantity of skim milk to be subtracted from Class II and ClassIII combined that exceed the pounds of skim milk remaining in such classes,the pounds of skim milk in Class II and Class III combined shall be increased(increasing as necessary Class III and then Class II to the extent of availableutilization in such classes at the nearest other pool plant of the handler,and then at each successively more distant pool plant of the handler) byan amount equal to such excess quantity to be subtracted, and the poundsof skim milk in Class I shall be decreased by a like amount. In such case,the pounds of skim milk remaining in each class at this allocation stepat the handler's other pool plant(s) shall be adjusted in the reverse directionby a like amount; and (iv) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(13)(ii) of this section, shouldthe computations pursuant to paragraph (a)(13) (i) or (ii) of this sectionresult in a quantity of skim milk to be subtracted from Class I that exceedsthe pounds of skim milk remaining in such class, the pounds of skim milkin Class I shall be increased by an amount equal to such excess quantityto be subtracted, and the pounds of skim milk in Class II and Class IIIcombined shall be decreased by a like amount (decreasing as necessary ClassIII and then Class II). In such case, the pounds of skim milk remainingin each class at this allocation step at the handler's other pool plantsshall be adjusted in the reverse direction by a like amount beginning withthe nearest plant at which Class I utilization is available;(14) Subtract from the pounds of skim milk remaining in each class thepounds of skim milk in receipts of fluid milk products and bulk fluid creamproducts from another pool plant according to the classification of suchproducts pursuant to andSection; 1124.42(a); and(15) If the total pounds of skim milk remaining in all classes exceed thepounds of skim milk in producer milk, subtract such excess from the poundsof skim milk remaining in each class in series beginning with Class III.Any amount so subtracted shall be known as ``overage'';(b) Butterfat shall be allocated in accordance with the procedure outlinedfor skim milk in paragraph (a) of this section; and(c) The quantity of producer milk in each class shall be the combined poundsof skim milk and butterfat remaining in each class after the computationspursuant to paragraph (a)(15) of this section and the corresponding stepof paragraph (b) of this section.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.45</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Market administrator's reports and announcements concerning classification.</ITAG>The market administrator shall make the following reports and announcementsconcerning classification:(a) Whenever required for the purpose of allocating receipts from otherorder plants pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(13) and the correspondingstep of andSection; 1124.44(b), estimate ane publicly announce the utilization(to the nearest whole percentage) in each class during the month of skimmilk and butterfat, respectively, in producer milk of all handlers. Suchestimate shall be based upon the most current available data and shallbe final for such purpose.(b) Report to the market administrator of the other order, as soon as possibleafter the report of receipts and utilization for the month is receivedfrom a handler who has received fluid milk products or bulk fluid creamproducts from an other order plant, the class to which such recepts areallocated pursuant to andSection; 1124.44 on the basis of such report, andthereafter, any change in such allocation required to correct errors disclosedin the verification of such report.(c) Furnish to each handler operating a pool plant who has shipped fluidmilk products or bulk fluid cream products to an other order plant theclass to which such shipments were allocated by the market administratorof the other order on the basis of the report by the receiving handler,and, as necessary, any changes in such allocation arising from the verificationof such report.(d) On or before the 14th day after the end of each month, report to eachcooperative association which so requests the amount and class utilizationof producer milk delivered by members of such cooperative association toeach handler receiving such milk. For the purpose of this report the milkso received shall be prorated to each class in accordance with the totalutilization of producer milk by such handler.<ITAG tagnum="84">Class Prices</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80"> andSection; 1124.50</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Class prices.</ITAG>Subject to the provisions of andSection; 1124.52, the class prices for themonth, per hundredweight of milk, shall be as follows:(a) <T3>Class I price.</T3> The Class I price shall be the basic formula pricefor the second preceding month plus $1.90.(b) <T3>Class II price. </T3>A tentative Class II price shall be computed bythe Director of the Dairy Division and transmitted to the market administratoron or before the 15th day of the preceding month. The tentative Class IIprice shall be the basic Class II formula price for the month plus theamount that the value computed pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this sectionexceeds the value computed pursuant to paragraph (b)(2) of this section,except that in no event shall the final Class II price be less than theClass III price. If the Class III price for the month is computed pursuantto paragraphs (c) (1) through (3) of this section, the final Class II priceshall be reduced by the amount that the Class III price is less than thebasic formula price to the extent such reduction does not cause the ClassII price to be less than the Class III price.(1) Determine for the most recent 12-month period the simple average (roundedto the nearest cent) of the basic formula prices computed pursuant to andSection;1124.51 and add 25 cents; and(2) Determine for the same 12-month period as specified in paragraph (b)(1)of this section the simple average (rounded to the nearest cent) of thebasic Class II formula prices computed pursuant to andSection; 1124.51a.(c) <T3>Class III price. </T3>The Class III price shall be the basic formulaprice for the month but not to exceed the price computed as follows:(1) Multiply the Chicago butter price pursuant to andSection; 1124.51 by4.2; (2) Multiply by 8.2 the weighted average of carlot prices per pound fornonfat dry milk solids, spray process, for human consumption, f.o.b. manufacturingplants in the Chicago area, as published for the period from the 26th dayof the immediately preceding month through the 25th day of the currentmonth by the Department; and (3) From the sum of the results arrived at under paragraph (c) (1) and(2) of this section subtract 48 cents and round to the nearest cent. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.51</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Basic formula price.</ITAG>The ``basic formula price'' shall be the average price per hundredweightfor manufacturing grade milk, f.o.b. plants in Minnesota and Wisconsin,as reported by the Department for the month, adjusted to 3.5 percent butterfatbasis and rounded to the nearest cent. For such adjustment, the butterfatdifferential (rounded to the nearest one-tenth cent) per one-tenth percentbutterfat shall be 0.12 times the simple average of the wholesale sellingprices (using the midpoint of any price range as one price) if Grade A(92-score) bulk butter per pound at Chicago, as reported by the Departmentfor the month.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.51a</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Basic Class II formula price.</ITAG>The ``basic Class II formula price'' for the month shall be the basic formulaprice determined pursuant to andSection; 1124.51 for the second precedingmonth plus or minus the amount computed pursuant to paragraphs (a) through(d) of this section:(a) The gross values per hundredweight or milk used to manufacture cheddarcheese and butter-nonfat dry milk shall be computed, using price data determinedpursuant to andSection; 1124.19 and yield factors in effect under the DairyPrice Support Program authorized by the Agricultural Act of 1949, as amended,for the first 15 days of the preceding month and, separately, for the first15 days of the second preceding month as follows:(1) The gross value of milk used to manufacture cheddar cheese shall bethe sum of the following computations:(i) Multiply the cheddar cheese price by the yield factor used under thePrice Support Program for cheddar cheese;(ii) Multiply the butter price by the yield factor used under the PriceSupport Program for determining the butterfat component of the whey valuein the cheese price computation; and(iii) Subtract from the edible whey price the processing cost used underthe Price Support Program for edible whey and multiply any positive differenceby the yield factor used under the Price Support Program for edible whey.(2) The gross value of milk used to manufacture butter-nonfat dry milkshall be the sum of the following computations:(i) Multiply the butter price by the yield factor used under the PriceSupport Program for butter; and(ii) Multiply the nonfat dry milk price by the yield factor used underthe Price Support Program for nonfat dry milk. (b) Determine the amounts by which the gross value per hundredweight ofmilk used to manufacture cheddar cheese and the gross value per hundredweightof milk used to manufacture butter-nonfat dry milk for the first 15 daysof the preceding month exceed or are less than the respective gross valuesfor the first 15 days of the second preceding month.(c) Compute weighting factors to be applied to the changes in gross valuesdetermined pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section by determining therelative proportion that the data included in each of the following paragraphsis of the total of the data represented in paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) ofthis section:(1) Combine the total American cheese production for the States of Minnesotaand Wisconsin, as reported by the Statistical Reporting Service of theDepartment for the most recent preceding period, and divide by the yieldfactor used under the Price Support Program for cheddar cheese to determinethe quantity of milk used in the production of American cheddar cheese;and(2) Combine the total nonfat dry milk production for the States of Minnesotaand Wisconsin, as reported by the Statistical Reporting Service of theDepartment for the most recent preceding period, and divide by the yieldfactor used under the Price Support Program for nonfat dry milk to determinethe quantity of milk used in the production of butter-nonfat dry milk.(d) Compute a weighted average of the changes in gross values per hundredweightof milk determined pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section in accordancewith relative proportions of milk determined pursuant to paragraph (c)of this section.<ITAG tagnum="80"> andSection; 1124.52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plant location adjustments for handlers.</ITAG>(a) The following zones are defined for the purpose of determining locationadjustments:(1) Zone 1 shall include:(i) The Idaho counties of Benewah, Bonner, Boundary, Kootenai, Latah andShoshone;(ii) The Oregon counties of Benton, Clackamas, Clatsop, Columbia, Douglas,Hood River, Lane, Lincoln, Linn, Marion, Multnomah, Polk, Tillamook, Washingtonand Yamhill;(iii) The Washington counties of Clark, Cowlitz, Ferry, Grays Harbor, Island,King, Kitsap, Lewis, Lincoln, Mason, Pacific, Pend Oreille, Pierce, Skagit,Snohomish, Skamania, Spokane, Stevens, Thurston, Wahkiakum, and Whitman. (2) Zone 2 shall include: the Washington county of Whatcom.  (3) Zone 3 shall include: the Oregon counties of Coos, Jackson, and Josephine; (4) Zone 4 shall include:  (i) The Idaho counties of Lewis and Nez Perce;  (ii) The Oregon counties of Crook, Deschutes, Gilliam, Jefferson, Klamath,Lake, Morrow, Sherman, Umatila, Wallowa, Wasco and Wheeler;  (iii) The Washington counties of Adams, Asotin, Benton, Chelan, Callam,Columbia, Douglas, Franklin, Garfield, Grant, Jefferson, Kittitas, Klickitat,Okanogan, San Juan, Walla Walla and Yakima.  (b) For milk received at a plant from producers and which is classifiedas Class I milk, the price specified in andSection; 1124.50(a) shall be adjustedby the amount stated in paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this section forthe location of such plant:  (1) For a plant located within one of the zones described in paragraphs(a) (1) through (4) of this section, the adjustment shall be as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s10,xs48</C>  <H1> </H1><H1>Adjustment per hundredweight</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Zone 1 <D>No adjustment.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zone 2 <D>Minus 6 cents.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zone 3 <D>Minus 8 cents.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zone 4 <D>Minus 15 cents.</D></ITAG></ITAG>(2) For a plant located outside of one of the zones described in paragraphs(a) (1) through (4) of this section, the adjustment shall be minus 1.5cents per hundredweight for each 10 miles or fraction thereof by shortesthard-surfaced highway distance that the plant is located from the nearerof the county courthouse in Spokane, Washington, the Multnomah County Courthousein Portland, Oregon, or the city hall in Eugene, Oregon;  (c) The Class I price applicable to other source milk shall be adjustedat the rates set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, except that theprice when adjusted for location shall not be less than the Class III price. (d) For fluid milk products transferred in bulk from a pool plant to anotherpool plant at which a higher Class I price applies and which is classifiedas Class I, the price shall be the Class I price applicable at the locationof the transferee-plant subject to a location adjustment credit for thetransferor-plant determined by the market administrator as follows: (1) Subtract from the pounds of Class I remaining at the transferee-plantafter the computations pursuant to andSection; 1124.44 (a)(13) and (b) thepounds of packaged fluid milk products from other pool plants;  (2) Subtract the pounds of bulk fluid milk products received at the transferee-plantform the following sources:  (i) Producers;  (ii) Handlers described in andSection; 1124.9(c); and  (iii) Pool plants at which the same or a higher Class I price applies. (3) Assign any pounds remaining to transferor-plants in sequence beginningwith the plant at which the least adjustment would apply; and  (4) Multiply the pounds so computed for each transferor-plant by the differencein the Class I prices applicable at the transferee-plant and transferor-plant.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.53 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Announcement of class prices. </ITAG>The market administrator shall announce publicly on or before the fifthday of each month the Class I price for the following month, the ClassIII price for the preceding month and the final Class II price for thepreceding month; and on or before the 15th day of each month the tentativeClass II price for the following month.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.54 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Equivalent price. </ITAG>If for any reason a price or pricing constituent required by this partfor computing class prices or for other purposes is not available as prescribedin this part, the market administrator shall use a price or pricing constituentdetermined by the Secretary to be equivalent to the pricing constituentthat is required.<ITAG tagnum="84">Uniform Price</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.60 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Handler's value of milk for computing uniform price. </ITAG>For the purpose of computing the uniform price, the market administratorshall determine for each month the value of milk of each handler with respectto each of its pool plants and of each handler described in andSection; 1124.9(b) and (c) with respect to milk that was not received at a pool plantas follows:(a) Multiply the quantity of producer milk in each class, as computed pursuantto andSection; 1124.44(c), by the applicable class prices (adjusted pursuantto andSection; 1124.52) and add together the resulting amounts;  (b) Add the amounts obtained from multiplying the pounds of overage deductedfrom each class pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(15) and the correspondingstep of andSection; 1124.44(b) by the class prices applicable at the locationof the pool plant, as adjusted by the butterfat differential specifiedin andSection; 1124.74. In case overage occurs in a nonpool plant locatedon the same premises as a pool plant, such overage shall be prorated betweenthe quantity transferred from the pool plant and other source milk in suchnonpool plant. In such case, add an amount equal to the value of overageprorated to the quantity transferred to the nonpool plant at the classprice applicable at the pool plant.  (c) Add an amount equal to the difference between the value at the ClassI price applicable at the pool plant and the value at the Class III price,with respect to skim milk and butterfat in other source milk subtractedfrom Class I pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(8) (i) through (iv) and (vii)and the corresponding step of andSection; 1124.44(b) excluding receipts ofbulk fluid cream products from another order plant; (d) Add the amount obtained from multiplying the difference between theClass I price applicable at the location of the transferor-plant and theClass III price by the hundredweight of skim milk and butterfat subtractedfrom Class I pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(8) (v) and (vi) and the correspondingstep of andSection; 1124.44(b);  (e) Add the amount obtained from multiplying the difference between theClass III price for the preceding month and the Class I price adjustedpursuant to andSection; 1124.52, or the Class II price as the case may be,for the current month by the hundredweight of skim milk and butterfat subtractedfrom Class I and Class II pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(10) and thecorresponding step of andSection; 1124.44(b);(f) Add an amount equal to the value at the Class I price, adjusted forlocation of the nearest nonpool plant(s) from which an equivalent volumewas received, with respect to skim milk and butterfat subtracted from ClassI pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(12) and the corresponding step of andSection;1124.44(b), excluding such skim milk or butterfat in bulk receipts of fluidmilk products from an unregulated supply plant to the extent that an equivalentamount of skim milk or butterfat disposed of to such plant by a handlerfully regulated under this or any other order issued pursuant to the Actis classified and priced as Class I milk and is not used as an offset onany payment obligation under this or any other order; and(g) Add or subtract as the case may be, the amount necessary to correcterrors as disclosed by the verification of reports of such handler of thehandler's receipts and utilization of skim milk and butterfat in previousmonths for which payment has not been made.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.61</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Computation of uniform price.</ITAG>For each month the market administrator shall compute the ``uniform price''per hundredweight for milk of 3.5 percent butterfat content received fromproducers as follows:(a) Combine into one total the values computed pursuant to andSection; 1124.60for all handlers who filed the reports prescribed by andSection; 1124.30for the month and who made the payments pursuant to andSection; 1124.71 forthe preceding month;(b) Add the aggregate of all minus location adjustments computed pursuantto andSection; 1124.75;(c) Add an amount equal to not less than one-half of the unobligated balancein the produce-settlement fund;(d) Divide the resulting amount by the sum of the following for all handlersincluded in these computations:(1) The total hundredweight of producer milk; and(2) The total hundredweight for which a value is computed pursuant to andSection;1124.60(f); and(e) Subtract not less than 4 cents nor more than 5 cents per hundredweight.The result shall be the ``uniform price'' for milk received from producers.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.62</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Announcement of uniform price and butterfat differential.</ITAG>The market administrator shall announce publicly on or before:(a) The fifth day after the end of each month the butterfat differentialfor such month; and(b) The 14th day after the end of each month the uniform price for suchmonth.<ITAG tagnum="84">Payments for Milk</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.70</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Producer-settlement fund.</ITAG>The market administrator shall establish and maintain a separate fund knownas the ``producer-settlement fund,'' into which shall be deposited allpayments made by handlers pursuant to andSection;andSection; 1124.71 and 1124.76and out of which shall be made all payments to handlers pursuant to andSection;1124.72. However, the market administrator shall offset the payment dueto a handler from such fund against payments due from such handler.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.71</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payments to the producer-settlement fund.</ITAG>(a) On or before the 16th day after the end of the month during which theskim milk and butterfat were received each handler shall pay to the marketadministrator the amount, if any, by which the total amount specified inparagraph (a)(1) of this section exceeds the total amount specified inparagraph (a)(2) of this section:(1) The sum of:(i) The total value of milk of the handler for such month as determinedpursuant to andSection; 1124.60; and(ii) For a cooperative association handler, the amount due from other handlerspursuant to andSection; 1124.73(d) but without adjustment for butterfat;(2) The sum of:(i) The value of milk received by such handler from producers at the applicableuniform price pursuant to andSection; 1124.73(a)(2) but without adjustmentsfor butterfat;(ii) The amount to be paid to cooperative associations pursuant to andSection;1124.73(d) but without adjustment for butterfat; and(iii) The value at the uniform price for all skim milk and butterfat applicableat the location of the plant(s) from which received (not to be less thanthe value at the Class III price) with respect to other source milk forwhich a value is computed pursuant to andSection; 1124.60(f); and(b) On or before the 25th day after the end of the month, each handleroperating a plant specified in andSection; 1124.7(d) (2) and (3), if suchplant is subject to the classification and pricing provisions of anotherorder which provides for individual handler pooling, shall pay to the marketadministrator for the producer-settlement fund an amount computed as follows:(1) Determine the quantity of reconstituted skim milk in filled milk disposedof as route disposition in the marketing area which was allocated to ClassI at such other order plant. If reconstituted skim milk in filled milkis disposed of from such plant as route disposition in the marketing areasregulated by two or more market pool orders, the reconstituted skim milkassigned to Class I shall be prorated according to such disposition ineach area.(2) Compute the value of the quantity assigned in paragraph (b)(1) of thissection to Class I disposition in this area, at the Class I price underthis part applicable at the location of the other order plant (but notto be less than the Class III price) and subtract its value at the ClassIII price.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.72</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payments from the producer-settlement fund.</ITAG>On or before the 18th day after the end of the month during which the skimmilk and butterfat were received, the market administrator shall pay toeach handler the amount, if any, by which the amount computed pursuantto andSection; 1124.71(a)(2) exceeds the amount computed pursuant to andSection;1124.71(a)(1), and less any unpaid obligations of such handler to the marketadministrator pursuant to andSection;andSection; 1124.71(a), 1124.77, 1124.85,and 1124.86. However, if the balance in the producer-settlement fund isinsufficient to make all payments pursuant to this section, the marketadministrator shall reduce uniformly such payments and shall complete suchpayments as soon as the necessary funds are available.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.73</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payments to producers and to cooperative associations.</ITAG>(a) Each handler shall make payments to each producer for milk receivedfrom such producer during the month:(1) On or before the last day of the month to each producer who had notdiscontinued shipping milk to such handler before the 18th day of the month,at not less than the Class III price for the preceding month per hundredweightof milk received during the first 15 days of the month, less proper deductionsauthorized in writing by such producer; and(2) On or before the 19th day after the end of each month for milk receivedfrom such producers during such month:(i) At not less than the uniform price for the quantity of milk received,adjusted by the butterfat differential pursuant to andSection; 1124.74 andby any location adjustments applicable under andSection; 1124.75;(ii) Minus payments made pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section.However, if by such date such handler has not received full payment forsuch month pursuant to andSection; 1124.72, the handler shall not be deemedto be in violation of this paragraph if the handler reduced uniformly forall producers the payments per hundredweight pursuant to this paragraphby a total amount not in excess of the reduction in payment from the MarketAdministrator; however, the handler shall make such balance of paymentuniformly to those producers to whom it is due on or before the date formaking payments pursuant to this paragraph next following that on whichsuch balance of payments is received from the market administrator.(b) The payments required in paragraph (a) of this section shall be made,upon request, to a cooperative association qualified under andSection; 1124.18,or its duly authorized agent, with respect to milk received from each producerwho has given such association authorization by contract or by other writteninstrument to collect the proceeds from the sale of the producer's milk,and any payment made pursuant to this paragraph shall be made on or before2 days prior to the dates specified in paragraph (a) of this section.(c) Each handler shall pay to each cooperative association or its dulyauthorized agent which operates a pool plant for skim milk and butterfatreceived from such plant:(1) On or before the 2nd day prior to the date specified in paragraph (a)(1)of this section for skim milk and butterfat received during the first 15days of that month at not less than the Class III price for the precedingmonth; and(2) On or before the 15th day after the end of such month, an amount ofmoney computed by multiplying the total pounds of such skim milk and butterfatin each class pursuant to andSection; 1124.42(a) by the class price adjustedby the butterfat differential and taking into account any location adjustmentsas provided by andSection; 1124.52 applicable at the pool plant of the cooperativeassociation or its agent, minus payment made pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)of this section.(d) Each handler who received milk for which a cooperative associationis the handler pursuant to andSection; 1124.9(c) shall pay such cooperativeassociation for such milk received:(1) On or before the 2nd day prior to the date specified in paragraph (a)(1)of this section for such milk received during the first 15 days of thatmonth at not less than the Class III price for the preceding month; and(2) On or before the 17th day after the end of each month, for the milkreceived at not less than the uniform price for all milk adjusted pursuantto andSection;andSection; 1124.74 and 1124.75(b), minus payments made pursuantto paragraph (d)(1) of this section.(e) None of the provisions of this section shall be construed to restrictany cooperative association qualified under section 8c(5)(F) of the Actfrom making payment for milk to its producers in accordance with such provisionof the Act.(f) In making payments to producers pursuant to this section, each handler,on or before the 19th days of each month shall furnish each producer witha supporting statement in such form that it may be retained by the producer,which shall show for the preceding month:(1) The identity of the handler and the producer;(2) The total pounds of milk delivered by the producer and the averagebutterfat test thereof and the pounds per shipment if such informationis not furnished to the producer each day of delivery;(3) The minimum rate at which payment to the producer is required underthe provisions of this section;(4) The rate per hundredweight and amount of any premiums or payments abovethe minimum price provided by the order;(5) The amount or rate per hundredweight of each deduction claimed by thehandler, together with a description of the respective deductions; and(6) The net amount of payment to the producer.(g) In making payments to a cooperative association in aggregate pursuantto this section, each handler upon request shall furnish to the cooperativeassociation, with respect to each producer for whom such payment is made,any or all of the above information specified in paragraph (f) of thissection.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.74</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Butterfat differential.</ITAG>For milk containing more or less than 3.5 percent butterfat, the uniformprice shall be increased or decreased, respectively, for each one-tenthpercent butterfat variation from 3.5 percent by a butterfat differential,rounded to the nearest one-tenth cent, which shall be 0.115 times the simpleaverage of the wholesale selling prices (using the midpoint of any pricerange as one price) of Grade A (92-score) bulk butter per pound at Chicagoas reported by the Department for the month. andSection; 1124.75 Plant locationadjustments for producers and on nonpool milk.(a) In making payment to producers pursuant to andSection; 1124.73(a) subjectto the application of andSection; 1124.13(c)(5) appropriate adjustments shallbe made per hundredweight of milk received from producers at respectiveplant locations at the same rate as specified for Class I milk set forthin andSection; 1124.52.(b) In making payments to a cooperative association pursuant to andSection;1124.73(d) appropriate adjustments shall be made at the rates specifiedfor Class I milk in andSection; 1124.52 for the location of the plant atwhich the milk was received from the cooperative association.(c) For purposes of computations pursuant to andSection;andSection; 1124.71(a)and 1124.72 the uniform price for all milk shall be adjusted at the ratesset forth in andSection; 1124.52 for Class I milk applicable at the locationof the nonpool plant from which the milk or filled milk was received, exceptthat the adjusted uniform price shall not be less than the Class III price.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.76</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payments by a handler operating a partially regulated distributingplant.</ITAG>Each handler who operates a partially regulated distributing plant shallpay to the market administrator for the producer-settlement fund on orbefore the 25th day after the end of the month either of the amounts (atthe handler's election) calculated pursuant to paragraph (a) or (b) ofthis section. If the handler fails to report pursuant to andSection;andSection;1124.30(d) and 1124.31(b) the information necessary to compute the amountspecified in paragraph (a) of this section, the handler shall pay the amountcomputed pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section:(a) An amount computed as follows:(1)(i) The obligation that would have been computed pursuant to andSection;1124.60 at such plant shall be determined as though such plant were a poolplant. For purposes of such computation, receipts at such nonpool plantfrom a pool plant or an other order plant shall be assigned to the utilizationat which classified at the pool plant or other order plant and transfersfrom such nonpool plant to a pool plant or an other order plant shall beclassified as Class II or Class III milk if allocated to such class atthe pool plant or other order plant and be valued at the uniform priceof the respective order if so allocated to Class I milk, except that reconstitutedskim milk in filled milk shall be valued at the Class III price. No obligationshall apply to Class I milk transferred to a pool plant or an other orderplant if such Class I utilization is assigned to receipts at the partiallyregulated distributing plant from pool plants and other order plants atwhich an equivalent amount of milk was classified and priced as Class Imilk. There shall be included in the obligation so computed a charge inthe amount specified in andSection; 1124.60(f) and a credit in the amountspecified in andSection; 124.71(a)(2)(iii) with respect to receipts froman unregulated supply plant, except that the credit for receipts of reconstitutedskim milk in filled milk shall be at the Class III price, unless an obligationwith respect to such plant is computed as specified in paragraph (a)(1)(ii)of this section; and(ii) If the operator of the partially regulated distributing plant so requests,and provides with reports filed pursuant to andSection;andSection; 1124.30(d)and 1124.31(b) similar reports with respect to the operations of any othernonpool plant which serves as a supply plant for such partially regulateddistributing plant by shipments to such plant during the month equivalentto the requirements of andSection; 1124.7(b), with agreement of the operatorof such plant that the market administrator may examine the books and recordsof such plant for purposes of verification of such reports, there willbe added the amount of the obligation computed at such nonpool supply plantin the same manner and subject to the same conditions as for the partiallyregulated distributing plant.(2) From this obligation there will be deducted the sum of:(i) The gross payments made by such handler for Grade A milk received duringthe month from dairy farmers at such plant adjusted to a 3.5 percent butterfatbasis by the butterfat differential pursuant to andSection; 1124.74, andlike payments made by the operator of a supply plant(s) included in thecomputations pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section; and(ii) Any payments to the producer-settlement fund of an other order underwhich such plant is also a partially regulated distributing plant.(b) An amount computed as follows:(1) Determine the respective amounts of skim milk and butterfat disposedof as route disposition of Class I milk within the maketing area;(2) Deduct the respective amount of skim milk and butterfat received atthe plant:(i) As Class I milk from pool plants and other order plants, except thatdeducted under a similar provision of another order issued pursuant tothe Act; and(ii) From a nonpool plant that is not an other order plant to the extentthat an equivalent amount of skim milk or butterfat disposed of to suchnonpool plant by handlers fully regulated under this or any other orderissued pursuant to the Act is classified and priced as Class I milk andis not used as an offset on any payment obligation under this or any otherorder;(3) Deduct the quantity of reconstituted skim milk in fluid milk productsdisposed of as route disposition in the marketing area;(4) From the value of such milk at the Class I price applicable at thelocation of the nonpool plant, subtract its value at the uniform priceapplicable at such location (not to be less than the Class III price),and add for the quantity of reconstituted skim milk specified in paragraph(b)(3) of this section its value computed at the Class I price applicableat the location of the nonpool plant (but not to be less than the ClassIII price) less the value of such skim milk at the Class III price.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.77</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Adjustment of accounts.</ITAG>Whenever verification by the market administrator of reports or paymentsof any handler discloses errors resulting in money due:(a) The market administrator from such handler;(b) Such handler from the market administrator; or(c) Any producer or cooperative association from such handler, the marketadministrator shall promptly notify such handler of any amount so due andpayment thereof shall be made on or before the next date for making paymentsset forth in the provisions under which such error occurred following the5th day after such notice.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.78</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Charges on Overdue Accounts.</ITAG>(a) Any unpaid obligation of a handler pursuant to andSection;andSection; 1124.71,1124.76, 1124.77, 1124.85 or andSection; 1124.86 shall be increased 1 percentbeginning on the first day after the due date, and on each date of subsequentmonths following the day on which such type of obligation is normally due,subject to the following conditions:(1) The amounts payable pursuant to this section shall be computed monthlyon each unpaid obligation, which shall include any unpaid overdue chargespreviously computed pursuant to this section; and (2) For the purpose of this section, any obligation that was determinedat a date later than that prescribed by the order because of a handler'sfailure to submit a report to the market administrator when due shall beconsidered to have been payable by the date it would have been due if thereport had been filed when due.(b) All charges on overdue accounts shall be paid to the fund to whichthe account was due immediately after the charge has been collected.<ITAG tagnum="84">Administrative Assessment and Marketing Service Deduction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.85</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Assessment for order administration.</ITAG>A pro rata share of the expense of administration of the order shall bepaid to the market administrator by each handler on or before the 16thday after the end of the month 4 cents per hundredweight, or such lesseramount as the Secretary may prescribe, with respect to:(a) Producer milk (including such handler's own production);(b) Other source milk allocated to Class I pursuant to andSection; 1124.44(a)(8)and (12) and the corresponding steps of andSection; 1124.44(b), except suchother source milk on which no handler obligation applies pursuant to andSection;1124.60(f); and(c) Route disposition in the marketing area from a partially regulateddistributing plant that exceeds the Class I milk:(1) Received during the month at such plant from pool plants and otherorder plants that is not used as an offset under a similar provision ofanother order issued pursuant to the Act; and(2) Specified in andSection; 1124.76(b)(2)(ii).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1124.86</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Deduction for marketing services.</ITAG>(a) Except as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, each handler,in making payments to producers (other than with respect to milk of suchhandler's own production) pursuant to andSection; 1124.73(a)(2), shall makea deduction of 5 cents per hundredweight of milk or such amount not exceeding5 cents per hundredweight as the Secretary may prescribe, with respectto the following:(1) All milk received from producers at a plant not operated by a cooperativeassociation.(2) All milk received at a plant operated by a cooperative associationfrom producers for whom the marketing services set forth below in thisparagraph are not being performed by the cooperative association as determinedby the market administrator. Such deduction shall be paid by the handlerto the market administrator on or before the 16th day after the end ofthe month. Such moneys shall be expended by the market administrator forthe verification of weights, sampling and testing of milk received fromproducers, and in providing for market information to producers. Such servicesare to be performed in whole or in part by the market administrator orby an agent engaged by and responsible to him.(b) In the case of each producer;(1) Who is a member of, or who has given written authorization for therendering of marketing services and the taking of deductions thereforeto, a cooperative association;(2) Whose milk is received at a plant not operated by such association;and(3) For whom the market administrator determines that such associationis performing the services described in paragraph (a) of this section,each handler shall deduct, in lieu of the deduction specified under paragraph(a) of this section, from the payments made pursuant to andSection; 1124.73(a)(2) the amount per hundredweight on milk authorized by such producerand shall pay, on or before the 18th day after the end of the month, suchdeduction to the association entitled to receive it under this paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="75">Marketing Agreement Regulating the Handling of Milk in the PacificNorthwest Marketing Area</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The parties hereto, in order to effectuate the declared policy ofthe Act, and in accordance with the rules of practice and procedure effectivethereunder (7 CFR Part 900), desire to enter into this marketing agreementand do hereby agree that the provisions referred to in paragraph I hereofas augmented by the provisions specified in paragraph II hereof, shallbe and are the provisions of this marketing agreement as if set out infull herein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">I. The findings and determinations, order relative to handling, andthe provisions of andSection;andSection; 1124.1 to 1124.86, all inclusive,of the order regulating the handling of milk in the Pacific Northwest marketingarea (7 CFR Part 1124) which is annexed hereto; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">II. The following provisions:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">andSection; 1124.87 Record of milk handled and authorization to correcttypographical errors.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(a) Record of milk handled. The undersigned certifies that he handledduring the month of September 1988, <T2>XXX</T2> hundredweight of milk covered by this marketing agreement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(b) Authorization to correct typographical errors. The undersignedhereby authorizes the Director, or Acting Director, Dairy Division, AgriculturalMarketing Service, to correct any typographical errors which may have beenmade in this marketing agreement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">andSection; 1124.88 Effective date. This marketing agreement shall becomeeffective upon the execution of a counterpart hereof by the Secretary inaccordance with Section 900.14(a) of the aforesaid rules of practice andprocedure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In Witness Whereof, The contracting handlers, acting under the provisionsof the Act, for the purposes and subject to the limitations herein containedand not otherwise, have hereunto set their respective hands and seals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77"/><ITAG tagnum="20">    (Signature)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Seal)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">By</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">  (Name) (Title)   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77"/><ITAG tagnum="20">    (Address)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Attest</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Date</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">FR Doc. 88-27819 Filed 12-5-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>