<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88831-0026 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-31-88.f2.A1025</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 169 / Wednesday, August 31, 1988/ Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Human Development Services</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">45 CFR Parts 1321, 1326 and 1328</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Grants for State and Community Programs on Aging; and Grants to IndianTribes and Organizations Serving Older Native Hawaiians for Supportiveand Nutrition Services</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Administration on Aging (AoA), Human Development ServicesOffice, HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rules.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Administration on Aging (AoA) is issuing final regulationsfor Part 1321 for grants to State and Community programs on aging, redesignatingformer Part 1328 for grants to Indian Tribes and organizations as Part1326, and adding a new Part 1328 for grants to Native Hawaiians. The basisfor these changes is the passage of Pub. L. 100-175 (the Older AmericansAct Amendments of 1987), comments on the AOA Notice of Proposed Rulemaking(NPRM) published on March 29, 1988 (53 FR 10107), and the Department'scommitment to regulatory reform.These rules implement Titles III and VI of the Older Americans Act, includingthe amendments to the Act which modify the current program. The changesemphasize the strengthened roles of the State and area agencies on agingin the development of community-based systems of services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>The final regulations are effective on August 31, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Frederick Luhmann, Office of Stateand Tribal Programs, Administration on Aging, Room 4739, 330 IndependenceAve., SW., Washington, DC 20201, (202) 245-0011.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>The Older Americans Act was first enacted in 1965. The President signedthe Older Americans Act Amendments of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-175) on November29, 1987. The Act was amended eleven times between 1965 and 1987.As first enacted, the Act authorized funding under Title III to supportin each State a State Agency on Aging. Title III also provided funds foreach State agency to initiate local community projects to provide socialservices to older persons.In 1972, a new Title VII was enacted which authorized funds for local communityprojects to provide nutrition services to the elderly. The projects weredesigned to provide persons aged 60 and older with at least one hot nutritiousmeal five or more days a week. In 1973, the amendments revised the TitleIII State Grant Program by requiring the State agency to: (1) Divide theentire State into planning and service areas, (2) determine in which areasan area plan would be developed, and (3) designate an area agency on agingto develop and administer the plan in each area. The 1973 amendments alsoadded a new Title V to the Act which authorized the Commissioner to makegrants directly to local community agencies to pay part of the cost ofthe construction, acquisition, renovation, alteration, or initial staffingof facilities for use as a multipurpose senior centers.The 1978 amendments consolidated under Title III the social services, nutritionservices, and multipurpose senior center programs formerly authorized underTitles III, V and VII. This consolidation was designed to eliminate duplicativeand overlapping functions that had been conducted under each Title. Italso reemphasized the concept of a single focal point for service deliverywithin each community. The 1978 amendments enacted a new Title VI, a directgrant program to Indian tribal organizations for older Indians. The 1981amendments made several technical amendments to the Act and reinforcedthe basic direction established under the 1978 amendments. Most of thechanges expanded the capacity of State agencies, area agencies and tribalorganizations through increased administrative flexibility.The 1984 amendments included a number of changes in the various serviceprograms under Title III, including provisions to increase further theability of States to transfer funds between their separate allotments forsupportive and nutrition services; to specify particular attention to theneeds of low-income minority older persons; to require area agencies toconduct activities to facilitate coordination of community-based long-termcare services; and to strengthen the long-term care ombudsman program.In addition, the 1984 amendments modified the manner in which funds forState administration are allocated to State agencies on aging, specifieda statutory limitation on the amount of funds which could be used for administrationof Title V, and created a new title for health education and training activitiesfor older persons.In 1986, legislation increased the authorization of appropriations forthe United States Department of Agricluture (USDA) cash and commodity subsidyprogram for fiscal years 1985-87 and set the level of reimbursement at56.76 cents for each meal served under Title III for each of those years.The 1987 amendments removed the former provision under which the USDA reimbursementrate was related to changes in the Consumer Price Index. A new fixed reimbursementrate was established for the four year authorization created by the 1987amendments.The 1987 amendments provide a strong basis for Older Americans Act supportedactivities that are responsive to the complex and changing environmentwhich is emerging with the aging of American society. With enactment ofthese amendments, the Act continues to underscore the collaborative effortsthat are needed to ensure that every community in this nation providesthe opportunity for individuals to live and mature with dignity and independence.The reauthorized Act reaffirms expectations that AoA, State agencies onaging and area agencies on aging provide leadership at their respectivelevels and work to establish strong partnerships with other public, privateand voluntary sector organizations to assure that the nation is respondingto the challenge of an aging society. The role of the State agency on agingis reinforced as the developer of policies and procedures to guide anddirect area agencies. The amendments also further enhance the role of thearea agency on aging as an advocate on behalf of the elderly and catalystfor ensuring the existence of community-based systems of services for olderpersons in every community in the planning and service area.The 1987 amendments authorize the initiation of a number of activitiesincluding the establishment in the Administration on Aging of an Officefor American Indian, Alaskan Native and Hawaiian Native Programs headedby an Associate Commissioner responsible for Title VI and for chairingan interagency task force related to older Indians. The amendments alsoestablish a separate Title VI-B program of grants for supportive and nutritionalservices to older Hawaiian Natives. Under Title III, the amendments create:A new Part D to support non-medical in-home services for frail older persons;a new Part E providing grants to States to assist them in meeting specialneeds of older persons; a new Part F supporting preventive health servicesfor the elderly; and a new Part G providing grants to States for programsto prevent abuse, neglect and exploitation of older individuals. The newamendments require each State to establish an Office of State Long-TermCare Ombudsman. The Commissioner on Aging is required to conduct a studyof the ombudsman program and report to Congress on the findings and recommendationsof the study.<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments</ITAG>During the 60 day comment period following publication of the NPRM, wereceived over 700 letters; however, only one joint letter from membersof Congress and a few other letters addressed the Title VI program. Allof the other comments pertained to Title III programs. The numbers of lettersreceived were: Members of Congress (12), national organizations (15), Stateunits on aging (43), State human services agencies (3), Area agencies onaging (184), community service provider agencies (237), and individuals(191). Many of the letters supported the changes which were proposed inorder to strengthen the development of community based services. However,a number of commenters indicated that there are provisions in current regulationswhich we proposed to delete and which they wish to see retained.As a result of the comment review process, a number of regulatory sectionswere revised or added. Changes were made in areas where we believed thatsuch changes met a compelling Federal interest and/or were necessary tomaintain the integrity of the Title III programs.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Comments and Changes Made From the NPRM</ITAG>Section 1321.3 Definitions.Commenters most frequently raised questions about the definition proposedfor ``direct services.'' Several comments were received about the definitionfor in-home services and severe disability. Single comments were offeredabout the following other terms, some of which were not included in theNPRM: greatest social need, means test, periodic, official duties, reservation,rural and significant population.Typical of the comments offered about the definition of ``direct services''was that it was both too vague and too broad. Some commenters stated that<T3>all</T3> activities of area agencies benefit older persons and, thus,would be precluded by the proposed definition. Some commenters also indicatedthat they understood the definition to prevent area agencies from providingany direct services, although in the view of these commenters it wouldbe appropriate for area agencies to engage in such activities as case managementor information and referral.A few commenters made suggestions about the proposed definition of ``in-homeservices.'' One commenter suggested that the definition be restricted toPart D since this would permit a fuller range of in-home support servicesto be offered through Part B. Another commenter requested the removal ofthe $150 limit on home modifications which was included in the proposeddefinition. One commenter requested the inclusion of the complete language of the statutein the definition of ``severe disability'' so it is clear that individualswith lifelong mental and/or physical disabilities are covered. <T3>AoA Response: </T3>We agree that the proposed definition of ``directservice'' was too broad. Therefore, we have modified the definition inthese final regulations to sharpen the intended meaning. The definitionneither permits nor precludes area agencies from engaging in such activities;it simply describes what activities constitute direct services. The determinationas to whether or not it is appropriate for an area agency to engage inany form of direct service is a responsibility which section 307(a)(10)of the Older Americans Act assigns to the State agency on aging. We considered the comments offered about the definition of ``in-home service'';but concluded that there was merit for reporting, and other purposes, inhaving a common definition of in-home services for both Part B and PartD. The $150 limit on home modifications is required by section 342(1)(E)of the Act; and, therefore, we could not change it. The definition of ``severe disability'' has been modified to include thestatutory reference in section 102(9) of the Act to mental and/or physicaldisability. One commenter who addressed the definition of ``reservation'' requestedthat we include the word ``former'' in the definition when referring toreservations in Oklahoma. We have made that change. Another commenter statedthat the proposed definition of ``significant population,'' as it appliedto section 306(a)(6)(N) of the Act, was too restrictive because it wasbased solely on the number of Indians a tribal organization must represent(that is 50 older Indians) in order to be eligible for a Title VI grant.The commenter indicated that the term could have different meanings invarious parts of the nation. We accepted the idea that flexibility shouldbe permitted in defining the term. Therefore, we have not included a standarddefinition in these rules. However we expect State policies to addressthis matter. Accordingly, we have added a State plan assurance requiringthis at andSection; 1321.17(b)(15). The remaining comments suggested thatadditional terms be defined; but we determined that no additional definitionsare necessary. Section 1321.7 Mission of the State agency.Many commenters were supportive of the fact that the proposed regulationsincluded for the first time clear mission statements for the State andarea agencies on aging. A few commenters, however, believed that the discussionof State agency responsibilities found in the Act was adequate, and thata further discussion of State agency mission was not required. A significantnumber of area agencies who commented on this section, and some Membersof Congress, objected to any reference to area agencies on aging as ``agentsof the State agency.'' A concern also was expressed by some that the term``agents'' might have inappropriate connotations of legal liability. Anumber of commenters requested that the term ``agents'' be deleted; othersrequested that the term ``partners'' be used to describe the relationshipbetween the State agency and area agencies. <T3>AoA Responses: </T3>The term ``agents'' was intended to convey thefact that under the Older Americans Act it is the responsibility of theState agency on aging to designate area agencies to carry out within specificplanning and service areas the statutory functions and responsibilitiesnecessary to foster the development in communities throughout the Stateof comprehensive systems of services for older persons. The State agencyhas the overall statewide responsibility to assure that such systems aredeveloped in each community and designates area agencies for the purposeof carrying out the State agency mission in designated geographic areasof the State. However, because of the concern expressed about the term``agents of the State,'' we have revised andSection; 1321.7(b) to deletethe term ``agents'' and to express more clearly the purpose for which areaagencies are designated by the State agency. We also deleted the term ``agent''from andSection; 1321.1(c) where it had appeared in the proposed rules. Thisrevision is intended to more clearly reflect that the State agency providesoverall policy and program guidance. Area agencies have flexibility tocarry out their mission within that framework. Section 1321.9 Organization and staffing of the State agency. One Member of Congress expressed concern that proposed regulations didnot prohibit the designated State agency on aging from directly operatingthe ombudsman program when that agency also has responsibility for licensingor certifying long-term care services. The commenter noted that AoA haschosen to interpret the statute as prohibiting the ombudsman function frombeing located in the same agency as the licensing and certification functiononly when the ombudsman program is contracted to another agency or organization.The concern of the commenter was that every appearance of conflict of interestrelated to the ombudsman program should be avoided; and that the potentialfor such an appearance of conflict of interest existed when the State agencyon aging also had responsibilities related to licensing and certification.<T3>AoA Response:</T3> We are sensitive to the concern expressed that theoperation of the ombudsman program be free from even the slightest appearanceof conflict of interest. Nevertheless, given the structure of section 307(a)(12)(A)of the Act, we believe that we have no alternative but to reaffirm ourinterpretation that the statutory constraint on operation of the ombudsmanprogram by an agency which also has licensing and certification responsibilitiesdoes not extend to the State agency on aging. We agree, however, that inthose situations where the State agency on aging also has responsibilitiesfor licensing and certification, special care must be taken and considerationgiven to assure the protection of the ombudsman program from even a hintof conflict of interest. We believe that the policies which the State agencydevelops under andSection; 1321.11 of these regulations provide the meansto achieve this goal. Those policies must provide strong measures to guaranteethe integrity of the ombudsman program on every point intended by the Congress.In these final regulations, we are requiring that State policies be developedin consultation with appropriate parties within the State. It is our expectationthat in the development of policies governing the ombudsman program therewill be full and ample discussion of the issue of conflict of interestand that the policies developed by each State will contain clear and explicitprovisions to prevent any such situation from arising, or if it did, toassure appropriate and timely action to correct any abuse of this nature.Section 1321.11 State agency policies.Comments were received from a relatively small number of States and nationalaging organizations on this section. Several commenters supported the conceptthat States should be responsible for the development of State policies,particularly for the ombudsman program. Comments from a few States weresupportive of AoA's proposal to delete the provision prohibiting the Stateagency from requiring the area agencies on aging to submit to it subgrantsor contracts for prior review or approval. Area agencies on aging werestrongly against deleting this prohibition on prior review and approvalauthority of the States. Many area agencies expressed the belief that Stateagencies, if free to mandate prior review and approval, would politicizethe decision-making process with regard to subgrants and contracts.<T3>AoA Response:</T3> We have included language to the effect that Statepolicies governing Title III programs are to be developed in consultationwith other appropriate parties in the State. We have given careful considerationto the comments regarding deletion of the prohibition against prior reviewand approval by the State agency. AoA is not imposing a requirement thatStates now begin to review and approve subgrants and contracts by theirarea agencies on aging. Neither are we prohibiting the States from developingsuch a requirement. We recognize the State's responsibility for developingrules and guidelines in this area. In deleting this provision from thecurrent regulations, AoA is adhering to the principle of providing maximumflexibility to State governments to respond to the needs of their respectivepopulations.Sections 1321.13 Advocacy responsibilities and 1321.61 Advocacy responsibilitiesof the area agency.Several commenters indicated concern about language in the existing regulations(andSection;andSection; 1321.33(b) and 1321.65(b)), which are carried overto andSection;andSection; 1321.13(b) and 1321.61(d) in the proposed regulations,and which they believe unjustifiably restricts lobbying and other politicaladvocacy activities by State and area agencies on aging. Several Stateagencies, Members of Congress, and national organizations, expressed concernthat we either clarify or delete language stating that ``no requirementsin this section shall be deemed to supersede statutory or other regulatoryrestrictions regarding lobbying or political advocacy with Federal funds.''Commenters pointed out that this provision appears not only to be contraryto the intent of Congress, but also to contradict policies stated in thissame section that give State agencies the responsibility to review, monitor,evaluate and comment on Federal, State and local programs, laws, policiesand other actions which affect or may affect older individuals.<T3>AoA Response:</T3> We revised the language which had appeared in proposedandSection;andSection; 1321.13(b) and 1321.61(d) to reflect more preciselyour intent with regard to lobbying or other political advocacy by Stateand area agencies on aging. The revised language appears in andSection;andSection;1321.13(b) and 1321.61(d).Section 1321.17 Content of State plan.By far the greatest number of comments received on this section of theproposed rules focused not on what was in the proposed rule, but what wasproposed to be deleted from the existing regulations. A large number ofcommenters, including: Some Members of Congress, the national associationsrepresenting State and area agencies, some individual State agencies, andall area agencies who addressed this point, opposed the proposed deletionof existing andSection; 1321.9(e)(5). That section permits a State agencyto approve the use by area agencies of Part B service funds for programdevelopment and coordination, provided that the State agency first spends8.5 percent (now 10%) of its total combined supportive and nutrition servicesfor the administration of area plans. On the other hand, a large numberof service providers wrote in favor of the deletion on the basis that itwould free up scarce service funds for needed services to older persons.Our reason given in the NPRM for proposing to delete this provision wasthat the 1987 amendments to the Act increased the amount of funding availablefor administration of area plans from 8.5 to 10 percent of the State'sallotments for services. Also, the 1987 amendments added new Parts to theAct, such as Part D for in-home services, which provided a broader basisupon which the 10 percent could be computed. We, therefore, felt that theexisting authority for area agencies to use service funds for program developmentand coordination was no longer necessary or appropriate.The most common reason offered by commenters for retention of the existingrule was that the increase from 8.5 to 10 percent for area plan administrationwas inadequate to offset the amount of funds currently used for programdevelopment and coordination. Commenters also contended that the 1987 amendmentsto the Older Americans Act added significant new responsibilities for areaagencies and that continued use of service funds for program developmentand coordination was necessary to properly carry out these responsibilities.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>Because of the strong sentiments expressed aboutthe proposal to delete the program development and coordination authority,we conducted a survey of State agencies to obtain a clearer perceptionof the extent to which services funds currently are used for program developmentand coordination. Our findings indicated that 23 State agencies permitsuch use, while the remainder do not currently use funds for this purpose.As reported by the States, in FY 1987 a total of approximately $10.25 millionnationally was approved for program development and coordination purposes.By comparison, the increase in the amount of funds available in FY 1988for area plan administration nationally as a result of the increase from8.5 to 10 percent of each State's Title III allotment equaled $9.85 million.We concluded, therefore, that on a national basis the deletion of the programdevelopment and coordination authority would have resulted in only a modestreduction in the overall funds available for area plan administration purposes.However, because of the diverse pattern among States in the use of theexisting program development and coordination authority, we recognizedthat deletion of this authority might have adverse effects in some States.As a result, we decided to retain the existing authority to use servicefunds for program development and coordination, but have added a requirementthat the State agency must certify that the area agency which proposesto use supportive service funds for program development and coordinationhas demonstrated to the satisfaction of the State agency that the use ofsuch funds will enhance the services available to older persons in theplanning and service area. The program development and coordination provisionappears at andSection;1321.17(f)(14).A few commenters discussed the topic of outreach to older Indians underTitle III and the question of coordination between Title III and TitleVI of the Act. In response to the comments which were concerned with outreachto older Indians as required by section 306(a)(6)(N) of the Act, we addedlanguage to andSection;1321.17(f)(8) which emphasizes the responsibilityof the State agency to assure outreach to older Indians. As for cordination,we added in andSection;1321.17(f)(13) a new requirement that the State agencyassure that services provided under Title III will be coordinated, whereappropriate, with the services provided under Title VI of the Act. We alsoadded similar requirements for coordination in andSection;andSection;1326.19(d)(6)and 1328.19(d)(6).Section 1321.35 Withdrawal of area agency designation.National aging organizations were the primary commenters submitting responsesto this section of the proposed regulations. Several comments supportedthe proposed new language which would permit States to withdraw area agencyon aging designation when the activities of the area agency are inconsistentwith its statutory mission or in conflict with the requirement of the Actthat it funciton only as an area agency on aging. Several other commenterssuggested deletion of this new language because it was deemed to be unnecessaryand because withdrawal of designation was not considered to be the intentof Congress.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>In adding new language to section 305(c) of theOlder Americans Act, Congress specified that an area agency is to functiononly for the purpose of serving as an area agency. The regulations makeclear that it is the State agency's responsibility to ensure that areaagencies adhere to this statutory mission and that the ultimate sanctionby the State agency for noncompliance is withdrawal of designation as anarea agency on aging. Therefore, we have not modified this provision.Section 1321.51(d) Confidentiality and disclosure of information.Many comments were received objecting to the inclusion of the requirementthat the director of the State agency, or other legitimately authorizedsuperior of the State ombudsman and of representatives of the OmbudsmanOffice, be given access to the ombudsman files. A number of Members ofCongress were particularly concerned that this provision be deleted becauseof the belief that it authorizes unwarranted expansion of those individualswho would have access to the records of residents of long-term care facilities.Congressional commenters expressed the belief that the effectiveness ofthe ombudsman program would be decreased under the process proposed, sincethe effectiveness of the program is tied to confidentiality of complainantsor residents of long-term care facilities.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>Under section 307(a)(12) of the Older AmericansAct, the State agency is required to ``establish and operate'' an ombudsmanprogram. AoA proposed to include a provision at andSection;1321.51(d) allowingaccess to files by the State agency director and other authorized individualsto ensure that the State agency had the ability to monitor the qualityand effectiveness of the program. Most commenters expressed the beliefthat access to ombudsman records by the State agency was not needed inorder to properly monitor the program. However, we remain committted tothe concept that it is the State agency on aging that is charged with itseffective and high quality implementation; regular monitoring of this programby the State agency is essential to that end. We believe that access tothe ombudsman files on a highly selective basis, without disclosure ofthe identity of any complainant or resident of a long-term care facility,is an essential element in determining the effectiveness and quality ofthis important service. Likewise, we are dedicated to maintaining the confidentialityof any complainant or resident of a long-term care facility. Therefore,proposed andSection;1321.51(d) has been deleted, and a carefully controlledand limited provision for access to the files has been added in andSection;1321.11(b).While a State agency on aging is not required to review the ombudsman files,when the director of the State agency determines that it must have accessto the files to verify effectiveness and quality of programs, access willbe under very limited and controlled circumstances, prohibiting disclosureof the identity of any complainant or resident of a long-term care facilityto the individuals conducting the monitoring.Section 1321.52 Evaluation of unmet need.Some Members of Congress, as well as State agencies on aging and nationalorganizations, requested that this section of the regulations be revisedto include more specific directions relative to geographic and other factorsthat should be taken into consideration by States in their evaluationsof unmet need.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>We recognize that State agencies are in need offurther guidance in this area. However, we determined that the level andtype of guidance that State agenices would find most helpful would be toodetailed to include in regulations; and that, to include in the regulationssuch detailed guidance for a one-time study would be inconsistent withthe Department-wide fundamental principle of regulatory simplicity. Wedo intend through our regular methods of information dissemination to makesuch guidance available to State agencies on aging.Section 1321.53 Mission of the area agency.As with andSection;1321.7, Mission of the State agency, many commenters expressedstrong support for the fact that the proposed regulations include a clearstatement of the mission of the area agency. State agencies on aging andservice provider agencies were particularly supportive of this section.However, other commenters, mostly area agencies, requested that the missionstatement be deleted. In the view of these commenters, the Act providessufficient guidance on this topic. A few area agency commenters suggestedthat if a mission statement were necessary, it should be developed by eacharea agency, or by each State agency for its area agencies; and shouldnot be included in regulations. Typical of several comments was the statementthat the Older Americans Act emphasizes local decision-making and thatit is inappropriate to impose a mission statement from above. Another perspectivereflected was a concern that the mission statement was restrictive andwould impede area agencies from taking advantage of opportunities to receivefunding from commerce, industry and local governments. A few commenterssuggested that the mission statement would restrict the latitude of areaagencies to mirror and respond to the changing population trends amongolder persons.<T3>AoA Respose: </T3>Our reason for including this mission statement andthe mission statement for the State agency in the proposed rules was toarticulate in a unified fashion the provisions concerning State and areaagency functions and responsibilities which are found in various placesthroughout the Older Americans Act. We fully support the concept of localdecision-making under the Older Americans Act in matters which bear uponthe manner in which each community responds to the needs of its older people;but in the case of area agencies on aging there is a common statutory missionwhich must guide such decision-making. We do not agree with the commentthat the mission statement for area agencies in any manner restrains theability of area agencies to take advantage of new opportunities or to befully responsive to the challenges of a changing aging population. Rather,we believe that the mission statement, as proposed, sets a benchmark againstwhich each area agency can measure its progress in serving as a leaderfor the communities in the planning and service area for which it is responsible.We believe firmly that the mission statements for State and area agencieswill prove to be significant and influential provisions, not because theyimpose any new requirements, but because they present a clear, well articulatedvision of the mission of State and area agencies which other entities,communities and individuals can easily understand. Therefore, the statementof mission is essentially the same as that proposed in the NPRM. However, in response to several commenters, we have made a minor revisionin the mission statement. Some commenters were concerned that the term``community leadership'' in proposed subsection (c) was subject to a degreeof ambiguity. They indicated that it was not always clear who constitutedthe community leadership. In response to these comments, we have changedthe term to ``elected community officials.'' Section 1321.55 Organization and staffing of the area agency. Many of the commenters on this section requested that the language on organizationand staffing in the existing regulations at andSection; 1321.57 be retained,rather than the language in the proposed regulations. A number of the commentsalso focused on the fact that proposed subsection (a)(2) used the term``single'' rather than ``separate'' in referring to the ogranizationalunit within a multi-purpose agency. The commenters correctly noted thatthe Act uses the term ``separate.'' The concern of the commenters, however,extended beyond the semantic difference between the terms ``single'' and``separate.'' A number of commenters expressed the opinion that the proposedregulations were too restrictive in interpreting the statutory requirementthat the ``separate organizational unit'' within a multi-purpose agency,rather than the multi-purpose agency itself, be recognized as the designatedarea agency. In the view of these commenters, the intent of the Act inrequiring a separate organizational unit within a multi-purpose agencywas to assure the visibility of the aging program but not to require thatthe unit be the designated area agency. The commenters who expressed thisview noted with concern that implementation of the proposed rule, in theiropinion, could cause widespread de-designations of existing area agencieswhich are presently housed in regional planning districts, councils ofgovernments, county and private nonprofit umbrella agencies. Some commentersalso suggested that subsection (c) of the proposed rule which discussedthe circumstances under which an area agency would cease to function asan area should be deleted. The comments on this subsection were similarto those which were offered with regard to proposed andSection; 1321.35,withdrawal of area agency designation.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>We did not accept the request of those commenterswho asked that we retain the language on organization and staffing of thearea agency as found in the existing regulations. The language in thoseregulations does not adequately reflect the 1987 amendments to the Act.For technical accuracy, we have accepted the request to change the term``single'' to ``separate'' in subsection (a)(2). However, we could notaccept the interpretation of those commenters who suggested that the Act,in identifying the separate unit in a multi-purpose agency as the areaagency, was merely intending that such a unit serve as a visible focalpoint for aging, but that the unit was not to be recognized as the designatedarea agency on aging. The requirement to consider the separate organizationalunit within a multi-purpose agency as the designated area agency is a statutoryprovision found in section 305(c)(4) of the Act. We have simply restatedthis statutory provision in the regulations because of its importance.We do not concur with the views of those who expressed concern that recognizingthe separate organizational unit as the designated area agency will resultin widespread de-designation and disruption within the aging network. EachState agency on aging has the responsibility and the ability to assurethat the requirements of the Act on this point are met, while at the sametime avoiding major disruption, using the State's own appropriate policiesand procedures. We expect that those States agencies which have designatedmulti-purpose agencies as area agencies on aging will move expeditiouslyto take whatever actions are necessary to comply with the requirementsof the Act concerning the types of agencies or units which legally maybe designated as area agencies on aging. In order to avoid unnecessary disruption in the implementation of thisprovision, we have modified andSection; 1321.55(a)(2) to provide that Stateaction to comply with the requirement for designation of separate organizationalunits within multi-purpose agencies currently serving as area agenciesshall not be considered ``designation of a new area agency'' for purposesof section 305(b)(5)(B) of the Act. This section of the Act provides thatwhenever a State agency designates a new area agency, the State agencyshall give the right of first refusal to a unit of general purpose localgovernment if: (1) Such unit can meet the requirements of serving as anarea agency; and (2) if the boundaries of such a unit and the boundariesof the planning and service area are reasonably contiguous. We believethat in the 1987 amendments Congress indicated to reaffirm the necessityfor separate area agency identity in the case of a multi-purpose agencybut did not intend to open the possibility for major changes of the typethat might occur should the provisions of section 305(b)(5)(B) apply inthis situation. Therefore, we have determined that the right of first refusaldoes not apply in the following limited circumstance: Where the State agencyon aging designates as an area agency on aging a separate organizationalunit of a multipurpose agency which has been serving as an area agency.The right of first refusal provision, of course, would be applicable inall other situations where the State agency designates an area agency.Section 1321.57 Area agency advisory council.A few commenters expressed their views about area agency advisory councils.Several commenters commended the fact that the membership of the advisorycouncil was required to include more than 50 percent older persons, includingminority individuals. One commenter indicated that the language of theproposed rules which stated that advisory councils ``shall carry out functions''implied an incorrect role for advisory councils. This commenter stressedthat advisory councils are, as their name implies, to provide advice tothe area agency; but they do not have responsibility for implementing andcarrying out functions of the area agency. The commenter requested thatthe language be changed to reflect this ``advisory role,'' rather thanan implementing role. Some area agency commenters also took exception tothe proposed inclusion on the advisory council of representatives of healthcare provider organizations and representatives of supportive servicesproviders. The reasons given for excluding these two groups were two: theAct does not mention them and their participation as advisory council membersmight create conflict of interest situations. A large number of provideragencies commented favorably on the proposed regulations as written.<T3>AoA Response:</T3> The fact that a small number of commenters choseto offer negative observations on this topic was offset by the fact thatmany others found the proposed regulation in this area to be highly satisfactory.It was not our intention to imply that the role of advisory councils wasother than ``to advise.'' However, we did wish to emphasize the potentialresource represented by advisory councils and to urge area agencies tomake greater use of their advisory councils in a variety of ways whichfurther the development of systems of services at the community level.To avoid any possible ambiguity, we have clarified in subsection (a) thatthe functions of the council are ``advisory'' functions. However, we havenot changed the language of the proposed rules concerning membership ofthe advisory council. We believe that health care providers and supportiveservices providers have essential roles to play in the development of responsiveservice systems at the community level; and we believe that it is importantfor all of the significant parties who must participate in the developmentof service systems for older persons to be actively involved in the processof planning for and implementing decisions directed to that end. Therefore,we have retained the requirement that representatives of health care providersand supportive services providers be included on the advisory council.We believe that the area agency can establish appropriate measures to assurethat the presence of these representatives on the advisory council doesnot lead to any conflict of interest situations. As necessary, the Stateagency also can establish State policy on this matter.Section 1321.63 Purpose of service allotments.One Member of Congress and several other commenters indicated that thelist of services found in andSection; 1321.63(a) of the proposed regulationsshould be expanded to include ``Outreach services.'' The reason offeredby these commenters was that subsection (a) lists the categories of servicesfor which funds are distributed by formula to State agencies on aging;and that outreach is one such service. A national organization pointedout that the language in subsection (a) should be modified to reflect thefact that area agencies, as well as the State agency, are involved in thedevelopment or enhancement of community systems building.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>We accepted the points made by commenters and revisedsubsection (a) both to include ``Outreach services'' and to include referenceto area agencies on aging.Section 1321.67 Service contributions.A number of commenters expressed concern that the proposed regulations,like earlier rules, permit contributions for supportive services. Theypointed out that the Act speaks explicitly only of contributions for nutritionservices and concluded from this fact that it was not proper to includein the regulations any provisions which dealt with contributions for supportiveservices. In addition to a general concern about contributions for supportiveservices, some commenters noted that in the case of certain types of services,such as information and referral, it is not practical to expect contributions.A few commenters indicated that providing an opportunity to contributein some instances might serve as a disincentive for older persons to availthemselves of needed services. Another concern expressed by a few commenterswas a fear that service providers might charge older persons for a service,rather than provide them with an opportunity to contribute voluntarily.These commenters cited examples of such abuse. Finally, a request was madeby a few commenters to change the wording in subsection (a)(1) from ``contributevoluntarily'' to ``voluntarily contribute''. However, a large number ofservice provider agencies wrote favoring the proposed rules as written.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>The question of whether or not it is allowable inregulations to provide an opportunity for contributions for supportiveservices was considered some time ago when we issued the original regulationon this matter. It was our conclusion then, and remains so now, that whilethe Act does not explicitly mention contributions for supportive services,it is permissible in regulations to provide a basis for the receipt ofsuch contributions. The rule as it appeared in the NPRM repeated the rulewhich has been in effect for a number of years without any perceived difficulties.On the contrary, the voluntary contributions of program participants haveallowed for a significant increase in the level of services provided inconjunction with the Title III program. The language of the regulationis clear: All contributions are voluntary; the privacy of each older personmust be protected with respect to his or her contribution; and, no olderperson may be denied a service because of unwillingness or inability tocontribute. State and area agencies are expected to assure that older personsfully understand the voluntary nature of contributions and that the voluntarycontribution provision does not present a disincentive for any older personto receive a service. If there is abuse, as some commenters noted, it isthe responsibility of the respective State and area agency to take appropriatemeasures to assure that service providers do not misinterpret the ruleas allowing, or even requiring, charges of services. We recognize thatcertain services, such as information and referral, do not lend themselvesas readily as do other services to the idea of contributions. This factin itself, however, need not preclude a service provider from providing``an opportunity'' to contribute.We also have clarified in these final rules the permissible alternativesfor the use of service contributions which a State agency may establishthrough State policy. In order to assure that contributions made by programparticipants result in an expansion of services, a State agency may authorizethe use by service providers of either or both of the alternatives describedin 45 CFR 92.25(g) (2) and (3).We will not permit States to use the deduction alternative described in45 CFR 92.25(g)(1) since that alternative would be inconsistent with therequisite expansion of services under this part. Further, use of the deductionalternative would seriously jeopardize the continuance of the totally voluntarycontributions which the participants make to the program. In the periodbetween FY 1981 and FY 1987 voluntary contributions have risen from $79million to $163.6 million per year. We do not wish to provide a disincentivefor the continued growth in contributions.Section 1321.71 Legal assistance.The public comments on the legal assistance provisions of the proposedregulations focused on four points: (1) Limitation on services to individualclients; (2) legal services performed at the request of public officials;(3) activities taken in the provider's self-interest; and (4) limitationon the use of private funds.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Lobbying on behalf of a client.</ITAG>Several commenters stated that the proposed regulations did not includethe Legal Services Corporation (LSC) provisions for lobbying on behalfof a client. Section 1612.5 of the LSC regulations (``Permissible activitieson behalf of eligible clients'') covers that subject at length.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Activities requested by public officials.</ITAG>Section 1612.6 of the LSC regulations, like the LSC Act, permits certainlegal activities to be undertaken at the request of public officials. Ourproposed regulations did not include this provision.<ITAG tagnum="81">3/4. Activities in the provider's interest; restriction on use ofprivate funds.</ITAG>The commenters also expressed concern about the lack of an exception, fromthe general prohibition on lobbying, for self-help by the organization.Section 1321.71(i)(2)(i) of the proposed rules_like andSection; 1612.13 ofthe LSC regulations_would have permitted lobbying with private funds andpertaining to measures directly affecting activities of the provider. Thus,there was a self-help exception, but only with respect to the use of privatefunds. The commenters also criticized the proposed restrictions on theuse of private funds.<T3>AoA Response: </T3>1. <T3>Lobbying on behalf of a client.</T3> We intended to encompass theseactivities by the broad statement in proposed andSection; 1321.71(b) thatthe regulations do not prohibit ``any form of legal assistance to an eligibleclient * * *'' nor may they interfere with ``the fulfillment of any attorney'sprofessional responsibilities to a client.'' However, in response to thecomments, we have added to andSection; 1321.71(i) new subsections (5) and(6), which reflect the substance of andSection; 1612.5 of the LSC regulations.These additional subsections are being added to the regulations to clarifythe point for the benefit of those who expressed concern in their comments.2. <T3>Activities requested by public officials.</T3> We believe that it wouldnot be appropriate to use Title III funds to assist public officials withrespect to issues other than aging. However, we agree that under certaincircumstances, responding to a request from a public official or body onissues related to aging may be appropriate. Therefore, we have added toandSection; 1321.71(i), a new subsection (7), which permits such actionson condition that the legal assistance provider first obtain the writtenapproval of the responsible area agency.<ITAG tagnum="81">3/4. </ITAG><T3>Activities in the provider's interest; restriction on use of privatefunds.</T3> We have responded to the concerns of commenters in these areasby deleting proposed andSection; 1321.71(i)(2) as well as the words ``byprivate entities or by a recipient, directly or through a subrecipient''in subsection (j). The effect of these deletions is that in these finalrules there is no reference to_and thus, no limitation on_the use of privatefunds for any purpose. We agree that AoA has no particular interest inregulating the use of funds from other sources, so long as the activitiesundertaken with those funds do not conflict with the provider's responsibilitiestoward its clients. Thus, providers may use private funds for self-helpactivities, as is permissible under the LSC regulations.<ITAG tagnum="81"/>Other CommentsIn addition to the areas of comments noted above, some commenters addressedother topics. For example, some commenters asked that interim final regulationsbe issued in order to provide further opportunity for comment. A smallnumber of other commenters requested under greater level of detail andspecificity in many areas of the regulations. A few commenters asked thatthe regulations include matters which are of an internal administrativenature, such as a description of the duties and functions of the AssociateCommissioner for American Indians, Alaskan Natives, and Hawaiian Natives.<T3>AoA Response:</T3> We provided a 60 day comment period on the proposedregulations and have carefully reviewed over 700 letters of comment submittedby persons from all parts of the nation who represented widely divergentpoints of view. We have accepted and incorporated in these final regulationsthose comments whicn in our judgment served to strengthen and clarify theregulations. We do not believe that any useful purpose would be servedby issuance of interim final regulations with another comment period. Whilea few commenters encouraged that we include greater detail and stringencyin these regulations, we have not accepted that suggestion. Our principlein writing these regulations has been to provide maximum flexibility andin accordance with Department policy, to avoid needlessly burdensome requirements.Finally, we have not acceded to the request to include in the regulationsmatters which relate to the internal operation of the Administration onAging and the Department of Health and Human Services. We do not considermatters of that nature to be proper material for inclusion in program regulations.<ITAG tagnum="81">Liquidation of obligations</ITAG>Several commenters expressed concern regarding the impact of andSection;92.23(b)of the HHS regulation_``Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grantsand Cooperative Agreements to State and Local Governments.'' 45 CFR 92.23(b)requires States to liquidate obligations no later than 90 days after theend of the period during which the State is permitted to obligate the federalfunds. The commenters stated that the multi-tiered grant structure of TitleIII (AoA, State unit on aging, area agency on aging and service provider)prohibits compliance with this common rule requirement.<T3>AoA response:</T3> This matter affects all federal programs that permitsub-awards with performance periods that run beyond the period during whichgrant funds are available to the State for obligation. Consequently itwill be covered in a separate rule.<ITAG tagnum="81">Other Technical Changes (andSection;andSection; 1321.3, 1321.23, 1321.29,1321.79 and 1321.83)</ITAG>We have deleted the proposed definition for ``Administrative action'' inandSection; 1321.3 because it was pointed out to us that the 1987 amendmentsdeleted the word ``administrative'' from section 307(a)(12)(i) of the Actand there is no longer a need for this definition. Also, based on a suggestionfrom a commenter, we added the words ``or State law'' following the word``Act'' the second time it appears in the definition of ``Official duties''because in some instances State law may specify official duties of theState Ombudsman Office representatives.We have moved andSection;andSection; 1321.23 (c) and (d) of the proposed regulations.They have now become andSection;andSection; 1321.29 (c) and (d). These sectionsare related to the designation of planning and service areas which is discussedunder andSection; 1321.29.We have deleted the redundant statement regarding the effective date ofa decision to withhold funds which appeared in andSection; 1321.79(a) ofthe NPRM as follows: ``* * * or later than the first date of the Commissioner'sdecision * * *''. The corrected sentence in which the redundancy appearednow reads as follows: ``This effective date may not be earlier than thedate of the Commissioner's decision or later than the first day of thenext calendar quarter.''We have inserted a phrase pertaining to the reallotment of funds withheldfrom the State which was inadvertently omitted from the first paragraphof andSection; 1321.83. After the phrase ``* * * or political subdivisionof the State * * *,'' we have inserted: ``* * * that has the authorityand capacity to carry out the functions of the State agency * * *.''These regulations require compliance with certain sections of the UniformAdministrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative Agreements to Stateand Local Governments, at 45 CFR Part 92. Since the regulations in Part92 will not be effective until October 1, 1988, these final regulationsshould be understood as referring to the corresponding predecessor provisionsof OMB Circular A-102 for the period prior to that date.<ITAG tagnum="84">Impact Analysis</ITAG>Executive Order 12291The Secretary has determined, in accordance with Executive Order 12291,that these rules do not constitute a major rule because they will not havean annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; result in majorincrease in costs or prices for consumers, any industries, any governmentalagency or any geographic regions; or have significant adverse effects oncompetition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or on theability of United States-based enterprises to compete with foreign-basedenterprises in domestic or import markets. We do not believe that therewill be any additional costs under these rules since the types of statutorilymandated data we will collect are ordinarily utilized by States for efficientprogram management.Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, Pub. L. 96-354, requires that anagency prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for a proposed or finalrule if the rule would have significant economic impact on a substantialnumber of ``small entities'', i.e. small businesses, small non-profit organizations,or small governmental jurisdictions.The responsibility for meeting the requirements of these regulations ison the State agencies and to a lesser extent on area agencies. Actual deliveryof services may be provided in some circumstances by proprietary, publicand not-for-profit agencies or organizations under grants or contractsfrom State or area agencies. Although area agencies and most service deliveryagencies and organizations are ``small entities'' within the meaning ofthe Act, this rule will impose no significant burdens on State agencies,area agencies or other affected parties and will provide flexibility toState and area agencies in implementing the provisions of the Act. Forthese reasons, the Secretary hereby certifies that these regulations willnot have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities.Recordkeeping and Reporting RequirementsSections 202, 305, 306, 307, 614, and 623 of the Act require collectionof data, area and State plans and Native American organization applications.These rules at andSection;andSection; 1321.17, 1326.19 and 1328.19 containrevised information collection requirements. The Act requires the Commissionereach fiscal year to collect from States statistical data on programs andactivities carried out with funds provided under the Act. The data mustinclude for each type of service: The aggregate amount of funds expended,the number of individuals served, and the number of units of service provided.Additionally, the data must indicate the number of senior centers fundedand the extent to which area agencies statisfied their statutory requirementsconcerning expenditure of adequate funds on specified services and targetedservices to older persons in greatest need. In responding to new statutorydata collection requirements, AoA will be sensitive to avoiding any needlessburden on State and area agencies. AoA will provide States with an opportunityto comment on revised information collection requirements. As requiredby section 3504(h) of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, we have submitteda copy of these revised information collection requirements to the Officeof Management and Budget (OMB) for its review.OMB has not yet approved the revised information collection requirementscontained in these rules. The new information collection requirements containedin andSection;andSection; 1321.17, 1326.19 and 1328.19 will not go into effectuntil OMB approval has been obtained. Although OMB has not yet approvedthe sections of these regulations associated with the development of Stateand area plans and Native American organization applications, those statutoryactivities required to maintain eligibility for funding remain in effect.When OMB assigns information collection approval numbers, we will publisha notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>45 CFR Part 1321Administrative practice and procedure, Aged, Grant program/social programs,Nutrition, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.45 CFR Part 1326Administrative practice and procedures, Aged, Grant programs, Indians,Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.45 CFR Part 1328Administrative practice and procedures, Aged, Grant programs, HawaiianNatives, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Program Numbers: 13.633 SpecialPrograms for Aging, Title III Part A and B_Grants on Aging: 13.635 SpecialPrograms for Aging, Title III Part C_Nutrition Services); (13.655 SpecialPrograms for Aging, Title VI_Grants for Indian Tribes)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: June 22, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Carol Fraser Fisk,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Commissioner on Aging.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Approved: July 11, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Otis R. Bowen,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Health and Human Services.</ITAG>For the reasons set forth in the Preamble, Chapter XIII, Subchapter C,of Title 45, Subtitle B, Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:1. Part 1321 is revised as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 1321_GRANTS TO STATE AND COMMUNITY PROGRAMS ON AGING</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart A_Introduction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.1 Basis and purpose of this part.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.3 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.5 Applicability of other regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart B_State Agency Responsibilities</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.7 Mission of the State agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.9 Organization and staffing of the State agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.11 State agency policies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.13 Advocacy responsibilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.15 Duration, format and effective date of the State plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.17 Content of State plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.19 Amendments to the State plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.21 Submission of the State plan or plan amendment to the Commissionerfor approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.23 Notification of State plan or State plan amendment approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.25 Restriction of delegation of authority to other agencies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.27 Public participation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.29 Designation of planning and service areas.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.31 Appeal to Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.33 Designation of area agencies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.35 Withdrawal of area agency designation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.37 Intrastate funding formula.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.41 Single State planning and service area.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.43 Interstate planning and service area.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.45 Transfer between congregate and home-delivered nutrition serviceallotments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.47 Statewide non-Federal share requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.49 State agency maintenance of effort.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.51 Confidentiality and disclosure of information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.52 Evaluation of unmet need.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart C_Area Agency Responsibilities</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.53 Mission of the area agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.55 Organization and staffing of the area agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.57 Area agency advisory council.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.59 Submission of an area plan and plan amendments to the Statefor approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.61 Advocacy responsibilities of the area agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart D_Service Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.63 Purpose of services allotments under Title III.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.65 Responsibilities of service providers under area plans.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.67 Service contributions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.69 Service priority for frail, homebound or isolated elderly.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.71 Legal assistance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.73 Grant related income under Title III-C.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.75 Licenses and safety.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart E_Hearing Procedures for State Agencies</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.77 Scope.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.79 When a decision is effective.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.81 How the State may appeal.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1321.83 How the Commissioner may reallot the State's withheld payments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.; Title III of the Older AmericansAct, as Amended.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart A_Introduction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1321.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Basis and purpose of this part.</ITAG>(a) This part prescribes requirements State agencies shall meet to receivegrants to develop comprehensive and coordinated systems for the deliveryof supportive and nutrition services under Title III of the Older AmericansAct, as amended (Act). These requirements include:(1) Designation and responsibilities of State agencies;(2) State plans and amendments;(3) Services delivery; and(4) Hearing procedures for applicants for planning and services area designation.(b) The requirements of this part are based on Title III of the Act. TitleIII provides for formula grants to State agencies on aging, under approvedState plans, to stimulate the development or enhancement of comprehensiveand coordinated community-based systems resulting in a continuum of servicesto older persons with special emphasis on older individuals with the greatesteconomic or social need, with particular attention to low-income minorityindividuals. A responsive community-based system of services shall includecollaboration in planning, resource allocation and delivery of a comprehensivearray of services and opportunities for all older Americans in the community.The intent is to use Title III funds as a catalyst in bringing togetherpublic and private resources in the community to assure the provision ofa full range of efficient, well coordinated and accessible services forolder persons.(c) Each State agency designates planning and service areas in the State,and makes a subgrant or contract under an approved area plan to one areaagency in each planning and service area for the purpose of building comprehensivesystems for older people throughout the State. Area agencies in turn makesubgrants or contracts to service providers to perform certain specifiedfunctions.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1321.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>``Act'' means the Older Americans Act of 1965 as amended.``Altering'' or ``renovating,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Actwith respect to multipurpose senior centers, means making modificationsto or in connection with an existing facility which are necessary for itseffective use as a center. These may include renovation, repair, or expansionwhich is not in excess of double the square footage of the original facilityand all physical improvements.``Constructing,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Act with respectto multipurpose senior centers, means building a new facility, includingthe costs of land acquisition and architectural and engineering fees, ormaking modifications to or in connection with an existing facility whichare in excess of double the square footage of the original facility andall physical improvements.``Department'' means the Department of Health and Human Services.``Direct services,'' as used in this part, means any activity performedto provide services directly to an individual older person by the staffof a service provider, an area agency, or a State agency in a single planningand service area State.``Fiscal year,'' as used in this part, means the Federal Fiscal Year.``Frail,'' as used in this part, means having a physical or mental disability,including having Alzheimer's disease or a related disorder with neurologicalor organic brain dysfunction, that restricts the ability of an individualto perform normal daily tasks or which threatens the capacity of an individualto live independently.``Human services,'' as used in andSection;1321.41(a)(1) of this part, withrespect to criteria for designation of a statewide planning and servicearea, means social, health, or welfare services.``In-home service,'' as used in this part, includes: (a) Homemaker andhome health aides; (b) visiting and telephone reassurance; (c) chore maintenance;(d) in-home respite care for families, including adult day care as a respiteservice for families; and (e) minor modification of homes that is necessaryto facilitate the ability of older individuals to remain at home, and thatis not available under other programs, except that not more than $150 perclient may be expended under this part for such modification.``Means test,'' as used in the provison of services, means the use of anolder person's income or resource to deny or limit that person's receiptof services under this part.``Official duties,'' as used in section 307(a)(12)(J) of the Act with respectto representatives of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, means workpursuant to the Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program authorized by the Actor State law and carried out under the auspices and general direction ofthe State Long-Term Care Ombudsman.``Periodic,'' as used in sections 306(a)(6) and 307(a)(8) of the Act withrespect to evaluations of, and public hearings on, activities carried outunder State and area plans, means, at a minimum, once each fiscal year.``Reservation,'' as used in section 305(b)(4) of the Act with respect tothe designation of planning and service areas, means any federally or Staterecognized Indian tribe's reservation, pueblo, or colony, including formerreservations in Oklahoma, Alaskan Native regions established pursuant tothe Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (85 Stat. 688), and Indian allotments.``Service provider,'' as used in section 306(a)(1) of the Act with respectto the provison of supportive and nutrition services, means an entity thatis awarded a subgrant or contract from an area agency to provide servicesunder the area plan.``Severe disability,'' as used to carry out the provisions of the Act,means a severe chronic disability attributable to mental and/or physicalimpairment of an individual that:(a) Is likely to continue indefinitely; and(b) Results in substantial functional limitation in 3 or more of the followingmajor life activities:(1) Self-care,(2) Receptive and expressive language,(3) Learning,(4) Mobility,(5) Self-direction,(6) Capacity for independent living, and(7) Economic self-sufficiency.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability of other regulations.</ITAG>Several other regulations apply to all activities under this part. Theseinclude but are not limited to:(a) 45 CFR Part 16_Procedures of the Departmental Grant Appeals Board;(b) 45 CFR Part 74_Administration of Grants, except Subpart N;(c) 45 CFR Part 80_Nondiscrimination under Programs Receiving Federal Assistancethrough the Department of Health and Human Services: Effectuation of TitleVI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;(d) 45 CFR Part 81_Practice and Procedures for Hearings Under Part 80 ofthis Title;(e) 45 CFR Part 84_Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programsand Activities Receiving or Benefiting from Federal Financial Participation;(f) 45 CFR Part 91_Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in HHS Programsor Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance;(g) 45 CFR Part 92_Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and CooperativeAgreements to State and Local Governments;(h) 45 CFR Part 100_Intergovernmental Review of Department of Health andHuman Services Programs and Activities; and(i) 5 CFR Part 900, Subpart F, Standards for a Merit System of PersonnelAdministration.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart B_State Agency Responsibilities</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Mission of the State agency.</ITAG>(a) The Older Americans Act intends that the State agency on aging shallbe the leader relative to all aging issues on behalf of all older personsin the State. This means that the State agency shall proactively carryout a wide range of functions related to advocacy, planning, coordination,interagency linkages, information sharing, brokering, monitoring and evaluation,designed to lead to the development or enhancement of comprehensive andcoordinated community based systems in, or serving, communities throughoutthe State. These systems shall be designed to assist older persons in leadingindependent, meaningful and dignified lives in their own homes and communitiesas long as possible.(b) The State agency shall designate area agencies on aging for the purposeof carrying out the mission described above for the State agency at thesub-State level. The State agency shall designate as its area agencieson aging only those sub-state agencies having the capacity and making thecommitment to fully carry out the mission described for area agencies inandSection; 1321.53 below.(c) The State agency shall assure that the resources made available toarea agencies on aging under the Older Americans Act are used to carryout the mission described for area agencies in andSection; 1321.53 below.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Organization and staffing of the State agency.</ITAG>(a) The State shall designate a sole State agency to develop and administerthe State plan required under this part and serve as the effective visibleadvocate for the elderly within the State.(b) The State agency shall have an adequate number of qualified staff tocarry out the functions prescribed in this part.(c) The State agency shall have within the State agency, or shall contractor otherwise arrange with another agency or organization, as permittedby section 307(a)(12)(A), an Office of the State Long-Term Care Ombudsman,with a full-time State ombudsman and such other staff as are appropriate.(d) If a State statute establishes a State ombudsman program which willperform the functions of section 307(a)(12) of the Act, the State agencycontinues to be responsible to assure that all of the requirements of theAct for this program are met regardless of the State legislation or sourceof funds. In such cases, the Governor shall confirm this through an assurancein the State plan.<ITAG tagnum="80">1321.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">State agency policies.</ITAG>(a) The State agency on aging shall develop policies governing all aspectsof programs operated under this part, including the ombudsman program whetheroperated directly by the State agency or under contract. These policiesshall be developed in consultation with other appropriate parties in theState. The State agency is responsible for enforcement of these policies.(b) The policies developed by the State agency shall address the mannerin which the State agency will monitor the performance of all programsand activities initiated under this part for quality and effectiveness.In monitoring the ombudsman program, access to files, minus the identityof any complainant or resident of a long-term care facility, shall be availableonly to the director of the State agency on aging and one other seniormanager of the State agency designated by the State director for this purpose.In the conduct of the monitoring of the ombudsman program, the confidentialityprotections concerning any complainant or resident of a long term carefacility as prescribed in section 307(a)(12) of the Act shall be strictlyadhered to.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Advocacy responsibilities.</ITAG>(a) The State agency shall:(1) Review, monitor, evaluate and comment on Federal, State and local plans,budgets, regulations, programs, laws, levies, hearings, policies, and actionswhich affect or may affect older individuals and recommend any changesin these which the State agency considers to be appropriate;(2) Provide technical assistance to agencies, organizations, associations,or individuals representing older persons; and (3) Review and comment, upon request, on applications to State and Federalagencies for assistance relating to meeting the needs of older persons.(b) No requirement in this section shall be deemed to supersede a prohibitioncontained in a Federal appropriation on the use of Federal funds to lobbythe Congress.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.15</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duration, format and effective date of the State plan.</ITAG>(a) A State may use its own judgment as to the format to use for the plan,how to collect information for the plan, and whether the plan will remainin effect for two, three or four years.(b) An approved State plan or amendment, as indentified in andSection; 1321.17,becomes effective on the date designated by the Commissioner.(c) A State agency may not make expenditures under a new plan or amendmentrequiring approval, as identified in andSection; 1321.17 and andSection; 1321.19,until it is approved.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.17</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Content of State plan.</ITAG>To receive a grant under this part, a State shall have an approved Stateplan as prescribed in section 307 of the Act. In addition to meeting therequirements of section 307, a State plan shall include:(a) Identification by the State of the sole State agency that has beendesignated to develop and administer the plan.(b) Statewide program objectives to implement the requirements under TitleIII of the Act and any objectives established by the Commissioner throughthe rulemaking process.(c) A resource allocation plan indicating the proposed use of all TitleIII funds administered by a State agency, and the distribution of TitleIII funds to each planning and service area.(d) Identification of the geographic boundaries of each planning and servicearea and of area agencies on aging designated for each planning and servicearea, if appropriate.(e) Provision of prior Federal fiscal year information related to low incomeminority and rural older individuals as required by sections 307(a) (23)and (29) of the Act.(f) Each of the assurances and provisions required in sections 305 and307 of the Act, and provisions that the State meets each of the requirementsunder andSection;andSection; 1321.5 through 1321.75 of this part, and the followingassurances as prescribed by the Commissioner:(1) Each area agency engages only in activities which are consistent withits statutory mission as prescribed in the Act and as specified in Statepolicies under andSection; 1321.11;(2) Preference is given to older persons in greatest social or economicneed in the provision of services under the plan;(3) Procedures exist to ensure that all services under this part are providedwithout use of any means tests;(4) All services provided under Title III meet any existing State and locallicensing, health and safety requirements for the provision of those services;(5) Older persons are provided opportunities to voluntarily contributeto the cost of services;(6) Area plans shall specify as submitted, or be amended annually to include,details of the amount of funds expended for each priority service duringthe past fiscal year;(7) The State agency on aging shall develop policies governing all aspectsof programs operated under this part, including the manner in which theombudsman program operates at the State level and the relation of the ombudsmanprogram to area agencies where area agencies have been designated;(8) The State agency will require area agencies on aging to arrange foroutreach at the community level that identifies individuals eligible forassistance under this Act and other programs, both public and private,and informs them of the availability of assistance. The outreach effortsshall place special emphasis on reaching older individuals with the greatesteconomic or social needs with particular attention to low income minorityindividuals, including outreach to identify older Indians in the planningand service area and inform such older Indians of the availability of assistanceunder the Act.(9) The State agency shall have and employ appropriate procedures for datacollection from area agencies on aging to permit the State to compile andtransmit to the Commissioner accurate and timely statewide data requestedby the Commissioner in such form as the Commissioner directs; and(10) If the State agency proposes to use funds received under section 303(f)of the Act for services other than those for preventive health specifiedin section 361, the State plan shall demonstrate the unmet need for theservices and explain how the services are appropriate to improve the qualityof life of older individuals, particularly those with the greatest economicor social need, with special attention to low-income minorities.(11) Area agencies shall compile available information, with necessarysupplementation, on courses of post-secondary education offered to olderindividuals with little or no tuition. The assurance shall include a commitmentby the area agencies to make a summary of the information available toolder individuals at multipurpose senior centers, congregate nutritionsites, and in other appropriate places.(12) Individuals with disabilities who reside in a non-institutional householdwith and accompany a person eligible for congregate meals under this partshall be provided a meal on the same basis that meals are provided to volunteerspursuant to section 307(a)(13)(I) of the Act.(13) The services provided under this part will be coordinated, where appropriate,with the services provided under Title VI of the Act.(14)(i) The State agency will not fund program development and coordinatedactivities as a cost of supportive services for the administration of areaplans until it has first spent 10 percent of the total of its combinedallotments under Title III on the administration of area plans;(ii) State and area agencies on aging will, consistent with budgeting cycles(annually, biannually, or otherwise), submit the details of proposals topay for program development and coordination as a cost of supportive services,to the general public for review and comment; and(iii) The State agency certifies that any such expenditure by an area agencywill have a direct and positive impact on the enhancement of services forolder persons in the planning and service area.(15) The State agency will assure that where there is a significant populationof older Indians in any planning and service area that the area agencywill provide for outreach as required by section 306(a)(6)(N) of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.19 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Amendments to the State plan.</ITAG>(a) A State shall amend the State plan whenever necessary to reflect:(1) New or revised Federal statutes or regulations,(2) A material change in any law, organization, policy or State agencyoperation, or(3) Information required annually by sections 307(a) (23) and (29) of theAct.(b) Information required by paragraph (a)(3) of this section shall be submittedaccording to guidelines prescribed by the Commissioner.(c) If a State intends to amend provisions of its plan required under andSection;andSection;1321.17 (a) or (f), it shall submit its proposed amendment to the Commissionerfor approval. If the State changes any of the provisions of its plan requiredunder andSection; 1321.17 (b) through (d), it shall amend the plan and notifythe Commissioner. A State need only submit the amended portions of theplan.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.21 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Submission of the State plan or plan amendment to the Commissionerfor approval.</ITAG>Each State plan, or plan amendment which requires approval of the Commissioner,shall be signed by the Governor or the Governor's designee and submittedto the Commissioner to be considered for approval at least 45 calendardays before the proposed effective date of the plan or plan amendment.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.23 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Notification of State plan or State plan amendment approval.</ITAG>(a) The Commissioner approves a State plan or State plan amendment by notifyingthe Governor or the Governor's designee in writing.(b) When the Commissioner proposes to disapprove a State plan or amendment,the Commissioner notifies the Governor in writing, giving the reasons forthe proposed disapproval, and informs the State agency that it has 60 daysto request a hearing on the proposed disapproval following the proceduresspecified in Subpart E of this part.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.25 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Restriction of delegation of authority to other agencies.</ITAG>A State or area agency may not delegate to another agency the authorityto award or administer funds under this part.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.27 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Public participation.</ITAG>The State agency shall have a mechanism to obtain and shall consider theviews of older persons and the public in developing and administering theState plan.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.29 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Designation of planning and service areas.</ITAG>(a) Any unit of general purpose local government, region within a Staterecognized for area wide planning, metropolitan area, or Indian reservationmay make application to the State agency to be designated as a planningand service area, in accordance with State agency procedures.(b) A State agency shall approve or disapprove any application submittedunder paragraph (a) of this section.(c) Any applicant under paragraph (a) of this section whose applicationfor designation as a planning and service area is denied by a State agencymay appeal the denial to the State agency, under procedures specified bythe State agency.(d) If the State denies an applicant for designation as a planning andservice area under paragraph (a) of this section, the State shall providea hearing on the denial of the application, if requested by the applicant,as well as issue a written decision.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.31 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Appeal to Commissioner.</ITAG>This section sets forth the procedures the Commissioner follows for providinghearings to applicants for designation as a planning and service area,under andSection; 1321.29(a), whose application is denied by the State agency.(a) Any applicant for designation as a planning and service area underandSection; 1321.29(a) whose application is denied, and who has been provideda hearing and a written decision by the State agency, may appeal the denialto the Commissioner in writing within 30 days following receipt of a State'shearing decision.(b) The Commissioner, or the Commissioner's designee, holds a hearing,and issues a written decision, within 60 days following receipt of an applicant'swritten request to appeal the State agency hearing decision to deny theapplicant's request under andSection; 1321.29(a).(c) When the Commissioner receives an appeal, the Commissioner requeststhe State Agency to submit:(1) A copy of the applicant's application for designation as a planningand service area;(2) A copy of the written decision of the State; and(3) Any other relevant information the Commissioner may require.(d) The procedures for the appeal consist of:(1) Prior written notice to the applicant and the State agency of the date,time and location of the hearing;(2) The required attendance of the head of the State agency or designatedrepresentatives;(3) An opportunity for the applicant to be represented by counsel or otherrepresentative; and(4) An opportunity for the applicant to be heard in person and to presentdocumentary evidence.(e) The Commissioner may:(1) Deny the appeal and uphold the decision of a State agency;(2) Uphold the appeal and require a State agency to designate the applicantas a planning and service area; or(3) Take other appropriate action, including negotiating between the partiesor remanding the appeal to the State agency after initial findings.(f) The Commissioner will uphold the decision of the State agency if itfollowed the procedures specified in andSection; 1321.29, and the hearingdecision is not manifestly inconsistent with the purpose of this part.(g) The Commissioner's decision to uphold the decision of a State agencydoes not extend beyond the period of the approved State plan.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.33</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Designation of area agencies.</ITAG>An area agency may be any of the types of agencies under section 305(c)of the Act. A State may not designate any regional or local office of theState as an area agency. However, when a new area agency on aging is designated,the State shall give right of first refusal to a unit of general purposelocal government as required in section 305(b)(5)(B) of the Act. If theunit of general purpose local government chooses not to exercise this right,the State shall then give preference to an established office on agingas required in section 305(c)(5) of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.35</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Withdrawal of area agency designation.</ITAG>(a) In carrying out section 305 of the Act, the State agency shall withdrawthe area agency designation whenever it, after reasonable notice and opportunityfor a hearing, finds that:(1) An area agency does not meet the requirements of this part;(2) An area plan or plan amendment is not approved;(3) There is substantial failure in the provisions or administration ofan approved area plan to comply with any provision of the Act or of thispart or policies and procedures established and published by the Stateagency on aging; or(4) Activities of the area agency are inconsistent with the statutory missionprescribed in the Act or in conflict with the requirement of the Act thatit function only as an area agency on aging.(b) If a State agency withdraws an area agency's designation under paragraph(a) of this section it shall:(1) Provide a plan for the continuity of area agency functions and servicesin the affected planning and service area; and(2) Designate a new area agency in the planning and service area in a timelymanner.(c) If necessary to ensure continuity of services in a planning and servicearea, the State agency may, for a period of up to 180 days after its finaldecision to withdraw designation of an area agency:(1) Perform the responsibilities of the area agency; or(2) Assign the responsibilities of the area agency to another agency inthe planning and service area.(d) The Commissioner may extend the 180-day period if a State agency:(1) Notifies the Commissioner in writing of its action under paragraph(c) of this section;(2) Requests an extension; and(3) Demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commissioner a need for theextension.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.37</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Intrastate funding formula.</ITAG>(a) The State agency, after consultation with all area agencies in theState, shall develop and use an intrastate funding formula for the allocationof funds to area agencies under this part. The State agency shall publishthe formula for review and comment by older persons, other appropriateagencies and organizations and the general public. The formula shall reflectthe proportion among the planning and service areas of persons age 60 andover in greatest economic or social need with particular attention to low-incomeminority individuals. The State agency shall review and update its formulaas often as a new State plan is submitted for approval.(b) The intrastate funding formula shall provide for a separate allocationof funds received under section 303(f) for preventive health services.In the award of such funds to selected planning and service areas, theState agency shall give priority to areas of the State:(1) Which are medically underserved; and(2) In which there are large numbers of individuals who have the greatesteconomic and social need for such services.(c) The State agency shall submit its intrastate formula to the Commissionerfor review and comment. The intrastate formula shall be submitted separatelyfrom the State plan.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.41</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Single State planning and service area.</ITAG>(a) The Commissioner will approve the application of a State which was,on or before October 1, 1980, a single planning and service area, to continueas a single planning and service area if the State agency demonstratesthat:(1) The State is not already divided for purposes of planning and administeringhuman services; or (2) The State is so small or rural that the purposes of this part wouldbe impeded if the State were divided into planning and services areas;and (3) The State agency has the capacity to carry out the responsibilitiesof an area agency, as specified in the Act. (b) Prior to the Commissioner's approval for a State to continue as a singleplanning and service area, all the requirements and procedures in andSection;1321.29 shall be met. (c) If the Commissioner approves a State's application under paragraph(a) this section: (1) The Commissioner notifies the State agency to develop a single Stateplanning and service area plan which meets the requirements of section306 and 307 of the Act. (2) A State agency shall meet all the State and area agency function requirementsspecified in the Act. (d) If the Commissioner denies the application because a State fails tomeet the criteria or requirements set forth in paragraphs (a) or (b) ofthis section, the Commissioner notifies the State that it shall followprocedures in section 305(A)(1)(E) of the Act to divide the State intoplanning and service areas. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.43 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Interstate planning and service area. </ITAG>(a) Before requesting permission of the Commissioner to designate an interstateplanning and service area, the Governor of each State shall execute a writtenagreement that specifies the State agency proposed to have lead responsibilityfor administering the programs within the interstate planning and servicearea and lists the conditions, agreed upon by each State, governing theadministration of the interstate planning and service area. (b) The lead State shall request permission of the Commissioner to designatean interstate planning and service area. (c) The lead State shall submit the request together with a copy of theagreement as part of its State plan or as an amendment to its State plan.(d) Prior to the Commissioner's approval for States to designate an interstateplanning and service area, the Commissioner shall determine that all applicablerequirements and procedures in andSection; 1321.29 and andSection; 1321.33of this part, shall be met. (e) If the request is approved, the Commissioner, based on the agreementbetween the States, increases the allotment of the State with lead responsibilityfor administering the programs within the interstate area and reduces theallotment(s) of the State(s) without lead responsibility by one of thesemethods: (1) Reallotment of funds in proportion to the number of individuals age60 and over for that portion of the interstate planning and service arealocated in the State without lead responsibility; or (2) Reallotment of funds based on the intrastate funding formula of theState(s) without lead responsibility.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.45 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfer between congregate and home-delivered nutrition service allotments.</ITAG>(a) A State agency, without the approval of the Commissioner, may transferbetween allotments up to 30 percent of a State's separate allotments forcongregate and home-delivered nutrition services.(b) A State agency may apply to the Commissioner to transfer from one allotmentto the other a portion exceeding 30 percent of a State's separate allotmentsfor congregate and home-delivered nutrition services. A State agency desiringsuch a transfer of allotment shall: (1) Specify the percent which it proposes to transfer from one allotmentto the other; (2) Specify whether the proposed transfer is for the entire period of aState plan or a protion of a plan period; and (3) Specify the purpose of the proposed transfer. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.47 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Statewide non-Federal share requirements. </ITAG>The statewide non-Federal share for State or area plan administration shallnot be less than 25 percent of the funds usesd under this part. All servicesstatewide, including ombudsman services and services funded under TitleIII-B, C, D, E and F, shall be funded on a statewide basis with a non-Federalshare of not less than 15 percent. Matching requirements for individualarea agencies are determined by the State agency. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.49 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">State agency maintenance of effort. </ITAG>In order to avoid a penalty, each fiscal year the State agency, to meetthe required non-federal share applicable to its allotments under thispart, shall spend under the State plan for both services and administrationat least the average amount of State funds it spent under the plan forthe three previous fiscal years. If the State agency spends less than thisamount, the Commissioner reduces the State's allotments for supportiveand nutrition services under this part by a percentage equal to the percentageby which the State reduced its expenditures. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.51 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Confidentiality and disclosure of information. </ITAG>(a) A State agency shall have procedures to protect the confidentialityof information about older persons collected in the conduct of its responsibilities.The procedures shall ensure that no information about an order person,or obtained from an older person by a service provider or the State orarea agencies, is disclosed by the provider or agency in a form that identifiesthe person without the informed consent of the person or of his or herlegal representative, unless the disclosure is required by court order,or for program monitoring by authorized Federal, State, or local monitoringagencies. (b) A State agency is not required to disclose those types of informationor documents that are exempt from disclosure by a Federal agency underthe Federal Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552. (c) A State or area agency on aging may not require a provider of legalassistance under this part to reveal any information that is protectedby attorney client privilege. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1321.52 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Evaluation of unmet need. </ITAG>Each State shall submit objectively collected and statistically valid datawith evaluative conclusions concerning the unmet need for supportive services,nutrition services, and multipurpose senior centers gathered pursuant tosection 307(a)(3)(A) of the Act to the Commissioner. The evaluations foreach State shall consider all services in these categories regardless ofthe source of funding for the services. This information shall be submittednot later than June 30, 1989 and shall conform to guidance issued by theCommissioner. <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart C_Area Agency Responsibilities </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1321.53 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Mission of the area agency. </ITAG>(a) The Older Americans Act intends that the area agency on aging shallbe the leader relative to all aging issues on behalf of all older personsin the planning and service area. This means that the area agency shallproactively carry out, under the leadership and direction of the Stateagency, a wide range of functions related to advocacy, planning, coordination,inter-agency linkages, information sharing, brokering, monitoring and evaluation,designed to lead to the development or enhancement of comprehensive andcoordinated community based systems in, or serving, each community in theplanning and service area. These systems shall be designed to assist olderpersons in leading independent, meaningful and dignified lives in theirown homes and communities as long as possible. (b) A comprehensive and coordinated community based system described inparagraph (a) of this section shall: (1) Have a visible focal point of contact where anyone can go or call forhelp, information or referral on any aging issue; (2) Provide a range of options: (3) Assure that these options are readily accessible to all older persons:The independent, semi-dependent and totally dependent, no matter what theirincome; (4) Include a commitment of public, private, voluntary and personal resourcescommitted to supporting the system; (5) Involve collaborative decision-making among public, private, voluntary,religious and fraternal organizations and older people in the community;(6) Offer special help or targetted resources for the most vulnerable olderpersons, those in danger of losing their independence; (7) Provide effective referral from agency to agency to assure that informationor assistance is received, no matter how or where contact is made in thecommunity; (8) Evidence sufficient flexibility to respond with appropriate individualizedassistance, especially for the vulnerable older person; (9) Have a unique character which is tailored to the specific nature ofthe community; (10) Be directed by leaders in the community who have the respect, capacityand authority necessary to convene all interested persons, assess needs,design solutions, track overall success, stimulate change and plan communityresponses for the present and for the future. (c) The resources made available to the area agency on aging under theOlder Americans Act are to be used to finance those activities necessaryto achieve elements of a community based system set forth in paragraph(b) of this section. For the purpose of assuring access to informationand services for older persons, the area agency shall work with electedcommunity officials in the planning and service area to designate one ormore focal points on aging in each community, as appropriate. The areaagency shall list designated focal points in the area plan. It shall bethe responsibility of the area agency, with the approval of the State agency,to define ``community'' for the purposes of this section. Since the OlderAmericans Act defines focal point as a ``facility'' established to encouragethe maximum collocation and coordination of services for older individuals,special consideration shall be given to developing and/or designating multi-purposesenior centers as community focal points on aging. The area agency on agingshall assure that services financed under the Older Americans Act in, oron behalf of, the community will be either based at, linked to or coordinatedwith the focal points designated. The area agency on aging shall assureaccess from the designated focal points to services financed under theOlder Americans Act. The area agency on aging shall work with, or workto assure that community leadership works with, other applicable agenciesand institutions in the community to achieve maximum collocation at, coordinationwith or access to other services and opportunities for the elderly fromthe designated community focal points. The area agency may not engage inany activity which is inconsistent with its statutory mission prescribedin the Act or policies prescribed by the State under andSection;1321.11.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1321.55 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Organization and staffing of the area agency. </ITAG>(a) An area agency may be either: (1) An agency whose single purpose is to administer programs for olderpersons; or (2) A separate organizational unit within a multi-purpose agency whichfunctions only for purposes of serving as the area agency on aging. Wherethe State agency on aging designates, as an area agency on aging, a separateorganizational unit of a multipurpose agency which has been serving asan area agency, the State agency action shall not be subject to section305(b)(5)(B) of the Act.   (b) The area agency, once designated, is responsible for providing foradequate and qualified staff to perform all of the functions prescribedin this part. (c) The designated area agency continues to function in that capacity untileither: (1) The area agency informs the State agency that it no longer wishes tocarry out the responsibilities of an area agency; or (2) The State agency withdraws the designation of the area agency as providedin andSection; 1321.35.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.57 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Area agency advisory council. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Functions of council. </T3>The area agency shall establish an advisorycouncil. The council shall carry out advisory functions which further thearea agency's mission of developing and coordinating community-based systemsof services for all older persons in the planning and service area. Thecouncil shall advise the agency relative to: (1) Developing and administering the area plan; (2) Conducting public hearings; (3) Representing the interest of older persons; and (4) Reviewing and commenting on all community policies, programs and actionswhich affect older persons with the intent of assuring maximum coordinationand responsiveness to older persons. (b) <T3>Composition of council. </T3>The council shall include individualsand representatives of community organizations who will help to enhancethe leadership role of the area agency in developing community-based systemsof services. The advisory council shall be made up of: (1) More than 50 percent older persons, including minority individualswho are participants or who are eligible to participate in programs underthis part; (2) Representatives of older persons; (3) Representatives of health care provider organizations, including providersof veterans' health care (if appropriate); (4) Representatives of supportive services providers organizations; (5) Persons with leadership experience in the private and voluntary sectors;(6) Local elected officials; and (7) The general public. (c) <T3>Review by advisory council. </T3>The area agency shall submit the areaplan and amendments for review and comment to the advisory council beforeit is transmitted to the State agency for approval. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.59 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Submission of an area plan and plan amendments to the State for approval.</ITAG>The area agency shall submit the area plan and amendments to the Stateagency for approval following procedures specified by the State agencyin the State policies prescribed by andSection; 1321.11. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.61 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Advocacy responsibilities of the area agency. </ITAG>(a) The area agency shall serve as the public advocate for the developmentor enhancement of comprehensive and coordinated community-based systemsof services in each community throughout the planning and service area.(b) In carrying out this responsibility, the area agency shall: (1) Monitor, evaluate, and, where appropriate, comment on all policies,programs, hearings, levies, and community actions which affect older persons;(2) Solicit comments from the public on the needs of older persons; (3) Represent the interests of older persons to local level and executivebranch officials, public and private agencies or organizations; (4) Consult with and support the State's long-term care ombudsman program;and (5) Undertake on a regular basis activities designed to facilitate thecoordination of plans and activities with all other public and privateorganizations, including units of general purpose local government, withresponsibilities affecting older persons in the planning and service areato promote new or expanded benefits and opportunities for older persons;and (c) Each area agency on aging shall undertake a leadership role in assistingcommunities throughout the planning and service area to target resourcesfrom all appropriate sources to meet the needs of older persons with greatesteconomic or social need, with particular attention to low income minorityindividuals. Such activities may include location of services and specializationin the types of services must needed by these groups to meet this requirement.However, the area agency may not permit a grantee or contractor under thispart to employ a means test for services funded under this part. (d) No requirement in this section shall be deemed to supersede a prohibitioncontained in the Federal appropriation on the use of Federal funds to lobbythe Congress; or the lobbying provision applicable to private nonprofitagencies and organizations contained in OMB Circular A-122. <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart D_Service Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.63 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose of services allotments under Title III. </ITAG>(a) Title III of the Older Americans Act authorizes the distribution ofFederal funds to the State agency on aging by formula for the followingcategories of services: (1) Supportive services; (2) Congregate meals services; (3) Home delivered meals services; (4) In-home services;(5) Ombudsman services;(6) Special needs services;(7) Elder abuse services;(8) Preventive health services; and(9) Outreach services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Funds authorized under these categories are for the purpose of assistingthe State and its area agencies to develop or enhance for older personscomprehensive and coordinated community based systems as described in andSection;1321.53(b) throughout the State.(b) Except for ombudsman services, State agencies on aging will award thefunds made available under paragraph (a) of this section to designatedarea agencies on aging according to the formula determined by the Stateagency. Except where a waiver is granted by the State agency, area agenciesshall award these funds by grant or contract to community services provideragencies and organizations. All funds awarded to area agencies under thispart are for the purpose of assisting area agencies to develop or enhancecomprehensive and coordinated community based systems for older personsin, or serving, communities throughout the planning and service area.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.65 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Responsibilities of service providers under area plans.</ITAG>As a condition for receipt of funds under this part, each area agency onaging shall assure that providers of services shall:(a) Provide the area agency, in a timely manner, with statistical and otherinformation which the area agency requires in order to meet its planning,coordination, evaluation and reporting requirements established by theState under andSection; 1321.13;(b) Specify how the provider intends to satisfy the service needs of low-incomeminority individuals in the area served, including attempting to provideservices to low-income minority individuals at least in proportion to thenumber of low-income minority older persons in the population servicedby the provider;(c) Provide recipients with an opportunity to contribute to the cost ofthe service as provided in andSection; 1321.67;(d) With the consent of the older person, or his or her representative,bring to the attention of appropriate officials for follow-up, conditionsor circumstances which place the older person, or the household of theolder person, in imminent danger;(e) Where feasible and appropriate, make arrangements for the availabilityof services to older persons in weather related emergencies;(f) Assist participants in taking advantage of benefits under other programs;and(g) Assure that all services funded under this part are coordinated withother appropriate services in the community, and that these services donot constitute an unnecessary duplication of services provided by othersources.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.67</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Service contributions.</ITAG>(a) For services rendered with funding under the Older Americans Act, thearea agency on aging shall assure that each service provider shall:(1) Provide each older person with an opportunity to voluntarily contributeto the cost of the service;(2) Protect the privacy of each older person with respect to his or hercontributions; and(3) Establish appropriate procedures to safeguard and account for all contributions.(b) Each service provider shall use supportive services and nutrition servicescontributions to expand supportive services and nutrition services respectively.To that end, the State agency shall:(1) Permit service providers to follow either the addition alternativeor the cost sharing alternatives as stated in 45 CFR 92.25(g) (2) and (3);or(2) A combination of the two alternatives.(c) Each service provider under the Older Americans Act may develop a suggestedcontribution schedule for services provided under this part. In developinga contribution schedule, the provider shall consider the income rangesof older persons in the community and the provider's other sources of income.However, means tests may not be used for any service supported with fundsunder this part. State agencies, in developing State eligibility criteriafor in-home services under section 343 of the Act, may not include a meanstest as an eligibility criterion.(d) A service provider that receives funds under this part may not denyany older person a service because the older person will not or cannotcontribute to the cost of the service.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.69 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Service priority for frail, homebound or isolated elderly.</ITAG>(a) Persons age 60 or over who are frail, homebound by reason of illnessor incapacitating disability, or otherwise isolated, shall be given priorityin the delivery of services under this part.(b) The spouse of the older person, regardless of age or condition, mayreceive a home-delivered meal if, according to criteria determined by thearea agency, receipt of the meal is in the best interest of the homeboundolder person.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.71</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Legal assistance.</ITAG>(a) The provisions and restrictions in this section apply only to legalassistance providers and only if they are providing legal assistance undersection 307(a)(15) of the Act.(b) Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit any attorney from providingany form of legal assistance to an eligible client, or to interfere withthe fulfillment of any attorney's professional responsibilities to a client.(c) The area agency shall award funds to the legal assistance provider(s)that most fully meet the standards in this subsection. The legal assistanceprovider(s) shall:(1) Have staff with expertise in specific areas of law affecting olderpersons in economic or social need, for example, public benefits, institutionalizationand alternatives to institutionalization;(2) Demonstrate the capacity to provide effective administrative and judicialrepresentation in the areas of law affecting older persons with economicor social need;(3) Demonstrate the capacity to provide support to other advocacy efforts,for example, the long-term care ombudsman program;(4) Demonstrate the capacity to provide legal services to institutionalized,isolated, and homebound older individuals effectively; and(5) Demonstrate the capacity to provide legal assistance in the principallanguage spoken by clients in areas where a significant number of clientsdo not speak English as their principal language.(d) A legal assistance provider may not require an older person to discloseinformation about income or resources as a condition for providing legalassistance under this part.(e) A legal assistance provider may ask about the person's financial circumstancesas a part of the process of providing legal advice, counseling and representation,or for the purpose of identifying additional resources and benefits forwhich an older person may be eligible.(f) A legal assistance provider and its attorneys may engage in other legalactivities to the extent that there is no conflict of interest nor otherinterference with their professional responsibilities under this Act.(g) No provider shall use funds received under the Act to provide legalassistance in a fee generating case unless other adequate representationis unavailable or there is an emergency requiring immediate legal action.All providers shall establish procedures for the referral of fee generatingcases.(1) ``Fee generating case'' means any case or matter which, if undertakenon behalf of an eligible client by an attorney in private practice, reasonablymay be expected to result in a fee for legal services from an award toa client, from public funds, or from the opposing party.(2) Other adequate representation is deemed to be unavailable when:(i) Recovery of damages is not the principal object of the client; or(ii) A court appoints a provider or an employee of a provider pursuantto a statute or a court rule or practice of equal applicability to allattorneys in the jurisdiction; or(iii) An eligible client is seeking benefits under Title II of the SocialSecurity Act, 42 U.S.C. 401, <T3>et seq.,</T3> Federal Old Age, Survivors, and Disability InsuranceBenefits; or Title XVI of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 1381, <T3>et seq.,</T3> Supplemental Security Income for Aged, Blind, and Disabled.(3) A provider may seek and accept a fee awarded or approved by a courtor administrative body, or included in a settlement.(4) When a case or matter accepted in accordance with this section resultsin a recovery of damages, other than statutory benefits, a provider mayaccept reimbursement for out-of-pocket costs and expenses incurred in connectionwith the case or matter.(h) A provider, employee of the provider, or staff attorney shall not engagein the following prohibited political activities:(1) No provider or its employees shall contribute or make available OlderAmericans Act funds, personnel or equipment to any political party or associationor to the campaign of any candidate for public or party office; or foruse in advocating or opposing any ballot measure, initiative, or referendum;(2) No provider or its employees shall intentionally identify the TitleIII program or provider with any partisan or nonpartisan political activity,or with the campaign of any candidate for public or party office;(3) While engaged in legal assistance activities supported under the Act,no attorney shall engage in any political activity;(i) No funds made available under the Act shall be used for lobbying activities,including but not limited to any activities intended to influence any decisionor activity by any nonjudicial Federal, State or local individual or body.Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit an employee from:(1) Communicating with a governmental agency for the purpose of obtaininginformation, clarification, or interpretation of the agency's rules, regulations,practices, or policies;(2) Informing a client about a new or proposed statute, executive order,or administrative regulation;(3) Responding to an individual client's request for advice only with respectto the client's own communications to officials unless otherwise prohibitedby the Older Americans Act, Title III regulations or other applicable law.This provision does not authorize publication of lobbying materials ortraining of clients on lobbying techniques or the composition of a communicationfor the client's use; or(4) Making direct contact with the area agency for any purpose;(5) Providing a client with administrative representation in adjudicatoryor rulemaking proceedings or negotiations, directly affecting that client'slegal rights in a particular case, claim or application;(6) Communicating with an elected official for the sole purpose of bringinga client's legal problem to the attention of that official; or(7) Responding to the request of a public official or body for testimony,legal advice or other statements on legislation or other issues relatedto aging; provided that no such action will be taken without first obtainingthe written approval of the responsible area agency.(j) While carrying out legal assistance activities and while using resourcesprovided under the Act, no provider or its employees shall:(1) Participate in any public demonstration, picketing, boycott, or strike,except as permitted by law in connection with the employee's own employmentsituation;(2) Encourage, direct, or coerce others to engage in such activities; or(3) At any time engage in or encourage others to engage in:(i) Any illegal activity; or(ii) Any intentional identification of programs funded under the Act orrecipient with any political activity.(k) None of the funds made available under the Act may be used to pay duesexceeding $100 per recipient per annum to any organization (other thana bar association), a purpose or function of which is to engage in activitiesprohibited under these regulations unless such dues are not used to engagein activities for which Older Americans Act funds cannot be used directly.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.73 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Grant related income under Title III-C.</ITAG>States and sub-grantees must require that their subgrantees' grant relatedincome be used in either the matching or cost sharing alternative in 45CFR 92.25(g)(2) or the additive alternative in andSection; 92.25(g)(3) ora combination of the two. The deductive alternative described in andSection;92.25(g)(1) is not permitted.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.75 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Licenses and safety.</ITAG>The State shall ensure:(a) That, in making awards for multipurpose senior center activities, thearea agency will ensure that the facility complies with all applicableState and local health, fire, safety, building, zoning and sanitation laws,ordinances or codes; and (b) The technical adequacy of any proposed alteration or renovation ofa multipurpose senior center assisted under this part, by requiring thatany alteration or renovation of a multipurpose senior center that affectsthe load bearing members of the facility is structurally sound and complieswith all applicable local or State ordinances, laws, or building codes.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart E_Hearing Procedures for Stawte Agencies</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.77 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope.</ITAG>(a) Hearing procedures for State plan disapproval, as provided for in section307(c) and section 307(d) of the Act are subject to the previsions of 45CFR Part 213 with the following exceptions:(1) Section 213.1(a); andSection; 213.32(d); and andSection; 213.33 do notapply.(2) Reference to SRS Hearing Clerk shall be read to mean HHS Hearing Clerk.(3) References to Administrator shall be read to mean Commissioner on Aging.(b) Instead of the scope described in andSection; 213.1(a), this subpartgoverns the procedures and opportunity for a hearing on:(1) Disapproval of a State plan or amendment:(2) Determination that a State agency does not meet the requirements ofthis part:(3) Determination that there is a failure in the provisions or the administrationof an approved plan to comply substantially with Federal requirements,including failure to comply with any assurance required under the Act orunder this part.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.79 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">When a decision is effective.</ITAG>(a) The Commissioner's decision specifies the effective date for AoA'sreduction and withholding of the State's grant. This effective date maynot be earlier than the date of the Commissioner's decision or later thanthe first day of the next calendar quarter.(b) The decision remains in effect unless reversed or stayed on judicialappeal, or until the agency or the plan is changed to meet all Federalrequirements, except that the Commissioner may modify or set aside hisor her decision before the record of the proceedings under this subpartis filed in court.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.81 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">How the State may appeal.</ITAG>A State may appeal the final decision of the Commissioner disapprovingthe State plan or plan amendment, finding of noncompliance, or findingthat a State agency does not meet the requirements of this part to theU.S. Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the State is located. TheState shall file the appeal within 30 days of the Commissioner's finaldecision.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1321.83</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">How the Commissioner may reallot the State's withheld payments.</ITAG>The Commissioner disburses funds withheld from the State directly to anypublic or nonprofit private organization or agency, or political subdivisionof the State that has the authority and capacity to carry out the functionsof the State agency and submits a State plan which meets the requirementsof this part and which contains an agreement to meet the non-federal sharerequirements. 2. Part 1328 is redesignated as Part 1326 and is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 1326_GRANTS TO INDIAN TRIBES FOR SUPPORT AND NUTRITION SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.1 Basis and purpose of this part.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.3 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.5 Applicability of other regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.7 Confidentiality and disclosure of information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.9 Contributions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.11 Prohibition against supplantation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.13 Supportive services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.15 Nutrition services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.17 Access to information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.19 Application requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.21 Application approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1326.23 Hearing procedures.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority</T4>: 42 U.S.C. 3001; Title VI, Part A of the Older AmericansAct.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1326.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Basis and purpose of this part.</ITAG>This program was established to meet the unique needs and circumstancesof American Indian elders on Indian reservations. This part implementsTitle VI (Part A) of the Older Americans Act, as amended, by establishingthe requirements that an Indian tribal organization shall meet in orderto receive a grant to promote the delivery of services for older Indiansthat are comparable to services provided under Title III. This part alsoprescribes application and hearing requirements and procedures for thesegrants.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1326.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>``Acquiring,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Act, means obtainingownership of an existing facility in fee simple or by lease for 10 yearsor more for use as a multipurpose senior center. ``Altering'' or ``renovating,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Actwith respect to multipurpose senior centers, means making modificationsto or in connection with an existing facility which are necessary for itseffective use as a center. These may include renovation, repair, or expansionwhich is not in excess of double the square footage of the original facilityand all physical improvements.``Budgeting period,'' as used in andSection; 1326.19 of this part, meansthe intervals of time into which a period of assistance (project period)is divided for budgetary and funding purposes.``Constructing,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Act with respectto multipurpose senior centers, means building a new facility, includingthe costs of land acquisition and architectural and engineering fees, ormaking modifications to or in connection with an existing facility whichare in excess of double the square footage of the original facility andall physical improvements.``Department,'' means the Department of Health and Human Services.``Indian reservation,'' means the reservation of any Federally recognizedIndian tribe, including any band, nation, pueblo, or rancheria, any formerreservation in Oklahoma, any community on non-trust land under the jurisdictionof an Indian tribe, including a band, nation, pueblo, or rancheria, withallotted lands, or lands subject to a restriction against alienation imposedby the United States, and Alaskan Native regions established, pursuantto the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (84 Stat. 688).``Indian tribe,'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or organized groupor community, including any Alaska Native Village, regional or villagecorporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska NativeClaims Settlement Act (85 Stat. 688) which is recognized as eligible forthe special programs and services provided by the United States to Indiansbecause of their status as Indians (25 U.S.C. 450b).``Means test,'' as used in the provision of services, means the use ofan older Indian's income or resources to deny or limit that person's receiptof services under this part.``Older Indians,'' means those individuals who have attained the minimumage determined by the tribe for services.``Project period,'' as used in andSection; 1326.19 of this part, means thetotal time for which a project is approved for support, including any extensions.``Service area,'' as used in andSection; 1326.9(b) and elsewhere in thispart, means that geographic area approved by the Commissioner in whichthe tribal organization provides supportive and nutritional services toolder Indians residing there. A service area may include all or part ofthe reservation or any portion of a county or counties which has a commonboundary with the reservation. A service area may also include a non-contiguousarea if the designation of such an area will further the purpose of theAct and will provide for more effective administration of the program bythe tribal organization.``Service provider,'' means any entity that is awarded a subgrant or contractfrom a tribal organization to provide services under this part.``Tribal organization,'' as used in andSection; 1326.7 and elsewhere in thispart, means the recognized governing body of any Indian tribe, or any legallyestablished organization of Indians which is controlled, sanctioned orchartered by such governing body or which is democratically elected bythe adult members of the Indian community to be served by such organizationand which includes the maximum participation of Indians in all phases ofits activities. Provided that in any case where a contract is let or grantmade to an organization to perform services benefiting more than one Indiantribe, the approval of each Indian tribe shall be a prerequisite to theletting or making of the contract or grant (25 U.S.C. 450b).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1326.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability of other regulations.</ITAG>The following regulations in Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulationsapply to all activities under this part:(a) Part 16_Procedures of the Departmental Grant Appeals Board;(b) Part 74_Administration of Grants;(c) Part 75_Informal Grant Appeals Procedures;(d) Part 80_Nondiscrimination Under Programs Receiving Federal Assistancethrough the Department of Health and Human Services: Effectuation of TitleVI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;(e) Part 81_Practice and Procedure for Hearings under Part 80 of this Title;(f) Part 84_Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programs andActivities Receiving Benefits from Federal Financial Participation; and(g) Part 91_Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in Programs or ActivitiesReceiving Federal Financial Assistance from HHS.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1326.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Confidentiality and disclosure of information.</ITAG>A tribal organization shall have confidentiality and disclosure proceduresas follows:(a) A tribal organization shall have procedures to ensure that no informationabout an older Indian or obtained from an older Indian by any providerof services is disclosed by the provider of such services in a form thatidentifies the person without the informed consent of the person or ofhis or her legal representative, unless the disclosure is required by courtorder, or for program monitoring by authorized Federal or tribal monitoringagencies.(b) A tribal organization is not required to disclose those types of informationor documents that are exempt from disclosure by a Federal agency underthe Federal Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1326.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contributions.</ITAG>(a) Each tribal organization shall:(1) Provide each older Indian with a free and voluntary opportunity tocontribute to the cost of the service;(2) Protect the privacy of each older Indian with respect to his or hercontribution;(3) Establish appropriate procedures to safeguard and account for all contributions;(4) Use all services contributions to expand comprehensive and coordinatedservices systems supported under this part, while using nutrition servicescontributions only to expand services as provided under section 307(a)(13)(c)(ii)of the Act.(b) Each tribal organization may develop a suggested contribution schedulefor services provided under this part. In developing a contribution schedule,the tribal organization shall consider the income ranges of older Indiansin the service area and the tribal organization's other sources of income.However, means tests may not be used.(c) A tribal organization that receives funds under this part may not denyany older Indian a service because the older Indian will not or cannotcontribute to the cost of the service.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1326.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Prohibition against supplantation. </ITAG>A tribal organization shall ensure that the activities provided under agrant under this part will be in addition to, and not in substitution for,comparable activities provided without Federal assistance. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1326.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Supportive services. </ITAG>(a) A tribal organization may provide any of the supportive services mentionedunder Title III of the Older Americans Act, and any other supportive servicesthat are necessary for the general welfare of older Indians. (b) If an applicant elects to provide multipurpose senior center activitiesor uses any of the funds under this part for acquiring, altering or renovatinga multipurpose senior center facility, it shall comply with the followingrequirements: (1) The tribal organization shall comply with all applicable local health,fire, safety, building, zoning and sanitation laws, ordinances or codes.(2) The tribal organization shall assure the technical adequacy of anyproposed alteration or renovation of a multipurpose senior centers assistedunder this part. The tribal organization assures technical adequacy byrequiring that any alteration or renovation of a multipurpose senior centerthat affects the load bearing members of the facility is structurally soundand complies with all applicable local or State ordinances, laws, or buildingcodes. (c) If an applicant elects to provide legal services, it shall substantiallycomply with the requirements in andSection;1321.71 and legal services providersshall comply fully with the requirements in andSection;andSection;1321.71(c)through 1321.71(p). <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1326.15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nutrition services. </ITAG>(a) In addition to providing nutrition services to older Indians, a tribalorganization may: (1) Provide nutrition services to the spouses of older Indians; (2) Provide nutrition services to non-elderly handicapped or disabled Indianswho reside in housing facilities occupied primarily by the elderly, atwhich congregate nutrition services are provided; (3) Offer a meal, on the same basis as meals are provided to older Indians,to individuals providing volunteer services during meal hours; and (4) Provide a meal to individuals with disabilities who reside in a non-institutionalhousehold with and accompany a person eligible for congregate meals underthat part. (b) Each tribal organization may receive cash payments in lieu of donatedfoods for all or any portion of its funding available under section 311(a)(4)of the Act. To receive cash or commodities, the tribal organization shallhave an agreement with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Food and NutritionService (FNS) to be a distributing agency. (c) Where applicable, the tribal organization shall work with agenciesresponsible for administering other programs to facilitate participationof older Indians. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1326.17 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Access to information. </ITAG>A tribal organization shall: (a) Establish or have a list of all services that are available to olderIndians in the service area, (b) Maintain a list of services needed or requested by the older Indians;and (c) Provide assistance to older Indians to help them take advantage ofavailable services. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1326.19 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application requirements. </ITAG>A tribal organization shall have an approved application. The applicationshall be submitted as prescribed in section 604 of the Act and in accordancewith the Commissioner's instructions for the specified project and budgetperiods. The application shall provide for: (a) Program objectives, as set forth in section 604(a)(5) of the Act, andany objectives established by the Commissioner. (b) A description of the geographic boundaries of the service area proposedby the tribal organization: (c) Documentation of the ability of the tribal organization to deliversupportive and nutrition services to older Indians, or documentation thatthe tribal organization has effectively administered supportive and nutritionservices within the last 3 years; (d) Assurances as prescribed by the Commissioner that: (1) A tribal organization represents at least 50 individuals who have attained60 years of age or older; (2) A tribal organization shall comply with all applicable State and locallicense and safety requirements for the provision of those services; (3) If a substantial number of the older Indians residing in the servicearea are of limited English-speaking ability, the tribal organization shallutilize the services of workers who are fluent in the language spoken bya predominant number of older Indians; (4) Procedures to ensure that all services under this part are providedwithout use of any means tests; (5) A tribal organization shall comply with all requirements set forthin andSection;1326.7 through 1326.17; and (6) The services provided under this part will be coordinated, where applicable,with services provided under Title III of the Act. (e) A tribal resolution(s) authorizing the tribal organization to applyfor a grant under this part; and(f) Signature by the principal official of the tribe.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1326.21 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application approval.</ITAG>(a) Approval of any application under section 604(e) of the Act, shallnot commit the Commissioner in any way to make additional, supplemental,continuaton, or other awards with respect to any approved application orportion thereof.(b) The Commissioner may give first priority in awarding grants to granteeswhich have effectively administered such grants in the prior year.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1326.23 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Hearing procedures.</ITAG>In meeting the requirements of section 604(d)(3) of the Act, if the Commissionerdisapproves an application from an eligible tribal organization, the tribalorganization may file a written request for a hearing with the Commissioner.(a) The request shall be postmarked or delivered in person within 30 daysof the date of the disapproval notice. If it requests a hearing, the tribalorganization shall submit to the Commissioner, as part of the request,a full written response to each objection specified in the notice of disapproval,including the pertinent facts and reasons in support of its response, andany and all documentation to support its position. Service of the requestshall also be made on the individual(s) designated by the Commissionerto represent him or her.(b) The Administration on Aging shall have the opportunity to respond with30 days to the merits of the tribal organization's request.(c) The Commissioner notifies the tribal organization in writing of thedate, time and place for the hearing.(d) The hearing procedures include the right of the tribal organizationto:(1) A hearing before the Commissioner or an official designated by theCommissioner;(2) Be heard in person or to be represented by counsel, at no expense tothe Administration on Aging;(3) Present written evidence prior to and at the hearing, and present oralevidence at the hearing if the Commissioner or designated official decidesthat oral evidence is necessary for the proper resolution of the issuesinvolved, and(4) Have the staff directly responsible for reviewing the application eitherpresent at the hearing, or have a deposition from the staff, whicheverthe Commissioner or designated official decides.(e) The Commissioner or designated official conducts a fair and impartialhearing, takes all necessary action to avoid delay and to maintain orderand has all powers necessary to these ends.(f) Formal rules of evidence do not apply to the hearings.(g) The official hearing transcript together with all papers, documents,exhibits, and requests filed in the proceedings, including rulings, constitutesthe record for decision.(h) After consideration of the record, the Commissoner or designated officialissues a written decision, based on the record, which sets forth the reasonsfor the decision and the evidence on which it was based. The decision isissued within 60 days of the date of the hearing, constitutes the finaladministrative action on the matter and is promptly mailed to the tribalorganization.(i) Either the tribal organization or the staff of the Administration onAging may request for good cause an extension of any of the time limitsspecified in this section.3. A new Part 1328 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1328_GRANTS FOR SUPPORTIVE AND NUTRITIONAL SERVICES TO OLDERHAWAIIAN NATIVES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.1 Basis and purpose of this part.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.3 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.5 Applicability of their regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.7 Confidentiality and disclosure of information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.9 Contributions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.11 Prohibition against supplantation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.13 Supportive services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.15 Nutrition services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.17 Access to information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.19 Application requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.21 Application approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1328.23 Hearing procedures.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 3001; Title VI Part B of the Older AmericansAct.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Basis and purpose of this part.</ITAG>This program was established to meet the unique needs and circumstancesof Older Hawaiian Natives. This part implements Title VI (Part B) of theOlder Americans Act, as amended, by establishing the requirements thata public or nonprofit private organization shall meet in order to receivea grant to promote the delivery of services for older Hawaiian Nativesthat are comparable to services provided under Title III. This part alsoprescribes application and hearing requirements and procedures for theseagrants.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>``Acquiring,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Act, means obtainingownership of an existing facility in fee simple or by lease of 10 yearsor more for use as a multipurpose senior center. ``Act,'' means the Older Americans Act of 1965, as amended.``Altering'' or ``renovating,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Actwith respect to multipurpose senior centers, means making modificationsto or in connection with an existing facility which are necessary for itseffective use as a center. These may include renovation, repair, or expansionwhich is not in excess of double the square footage of the original facilityand all physical improvements.``Budgeting period,'' as used in andSection; 1328.19 of this part, meansthe intervals of time into which a period of assistance (project period)is divided for budgetary and funding purposes.``Constructing,'' as used in section 307(a)(14) of the Act with respectto multipurpose senior centers, means building a new facility, includingthe costs of land acquisition and architectural and engineering fees, ormaking modificaitons to or in connection with an existing facility whichare in excess of double the square footage of the original facility andall physical improvements.``Department,'' means the Department of Health and Human Services.``Eligible organization,'' means a public or nonprofit private organizationhaving the capacity to provide services under this part for older HawaiianNatives.``Grantee,'' as used in this part, means an eligible organization thathas received funds to provide services to older Hawaiians.``Hawaiian Native,'' as used in this part, means any individual any ofwhose ancestors were native of the area which consists of the HawaiianIslands prior to 1778.``Means test,'' as used in the provision of services, means the use ofan older Hawaiian Native's income or resources to deny or limit that personreceipt of services under this part.``Older Hawaiian,'' means any individual, age 60 or over, who is an HawaiianNative.``Project period,'' as used in andSection; 1328.19 of this part, means thetotal time for which a project is approved for support, including any extensions.``Service area,'' as used in andSection; 1328.9(b) and elsewhere in thispart, means that geographic area approved by the Commissioner in whichthe grantee provides supportive and nutritional services to older HawaiianNatives residing there.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability of other regulations.</ITAG>The following regulations in Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulationsapply to all activities under this part:(a) Part 16-Procedures of the Departmental Grant Appeals Board;(b) Part 74-Administration of Grants;(c) Part 75-Informal Grant Appeals Procedures;(d) Part 80-Nondiscrimination Under Programs Receiving Federal Assistancethrough the Department of Health and Human Services: Effectuation of TitleVI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;(e) Part 81-Practice and procedures for hearings under Part 80;(f) Part 84-Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programs andActivities Receiving Benefits from Federal Financing Participation; and(g) Part 91-Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in Programs or ActivitiesReceiving Federal Financial Assistance from HHS.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Confidentiality and disclosure of information.</ITAG>A grantee shall have confidentiality and disclosure procedures as follows:(a) The grantee shall have procedures to ensure that no information aboutan older Hawaiian Native or obtained from an older Hawaiian Native is disclosedin a form that identifies the person without the informed consent of theperson or of his or her legal representative, unless the disclosure isrequired by court order, or for program monitoring by authorized Federalmonitoring agencies.(b) A grantee is not required to disclose those types of information ordocuments that are exempt from disclosure by a Federal agency under theFederal Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contributions.</ITAG>(a) Each grantee shall:(1) Provide each older Hawaiian Native with a free and voluntary opportunityto contribute to the cost of the service;(2) Protect the privacy of each older Hawaiian Native with respect to hisor her contribution;(3) Establish appropriate procedures to safeguard and account for all contributions;(4) Use all supportive services contributions to expand the services providedunder this part; and(5) Use all nutrition services contributions only to expand services asprovided under section 307(a)(13)(c)(ii) of the Act.(b) Each grantee may develop a suggested contribution schedule for servicesprovided under this part. In developing a contribution schedule, the granteeshall consider the income ranges of older Hawaiian Natives in the servicearea and the grantee's other sources of income. However, means tests maynot be used.(c) A grantee may not deny any older Hawaiian a service because the olderHawaiian will not or cannot contribute to the cost of the service.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Prohibition against supplantation.</ITAG>A grantee shall ensure that the activities provided under a grant underthis part will be in addition to, and not in substitution for, comparableactivities provided without Federal assistance.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Supportive services.</ITAG>(a) A grantee may provide any of the supportive services specified underTitle III of the Older Americans Act and any other supportive services,approved in the grantee's application, that are necessary for the generalwelfare of older Hawaiian Natives.(b) If a grantee elects to provide multipurpose senior center activitiesor uses any of the funds under this part for acquiring, altering or renovatinga multipurpose senior center facility, it shall comply with the followingrequirements:(1) The grantee shall comply with all applicable local health, fire, safety,building, zoning and sanitation laws, ordinances or codes.(2) The grantee shall assure the technical adequacy of any proposed alterationor renovation of a multipurpose senior center assisted under this part.The grantee shall assure technical adequacy by requiring that any alterationor renovation of a multipurpose senior center that affects the load bearingmembers of the facility is structurally sound and complies with all applicablelocal or State ordinances, laws, or building codes.(c) If a grantee elects to provide legal services, it shall substantiallycomply with the requirements in andSection; 1321.71 and legal services providersshall comply fully with the requirements in andSection;andSection; 1321.71(c)through 1321.71(p).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nutrition services.</ITAG>(a) In addition to providing nutrition services to older Hawaiian Natives,a grantee may:(1) Provide nutrition services to the spouses of older Hawaiian Natives;(2) Provide nutrition services to non-elderly handicapped or disabled HawaiianNatives who reside in housing facilities occupied primarily by the elderly,at which congregate nutrition services are provided;(3) Offer a meal, on the same basis as meals are provided to older HawaiianNatives, to individuals providing volunteer services during meal hours;and(4) Provide a meal to individuals with disabilities who reside in a non-institutionalhousehold with and accompany a person eligible for congregate meals underthat part.(b) Each grantee may receive cash payments in lieu of donated foods forall or any portion of its funding available under section 311(a)(4) ofthe Act. To receive cash or commodities, the grantee shall have an agreementwith the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)to be a distributing agency.(c) Where applicable, the grantee shall work with agencies responsiblefor administering other programs to facilitate participation of older HawaiianNatives.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.17 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Access to information.</ITAG>A grantee shall:(a) Establish or have a list of all services that are available to olderHawaiian Natives in the service area;(b) Maintain a list of services needed or requested by the older Hawaiians;and(c) Provide assistance to older Hawaiian Natives to help them take advantageof available services.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.19 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application requirements.</ITAG>To receive funds under this part, an eligible organization shall submitan application as prescribed in section 623 of the Act and in accordancewith the Commissioner's instructions for the specified project and budgetperiods. The application shall provide for:(a) Program objectives, as set forth in section 623(a)(6) of the Act, andany objectives established by the Commissioner;(b) A description of the geographic boundaries of the service area proposedby the eligible organization;(c) Documentation of the organization's ability to serve older HawaiianNatives;(d) Assurances as prescribed by the Commissioner that:(1) The eligible organization represents at least 50 older Hawaiian Nativeswho have attained 60 years of age or older;(2) The eligible organization shall conduct all activities on behalf ofolder Hawaiian natives in close coordination with the State agency andArea Agency on Aging:(3) The eligible organization shall comply with all applicable State andlocal license and safety requirements for the provision of those services;(4) The eligible organization shall ensure that all services under thispart are provided without use of any means tests;(5) The eligible organization shall comply with all requirements set forthin andSection;andSection; 1328.7 through 1328.17; and(6) The services provided under this part will be coordinated, where applicable,with services provided under Title III of the Act.(e) Signature by the principal official of the eligible organization.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.21 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application approval.</ITAG>(a) Approval of any application under section 623(d) of the Act, shallnot commit the Commissioner in any way to make additional, supplemental,continuation, or other awards with respect to any approved applicationor portion thereof.(b) The Commissioner may give first priority in awarding grants to eligibleapplicant organizations that have prior experience in serving HawaiianNatives, particularly older Hawaiian Natives.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1328.23 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Hearing procedures.</ITAG>In accordance with section 623(c)(3) of the Act, if the Commissioner disapprovesan application from an eligible organization, the organization may filea written request for a hearing with the Commissioner.(a) The request shall be postmarked or delivered in person within 30 daysof the date of the disapproval notice. If it requests a hearing, the organizationshall submit to the Commissioner, as part of the request, a full writtenresponse to each objection specified in the notice of disapproval, includingthe pertinent facts and reasons in support of its response, and any andall documentation to support its position. Service of the request shallalso be made on the individual(s) designated by the Commissioner to representhim or her.(b) The Administration on Aging shall have the opportunity to respond within30 days to the merits of the organization's request.(c) The Commissioner notifies the organization in writing of the date,time and place for the hearing.(d) The hearing procedures include the right of the organization to:(1) A hearing before the Commissioner or an official designated by theCommissioner;(2) Be heard in person or to be represented by counsel, at no expense tothe Administration on Aging;(3) Present written evidence prior to and at the hearing, and present oralevidence at the hearing if the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designeedecides that oral evidence is necessary for the proper resolution of theissues involved, and (4) Have the staff directly responsible for reviewing the application eitherpresent at the hearing, or have a deposition from the staff, whicheverthe Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee decides.(e) The Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee conducts a fair andimpartial hearing, takes all necessary action to avoid delay and to maintainorder and has all powers necessary to these ends.(f) Formal rules of evidence do not apply to the hearings.(g) The official hearing transcript together with all papers documents,exhibits, and requests filed in the proceedings, including rulings, constitutesthe record for decision.(h) After consideration of the record, the Commissioner or the Commissioner'sdesignee issues a written decision, based on the record, which sets forththe reasons for the decision and the evidence on which it was based. Thedecision is issued within 60 days of the date of the hearing, constitutesthe final administrative action on the matter and is promptly mailed tothe organization.(i) Either the organization or the staff of the Administration on Agingmay request, for good cause, an extension of any of the time limits specifiedin this section.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-19624 Filed 8-30-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4130-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>