<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88922-0101 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-22-88.f2.A1100</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">RIN 2130-AA32 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. RSSl 88-1, Notice No. 1] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Special Safety Inquiry; Locomotive Control Cab Safety </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), Department of Transportation(DOT).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of special safety inquiry. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>FRA is initiating a Special Safety Inquiry to examineengineering, environmental and technical factors affecting the safety andwork environment of locomotive control cabs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>(1) FRA will hold public hearings on November 2 and 3,1988, beginning at 9:30 a.m. at the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago,Illinois. (2) Prepared statements to be made at the hearing should be submitted tothe Docket Clerk at least five days before the hearing date (close of business,October 28, 1988). Parties not able to meet that deadline and those wishingto include technical exhibits in their presentations are encouraged tocontact the FRA representatives listed below. (3) Persons not desiring to testify, but wishing to submit written commentsfor inclusion in the safety inquiry docket should submit them to the DocketClerk by December 3, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>(1) Hearing location_Illinois Institute of Technology,Grover M. Herman Hall, 324l S. Federal Street, Chicago, Illinois 60616.(2) Docket Clerk, Office of Chief Counsel (RCC-30), Federal Railroad Administration,400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590 (telephone 202-366-0817).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> William E. Loftus, ExecutiveDirector, RED-1, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590 (telephone(202) 366-2257), or Clifford Gannett, Research and Development, Officeof Safety, RRS-32, Federal Railroad Administration, 400 Seventh Street,SW., Washington, DC 20590 (telephone (202) 366-0466).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>Locomotive cab safety has been an area of concern for industry, labor andgovernment since passage of the Railroad Safety Act of 1970, which gaveFRA broad powers to regulate in all matters affecting railroad safety.The Federal interest centers on the structural capability of the locomotiveto sustain damage in most accident situations in order to minimize seriousinjuries or crew fatalities as well as in-cab factors that affect employeesafety. FRA's approach to these issues has emphasized cooperative researchprograms that have resulted in significant changes in the safety designof control cabs and an improved working environment. However, these improvementshave not been universally adapted. The workplace of the locomotive engineer is the control cab of the leadlocomotive. From that cab, he or she controls the movement of the trainin response to instructions transmitted by various communication devices.The workplace environment in the cab is affected by noise, fumes, visibilityfactors, and weather (heat or cold). The crew's vulnerability in a collisionwith other railroad equipment or in a collision with heavy highway vehiclesat railway highway grade crossings is in part a function of the availabilityof emergency egress facilities and the cab's structural integrity. FRA's primary interest is railroad safety; in this instance, the safe movementof the train and safety of the crew in the cab. For many years, the FederalRailroad Administration has encouraged railroads and locomotive manufacturersto examine all aspects of the locomotive cab work environment as a firststep toward improving industry practices in the design, construction andmaintenance of the locomotive cab. Much of FRA's effort has been in research to analyze problems and identifysolutions. The research has been conducted in close cooperation with railroadsand labor organizations (Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and UnitedTransportation Union) and, at times, with manufacturers. The decision to hold a special safety inquiry on locomotive cab safetyis consistent with FRA's view that a higher degree of employee safety andan improved, safer work environment can be achieved. It is FRA's intentto examine, with the active participation of all interested parties, thecurrent state of locomotive cab design and construction; to identify problemsand opportunities for improvement; and to seek consensus on strategiesfor improving future designs. FRA views the locomotive cab safety issue as focusing on specific areasof concern which together make up the ``system'' of the locomotive cabworkplace. Those areas of concern form the framework for this inquiry.They are: crashworthiness; work environment; and crash avoidance.A substantial percentage of railroad employee fatalities and injuries occurwhen railroad equipment collides with other railroad equipment or withmotor vehicles at highway grade crossings. Sixty-seven railroad employeeswere killed in train accidents over the past five years (1983-1987). Forty-seven,or 70 percent of these employees, were killed in collisions of railroadequipment, many of them in cabooses or locomotives. Another eight employeeswere killed when locomotives hit highway vehicles at grade crossings. Railroad employees injured in collisions of railroad equipment during thesame period totaled 632. Another 586 were injured in railroad highway gradecrossing collisions with motor vehicles. Together, these injuries represent57.6 percent of all railroad employees injured in train accidents. While the number of head-on and rear-end collisions has declined since1983, these accidents continue to represent a major safety concern giventhe resulting fatalities and the seriousness of the injuries associatedwith them. This safety inquiry comes at a time of historic change in American railroading.An increasing amount of highly sophisticated operating and control equipmentis coming on the market and being placed in the locomotive cab. Additionalemployees are being located in the cab due to the progressive removal ofcabooses. There are currently no Federal regulations governing locomotivecrashworthiness (other than certain commuter equipment regulations), norare there Association of American Railroads standards concerning the subject.This is an opportune time to seek a consensus on those design elementsand operating procedures that can provide a safer work environment. We urge interested parties to share their views on the requirements ofa safer, more environmentally acceptable workplace in their responses tothe general and specific questions listed below. We stress, however, thatour list is illustrative, not all-inclusive. We encourage the parties topresent comments on any issue they identify as falling within the broadscope of this inquiry. FRA is particularly interested in technical papers or presentations oncrashworthiness designs and improved cab layouts and instrument location.Railroads and manufacturers are invited to locate prototype locomotivesand static displays at the hearing site to demonstrate the technical anddesign concepts presented in formal papers and testimony. Another specificarea of interest is the use of Advance Train Control System technology(ATCS) in crash avoidance and the ergonomic factors associated with introductionof ATCS devices into the locomotive cab. Railroad employees who ride locomotives are among the users or consumersaffected by the design of a locomotive. Their experiences can be very helpfulin establishing priorities for locomotive changes. We invite the participationof the employees directly or through their employee organizations. <ITAG tagnum="84">Crashworthiness </ITAG>During the period 1976 to 1982, seven engineering studies were conductedto review accident data and make recommendations to improve the crashworthinessof locomotive cabs. In addition, rear-end and automobile collision testswere performed at the Transportation Test Center in 1975. The studies concludedthe primary cause of fatalities and injuries was cab crushing due to impactand override. The secondary cause of the injuries and fatalities was occupantsbeing thrown around in the cab and into fixed objects with protuberancesor no padding. The most recent study by National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL)was completed in 1982 (Analysis of Locomotive Cabs), and summarized previousresearch and made general design recommendations. The NSTL study reviewed accident data for the period 1974-1979. Similardata for the 1983-1987 period is shown in (Table I). NSTL's analysis ofcollision data in the study indicated all fatalities, and 96 percent ofall injuries, occurred at 35 miles per hour or less. An analysis of 147 National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) railroadaccident reports indicated that 61 percent of all accidents occurred duringclear and dry conditions. In terms of override frequency and severity factors,a sample of 36 NTSB accident reports indicated 53 percent of the traincollisions resulted in override with an accompanying injury or fatality.The engineering studies identified seven means of improving the crashworthinessof present locomotives. The studies also recommended improvements to thecab environment to reduce the probability of serious injury. During thecourse of the engineering studies, radically new designs of locomotivefront ends were made. These new designs were directed toward providingadequate strength so that in the event of a grade crossing or rear-endcollision and override of the cab by a caboose or freight car, the probabilityof loss of survivability space would be minimized. Unfortunately, thesedesigns drastically increased the weight or proved undesirable for otherreasons. The seven recommended improvements to crashworthiness were: Top shelf couplers;anticlimbers with 200,000 pound capacity; the long hood anchored with adequateshear strength; high capacity 1,250,000 pound draft gears; increase verticalstrength of cab to support loaded freight car; increase collision poststrength to 500,000 pounds per post; and increase wall thickness of fullwidth short hood to \3/8\ inch and attenuate collision energy by attachingsandboxes to posts and deck plate. There were also five recommended improvements for in-cab safety: Provideadequate emergency escape routes; provide a 1-to-2 inch layer of paddingand eliminate sharp edges in the cab; replace the large control stand witha console; improve fire protection; and provide cab occupant restraint.The Burlington Northern (BN) and the Canadian National Railway (CN) haveadopted some of these recommendations. The BN ordered its 1980 purchasedlocomotives with an improved collision post design, now standard on ElectroMotive Division SD locomotives. These collision posts reportedly can withstand300,000 lbs. at the floor level without yielding. The BN short hood wasmade of \3/8\andmin16;andmin16; (.375andmin16;andmin16;) steel plate designed toaddress collision speeds below 15 m.p.h. Other short hoods are made of11-gauge or .090andmin16;andmin16; ``thick steel.'' The BN design helps mitigatethe override problem but does not provide roll-over protection. The CN design provides collision posts each capable of withstanding a 500,000lb. force at 30andmin16;andmin16; above the deck. The General Electric Company(GE) recently completed an engineering analysis to verify that this canbe accomplished on GE locomotives. The CN design includes a full-widthshort hood with a \1/2\andmin16;andmin16; steel plate. The locomotive is alsoequipped, as is the BN locomotive, with anticlimbers. The CN anticlimberis \1/2\andmin16;andmin16; thicker than the BN anticlimber, making it two inchesthick. Recently, the Union Pacific placed an order for 137 locomotivesthat incorporate most of the CN's design improvements. Federal regulations deal in certain design requirements for ``multipleunit'' (MU) electric locomotives in rail commuter service (49 CFR 229.141).Design requirements for MU locomotives call for two main vertical members(collision posts), each having an ultimate shear value of not less than300,000 lbs. at a point even with the underframe. The design requirementsalso call for anticlimbers capable of a vertical load of 100,000 lbs. Some but not all diesel electric locomotives are being built to meet orsurpass this collision post standard. However, the collision force resistanceof some EMD GP locomotives for both posts is only 96,000 lbs. About one-halfof the major railroads order locomotives equipped with anticlimbers. Some of the recommendations listed earlier would increase the weight offour-axle locomotives. This is not the case with six-axle locomotives.Ballast could be removed from these locomotives to compensate for addedweight brought about by changes to improve crashworthiness. The extentof the problem of an increase in weight of four-axle locomotives needsto be assessed. <ITAG tagnum="84">Work Environment </ITAG>The in-cab environment of a locomotive has evolved from the open spartan,steel-framed cab of the steam days to the top-of-the-line cabs on somelocomotives today that feature sound insulation, air conditioning, ergonomic-styledseats, console controls and video display devices for communications andinformation purposes. However, in-service locomotive cabs may have oneor all of the following problems: noise, fumes, poor heat/cold controls,limited visibility, difficult egress and poor seating. A Locomotive Control Compartment Committee was established in 1971, consistingof representatives of the railroad companies, Association of American Railroads(AAR), Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, United Transportation Unionand FRA. The Committee's emphasis has been to improve the safety of thelocomotive cab workplace. An early outgrowth of the Committee's work were the ``clean cab'' designchanges that the AAR adopted. These items included such improvements asnon-skid floors, door closure bars, flexible hinge guard cushion pad forthe door frame, a windshield wiper protective cover, a padded sun visorand improved seats. More recently, the Committee has concentrated on improvedfunctional design of cab interiors, including the placement of controlsand communication devices. The removal of cabooses from many trains andthe placement of additional operating equipment in the cab requires considerationof changes to the conventional cab. Amtrak has electric locomotives (AEM-7) in service that have a controlconsole arrangement directly in front of the engineer. The Canadian NationalRailway has purchased diesel-electric locomotive units with a similar controlconsole arrangement but incorporating additional cab changes. The floorspace of the CN cab is approximately 25 percent larger, and an eight-inchspeedometer is located conveniently for the fireman/brakeman and engineerto see. There is a centrally located radio speaker in the ceiling of thecab in addition to the one in the radio control head on the control console.Installation of a control console brings the benefit of a noticeable senseof roominess in the cab. The person at the controls is not closed in andhas easy access to or the ability to exit from the seat. Forward visibilityis improved. Display panels for the ``end of train'' information systemand ``Pacesetter'' slow speed control are placed above the console. TheCN intends to provide some form of desk and adequate lighting for the conductorin the cab. Improved visibility, lighting, air conditioning, noise control and anatomicallydesigned seating are addressed and achieved in CN's new designs, as areimproved toilet facilities. Six parts of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 49, apply directly toequipment specifications and the maintenance of diesel-electric locomotives.They are: Part 210, railroad noise emission compliance regulations; Part223, safety glazing standards; and Part 229, railroad locomotive safetystandards. Part 229 covers general items, inspection and tests, safetyrequirements including the brake system, draft, suspension and electricalsystems, internal combustion equipment, steam generator and cabs and cabequipment.Part 231 refers to railroad safety appliance standards such as handholds,etc. Part 232, railroad power brakes and drawbars, refers to the inspectionand performance of the brake system. Part 236 contains rules and instructionsfor the interface of the locomotive and signaling systems. <ITAG tagnum="84">Crash Avoidance </ITAG>In all safety programs, prevention of accidents and, in the event of anaccident, prevention of serious injury or death are primary goals. Theprincipal purpose of railroad signal systems, operating rules and practices,communications, employee training and automatic warning and control systemsis safe operation. Alertness of the locomotive crew is a critical factor in crash avoidance.Post-accident investigations have, on several occasions, concluded thatthe crew was asleep at the time of a collision. Over the years, severaldevices have been used by railroads to make certain the locomotive engineerremains alert. These devices, ranging from the old style ``deadman's''pedal to the sophisticated electronic systems used in high speed passengerand freight services, have not been entirely satisfactory. Some devicesare said to be stressful to engineers and, at times, engineers have beenable to circumvent the alertness-interrogation process. An alerter deviceshould be tamperproof, reliable, inexpensive, unobtrusive and easily installed.FRA has funded research on one such device making use of ultrasonic hardwareto survey the engineer's physical motion without being an intrusive elementin train operation. This device is in the early stages of development butrepresents an effort to meet the performance criteria listed above, andwill be on display at the hearing. Papers and comments concerning presentand improved devices are welcome. Safety is a prime objective of the ATCS project of the Railway Associationof Canada and the Association of American Railroads. Through the use ofspecific, real-time information on train and track forces, train location,automated route and block interlocking and automated enforcement of speedsand authorities, safer operations are achieved. ATCS will space trainsthrough the use of blocks (space intervals), similar to other block systems(manual, automatic and controlled-manual). However, it is an advanced methodthat will permit several trains to be in closer proximity on the same trackat the same time than is now the case with conventional systems. ATCS can eliminate the potential for train collisions when the full systembecomes operational. The ATCS and the Advanced Railroad Electronics System(ARES) being developed by BN, will provide a means of controlling trainspeed in the event the engineer and other crew members are not alert. Atpresent, some major railroads equip their locomotives with alerter devicesto make certain the engineer is awake and attentive. Installing ATCS will mean additional devices in the cab that will requirethe engineer's attention. The equipment will include video displays, keyboards,and radio equipment. The equipment must share space with rear-end monitoringequipment and, in some cases, radio equipment to control locomotive unitsin the train, as well as conventional control equipment. Presently, some railroads have equipped locomotives with event recordersthat record on magnetic tape the performance of the engineer in handlingthe train. The latest event recorders provide eight to ten channels ofinformation on train performance and handling including train speed andbrake applications during train movement. This equipment is particularlyvaluable in accident investigations. In accordance with the requirementsof the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 1988, FRA intends to conduct a separaterulemaking on the use of event recorders. <ITAG tagnum="84">Safety Statistics </ITAG>While the number of rear-end and head-on collisions has decreased overthe last five years, the potential for loss of life, injury, and propertydamage in a collision of heavy railroad equipment has not been eliminated.For the years 1983 through 1987, a total of 332 rear-end and head-on collisionsoccurred. Of this total, 56 percent were rear-end and 44 percent head-oncollisions, resulting in combined damages of $74.4 million. Rear-end collisionsaccounted for $36.9 million and head-on collisions $37.5 million in damages.For that period, train collisions resulted in 47 deaths and 632 injuries.In addition, there were 586 employee injuries and 8 deaths due to railroadhighway grade crossing accidents. During this five-year period, 1,416 employeeinjuries were incurred while operating on locomotives. A detailed listingof this data is shown in Table 1. <ITAG tagnum="84">Technical Issues </ITAG>We solicit specific comment on the following issues: (a) Achieving adequatecollision post and short hood capability to attenuate a crash force; (b)achieving adequate anticlimbing capability and coupler strength; (c) lesseningthe potential for crushing of cab in an override accident or derailmentrollover; (d) cab congestion of people and equipment; (e) safety featuressuch as an emergency exit, occupant restraints, increased padding and removalof objects with sharp edges; and (f) need for a crew alerter device. We ask you to address the following specific questions: 1. Would it be feasible for the major railroads, with the cooperation oflocomotive manufacturers, to agree upon locomotive design standards thatwould enhance safety of cab occupants in the event of a collision or derailment?2. Are there any technical barriers or other objections to increasing thecrash attenuation capability of crash posts and short hoods on six-axlelocomotives? On four-axle locomotives? 3. Are there technical barriers or other objections to providing a cabstructure that will not crush under override or rollover conditions?4. Are new locomotives presently being ordered equipped with anticlimbers?If not, why not? 5. What further improvements can be made to upgrade the work environmentof the cab, especially regarding noise attenuation, fumes control, heatingand air conditioning, seating comfort and support, and other ergonomicfactors? Are technical or economic limitations involved? 6. Should the size of locomotive cabs be increased to accommodate additionalcrew members and equipment? Is this economically and technologically feasible?7. In order to eliminate a source of injuries, should the large controlstand be replaced with a differently designed console? Does the consoledesign contribute to better visibility of in-cab devices and to the overallfield of vision? 8. Have there been occasions when safety was adversely affected becausecrew members were not alert? What are the advantages and disadvantagesto providing alerter devices in cabs. 9. Which of the changes suggested earlier do you feel are important orunimportant? 10. What would be your priorities in making design changes? 11. Do you believe adoption of an AAR Manual of Standards for design requirementsfor new locomotives would be effective in obtaining desirable industry-wideimprovements? <ITAG tagnum="84">Demonstrations and Exhibits </ITAG>It is FRA's intention that the special safety inquiry be as comprehensiveas possible in coverage of all aspects of the locomotive cab safety issue.Therefore, we encourage the use of static and working displays of new productsand research projects directly applicable to the inquiry's purpose. Limitedspace is available in the hearing location, Grover M. Herman Hall at theIllinois Institute of Technology, for display of mock-up models and graphicdisplays of new equipment that are also the subject of technical papersand direct testimony at the hearings. FRA is hopeful that track space atthe AAR's Research and Test Department's Chicago Technical Center can bemade available for the display of the latest locomotive designs now inprototype or in production. The hearing schedule will permit time for theattendees to visit the displays as a practical demonstration of papersor testimony previously presented.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on September 16, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John H. Riley, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-06-M 001 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-21629 Filed 9-21-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-06-C</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>