<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88203-0045 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-03-88.f2.A1044</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 22 / Wednesday, February 3, 1988/ Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Food Safety and Inspection Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">9 CFR Parts 71, 78, 85, 309, 310, and 320</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 87-103]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Swine Identification</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA, andFood Safety and Inspection Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The United States Department of Agriculture (the Department)is proposing to add to its existing identification and recordkeeping requirementsfor swine, to require that all swine in interstate commerce be identifiedand that records concerning the swine identification be maintained. Expandingexisting requirements, so that all swine in interstate commerce are identifiedand records of their identification maintained, would allow the Animaland Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) of the Department to tracea swine disease to its source much more efficiently than is now possible.APHIS needs to be able to locate the source of infection in order to eradicatecertain diseases and stop them from spreading. Expanding existing identificationand recordkeeping requirements for swine in interstate commerce would alsoallow the Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) of the Department todetermine more easily the source of meat that is adulterated with drugsand other chemical residue at levels higher than the allowed tolerance.FSIS needs to be able to locate these sources of adulteration in orderto better keep the United States meat supply free of meat that could harmthe health of the American public.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Consideration will be given to all comments postmarked orreceived on or before April 4, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Send an original and 2 copies of written comments toSteven B. Farbman, Assistant Director, Regulatory Coordination, APHIS,USDA, Room 728, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782.Please state that your comments are in response to Docket Number 87-103.Comments received may be inspected at Room 728 of the Federal Buildingbetween 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Dr. W.E. Ketter, Regulatory Communicationsand Compliance Policy Staff, VS, APHIS, USDA, Room 828, Federal Building,6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, 301-436-5863; or Dr. DouglasL. Berndt, Director, Slaughter Inspection Standards and Procedures Division,Meat and Poultry Inspection Technical Services, FSIS, USDA, Room 4444,P.O. Box 96464, Washington, DC 20090-6464, 202-447-3219.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>This background material is presented in five sections: (1) History ofIndustry Action Concerning Swine Identification; (2) Packers and StockyardsAdministration: Responsibilities and Current Regulations; (3) Animal andPlant Health Inspection Service (APHIS): Responsibilities and Current Regulations;(4) Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS): Responsibilities and CurrentRegulations; and (5) Proposed Regulations.The first section is historical material concerning identification of swineand pork from the point of view of the various industries concerned withproducing meat for the American public, including livestock producers (especiallyhog producers), feedlot owners, sale barn operators, and slaughtering plantoperators. The second, third, and fourth sections summarize the currentUSDA regulations concerning swine identification and records required tobe maintained on swine in interstate commerce. The fifth section detailsproposed regulations to expand requirements for swine identification andto require certain records of swine identification to be kept.<ITAG tagnum="84">History of Industry Action Concerning Swine Identification</ITAG>For many years, representatives of the swine industry have urged the UnitedStates Department of Agriculture (the Department) to promulgate regulationsrequiring the identification of swine in the United States. In 1970, theU.S. Animal Health Association (USAHA), a national organization of stateand federal animal health officials and industry representatives, adopteda resolution demanding that all livestock and poultry containing biologicalresidues or harboring zoonotic diseases injurious to human health be quarantinedand disposed of in an appropriate manner. In 1982, the Livestock ConservationInstitute (LCI), a nonprofit research and education organization of thelivestock and meat industry and other professional groups, approved a resolutionsupporting mandatory identification of all swine to the farm of originat all points of concentration and slaughter. Virtually all segments ofthe pork industry concurred in the resolution. In 1984, the National PorkProducer's Council (NPPC), which represents swine producers, appointeda task force to develop a national identification program for swine.At their respective 1984 meetings, the identification committees of boththe USAHA and the LCI reported that ``there is general agreement on theneed for identification.'' Both organizations resolved ``to continue topursue a national, uniform means to identify swine back to the farm orranch.'' An NPPC identification task force has also recommended the developmentof a system ``to allow for the potential for product improvement that willenhance the product image and increase consumer confidence in the product.To accomplish this, hogs must be identified for control of disease andresidues as well as composition and quality.''Packers and processors, as represented by the American Meat Institute (AMI),advocate animal identification to help prevent and eliminate diseases andcontrol residues. Many slaughtering establishments independently requireidentification for the animals they purchase.On March 28, 1984, the AMI submitted a petition to USDA requesting adoptionof regulations requiring identification of all swine moved or sold forthe purpose of slaughter, so that they could be traced back through marketingchannels to their respective sources. The purpose of the identificationwould have been ``to facilitate the prevention, eradication, and eliminationof swine diseases and for other public health-related reasons.'' FSIS deniedthis petition on August 22, 1984, stating that USDA does not have authorityto require a mandatory swine identification program for all swine movedor sold for purposes of slaughter, as requested by the AMI.On July 9, 1985, the AMI submitted a second petition, asking that regulationsbe adopted requiring, with certain exceptions, that swine moved or soldin interstate commerce for the purpose of slaughter be identified to theirplaces of origin by a means approved by USDA. The petition referred toa ``Notice of Intent to Institute Proposed Rulemaking,'' published by FSISon May 20, 1985 (50 FR 20796). The notice stated that FSIS would considerevidence from producers that animals offered for ante-mortem inspectionhad been properly withdrawn from sulfonamide and other drugs. (If animalsare not properly withdrawn from these drugs before slaughter, their meatwill be adulterated by residues.) According to the AMI, adequate evidencecannot be provided, and therefore the sulfa residue problem can only bedealt with effectively with a swine identification system that allows swineto be traced back to their premises or herd of origin.The AMI petition was supported by the LCI, the National Association ofMeat Purveyors, an organization representing meat wholesalers, and theAmerican Feed Industry Association, an organization representing manufacturersof livestock and poultry feed.In addition, Dr. R.H. Wasserman of the New York State College of VeterinaryMedicine, Cornell University, endorsed the AMI petition. Dr. Wassermanhad chaired the National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council(NAS/NRC) Committee on the Scientific Basis of the Nation's Meat and PoultryInspection Program. In July 1985, the Committee published a report, ``Meatand Poultry Inspection: the Scientific Basis of the Nation's Program.''In this report, the Committee recommended (pp. 77-78) that an animal identificationsystem ``be created to allow diseased or contaminated animals to be racedto their source, to increase the farmer's share of responsibility for contamination,and to facilitate epidemiological studies of specific disease outbreaks.''The identification system would be used in conjunction with an integratedUSDA animal health monitoring program using data from meat and poultryinspection to ensure the routine tracing of disease and contamination backto their respective sources (p. 78). In addition, as pointed out in thereport, an identification and traceback system would also be useful incontrolling use of contaminating chemicals at the farm (p. 60).The FSIS responded to the NAS report in its ``FSIS Future Agenda,'' issuedJune, 1986. In preparing the response, the FSIS established eight committees,including a committee on animal identification and traceback. That committeerecommended establishing a mandatory, national system for tracing swineback to their points of origin (p. VI-5). USDA was urged to begin at onceto develop a program requiring identification of swine and maintenanceof identification records by slaughter plants (p. VI-6). The committeefound the persistence of the residue problem in swine to be a compellingreason to initiate an identification and traceback program. ``In the caseof residue screening, product which has been sampled [in FSIS's monitoringprogram] and found by the laboratory to be positive for chemical contaminationwill have moved into commerce before the [laboratory] results are returnedto the point of origin. However, these results can be used to develop trenddata and to alert inspectors to potential problem producers, <T3>provided the source of the contamination is known</T3>'' (p. VI-3).The committee assessed the option of requiring slaughter plants to maintainrecords on the ownership of all swine during the 30-day period immediatelypreceding slaughter. It found this option ``* * * could be put into operationwith little difficulty and may be generally acceptable to producers andslaughter plants. It would provide an excellent, low-cost, and highly effectivestart-up program for a nationwide system for tracing animal ownership.''The primary value of these regulations, in the view of the committee, wouldbe in establishing the means for tracing animals with violative levelsof residues to their previous owners (p. VI-5). But the committee alsonoted other possible benefits from the regulations. ``Part of [FSIS's]future agenda,'' observed the committee,<ITAG tagnum="20">``* * * is to move into more productive forms of inspection. FSISis planning to direct more intensive efforts to the control of microbiologicaland chemical contaminants in meat and poultry. These efforts would includethe generation of epidemiological data that could be fed back into theanimal production chain to improve the condition of animals presented forinspection. An animal identification and traceback system would be neededto carry out this kind of inspection activity * * *. Federal and stateanimal health authorities would be able to trace animals to their sourcewhen appropriate action is needed to be taken to prevent epizootic infectionsor chemical residues or other contaminations. Benefits would also accureto producers in the form of reduced herd morbidity and mortality and asa tool in the development of better animal husbandry. By monitoring theresults of breeding improvements from the farm to the slaughterhouse, producers,consumers, and food companies could all be expected to benefit from theenhanced livestock quality that animal identification and traceback couldbring. In addition, effective animal identification can deter theft andthereby reduce losses to producers and insurers.'' (p. VI-3.)</ITAG>In its deliberations, the committee agreed that one aspect of animal diseasecontrol that deserves particular attention is that of exotic diseases.Contagions of foreign origin, such as African swine fever, could have devastatingeffects on domestic herds. Losses would be caused by disruption to themarketing system, and by morbidity and mortality among animals. A goodidentification and traceback system would enable the industry and animalhealth authorities to locate the sources of exotic infections quickly andefficiently.On January 12, 1987, officials of the AMI, the Livestock Marketing Association,an organization representing operations of livestock markets, and the NPPCsent a letter to the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Marketing andInspection Services. The letter outlined the basic features of a suggestedswine identification system. Among other things, the letter stated thata workable swine identification system would ``provide an effective, economicalmethod of enhancing the Department's public health capabilities.'' Thesystem outlined in the letter would require packers, marketing agents,and other buyers to maintain records regarding the sources of animals.In addition to this industry support for a swine identification system,there has been much recent congressional interest in the subject. The ProcessedProducts Inspection Improvement Act of 1986 (Title IV of the Futures TradingAct of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-641)) expresses the sense of Congress that theSecretary of Agriculture should evaluate the feasibility of, and develop,a program that would enable the Secretary to trace livestock subject tofederal inspection in order to identify the producer (section 405(2)).The Secretary is to report to congressional committees on any action proposedor taken with respect to such a program by November 1987 (see 406(3)).<ITAG tagnum="84">Packers and Stockyards Administration: Responsibilities and CurrentRegulations</ITAG>The Packers and Stockyards Administration (PSA) of the Department, underthe Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 U.S.C. 181, <T3>et seq.</T3>), regulates the packers and stockyards industry to assurefair trade practices. Most PSA regulations concern financial practicesof the industry. However, as part of this regulation, PSA requires marketagencies to maintain certain records concerning livestock. The regulationsdo not require that these records show the identification, if any, of thelivestock. Records may include this information, but most swine are identifiedonly by lot.<ITAG tagnum="84">APHIS: Responsibilities and Current Regulations</ITAG>APHIS is responsible, in part, for protecting the health of United Stateslivestock and poultry. In order to fulfill this responsibility, APHIS haspromulgated regulations requiring animals moving in interstate commerceto be tested for disease and inspected for pests, requiring certain animalsmoving in interstate commerce to be identified, and otherwise governingthe interstate movement or commerce of livestock and poultry in the UnitedStates.Millions of livestock are slaughtered every year in the United States.Many of these animals are moved interstate to get to slaughter. When theseanimals are slaughtered, blood and tissue samples are taken from some,and all the carcasses are inspected. If any of them are found to be infectedwith certain diseases, APHIS attempts to trace the route the animals tookthrough marketing channels to arrive at slaughter. In that way, APHIS canfind out where diseased animals were located, when they were there, andwhat other animals they came in contact with. Each animal that a diseasedanimal came in contact with is exposed and may itself become infected,and may in turn have the capability of infecting other animals. Therefore,if APHIS is to successfully control and eradicate certain livestock diseasesin this country, it must be able to trace individual animals.APHIS has some regulations requiring identification of swine moved in interstatecommerce. However, not all swine are covered, and when identification isrequired, it is often optional whether it is applied before or after theswine move interstate. The regulations concerning swine identificationare contained in Title 9, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 78 and 85.Part 78 contains APHIS's regulatory program to control and eradicate brucellosis.These regulations include requirements for movements in interstate commerceof: reactor swine, exposed swine, sows and boars moving for slaughter orfor sale for slaughter, and sows and boars moving for breeding. Other swineare not covered by Part 78.Part 78 does not regulate swine that are not brucellosis reactors or exposedto brucellosis, or that are not sows or boars moved or moving in interstatecommerce for any purpose other than slaughter, sale for slaughter, or breeding.Most swine in this category would be moving or moved in interstate commercefor feeding.Part 78 requires reactor swine moved in interstate commerce to be identifiedby a metal eartag (see andSection; 78.31(b)). The regulations also requirereactor swine to be accompanied by a permit (see andSection; 78.31(c)). Thepermit must include certain information: owner's name and address, pointsof origin and destination, number of animals covered, purpose of the movement,any reactor tag numbers, and one of the following: The official eartagnumber, individual animal registered breed association registration tattoo,registered breed association registration brand, United States Departmentof Agriculture backtag number, individual animal registered breed associationregistration number, or similar individual identification (see andSection;78.1, definition of ``permit''). Part 78 also requires that records keptin connection with the interstate movement of reactor swine have the words``Brucellosis Reactor'' on them (see andSection; 78.31(d)).Part 78 requires that exposed swine may only be moved in interstate commerceif accompanied by a permit (see andSection; 78.32). The permit must includethe same information listed above.Part 78 provides that sows and boars that are not brucellosis reactor orexposed swine may only be moved in interstate commerce for slaughter orfor sale for slaughter if individually identified: (1) By an official eartagor USDA backtag applied before movement in interstate commerce and beforethey are mixed with swine from any other source (see andSection; 78.33(a)(1));(2) by an official eartag or USDA backtag applied upon arrival after movementin interstate commerce and before they are mixed with swine from any othersource, when moved directly from their herd of origin to a recognized slaughteringestablishment or a stockyard, market agency, or dealer operating underthe Packers and Stockyards Act, as amended (see andSection; 78.33(a)(2));or, (3) by a Veterinary Services-approved tattoo that has been authorizedin writing by the Deputy Administrator, VS (see andSection; 78.33(a)(3)).The regulations also state that serial numbers of official eartags, USDAbacktags, and Veterinary Services approved tattoos will be assigned topersons who apply in the state where they maintain their place of business.``Persons assigned serial numbers must: (1) Identify the herd of originof swine upon which the serial numbers were used and record this informationon a document; (2) maintain these records at their place of business for2 years; and (3) make these records available for inspection during ordinarybusiness hours upon request by a Veterinary Services representative ora state representative'' (see andSection; 78.33(d)). The regulations alsostate that:<ITAG tagnum="20">``[t]he operator of each place of business where sows and boars areidentified on arrival in accordance with this section must enter the identificationon the yarding receipt, sale ticket, invoice, or waybill relating to thesows and boars, and maintain the document at the place of business for2 years. The operator must make the document available for inspection duringordinary business hours upon request by a Veterinary Services representativeor state representative''. (See andSection; 78.33(e)).</ITAG>Part 78 provides that sows and boars that are not brucellosis reactor orexposed swine may only be moved in interstate commerce for breeding ifindividually identified by an official eartag, or by ear notching or anear tattoo that has been recorded in the book of record of a purebred registryassociation. According to the regulations, the identification must be donebefore the swine move in interstate commerce and before they are mixedwith swine from any other source. (See andSection; 78.33(b)).Part 85 contains APHIS's regulatory program to control the spread of pseudorabies.The regulations include requirements for interstate movement of: infectedswine, exposed swine, vaccinated swine that are not known to be eitherinfected or exposed, and unvaccinated swine that are not known to be eitherinfected or exposed.Infected swine and exposed swine may be moved interstate under Part 85to certain locations under certain conditions. One of the conditions isthat they are accompanied by a permit or owner-shipper statement. All permitsand owner-shipper statements must include certain information, includingthe number of swine being moved, the points of origin and destination,the consignor and consignee, and any other information required by theregulations. (See andSection; 85.1, definitions of ``Owner-shipper statement''and ``Permit''.) Section 85.5(a)(3) requires that the permit or owner-shipperstatement accompanying infected swine and exposed swine interstate to slaughtermust also list ``the identification tag, tattoo earnotch recognized bya breed association, or similar identification of each swine being moved;<T3>except</T3> if the swine are moved interstate and the identity of thefarm of origin of each swine is maintained, the permit or the owner-shipperstatement need not list the individual identification required * * * ifsuch swine are identified to the farm of origin at the recognized slaughteringestablishment or the first slaughter market.'' Similarly, the permit accompanyingexposed swine moving interstate to a quarantined herd or a quarantinedfeedlot must include ``the identification tag, tattoo, earnotch recognizedby a breed association, or similar identification of each animal beingmoved.'' (See andSection; 85.5(b)(5)).Pseudorabies vaccinated swine that are not known to be either infectedwith the disease or exposed to it can be moved to slaughter if they areaccompanied by a permit or owner-shipper statement (see andSection; 85.6(a)(2)).These documents need only include the number of swine being moved, the``points of origin and destination,'' and ``the consignor and the consignee.''The documents do not need to include identification of the swine. However,pseudorabies vaccinated swine moving to a quarantined herd or quarantinedfeedlot must be accompanied by a permit that include ``the individual identificationtag, tattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association or similar identificationof each animal being moved.'' (see andSection; 85.6(b)(2)).Swine that have not been vaccinated for pseudorabies, and that are notknown to be either infected with the disease or exposed to it, can be movedinterstate to slaughter without being accompanied by any document and withoutbeing identified. These swine must be moved either directly to a recognizedslaughtering establishment or ``directly through one or more slaughtermarkets and then directly to a recognized slaughtering establishment.''(See andSection; 85.7(a)).Swine that have not been vaccinated for pseudorabies and that are not knownto be either infected with the disease or exposed to it, can be moved interstateto feedlots, quarantined feedlots, quarantined herds, and approved livestockmarkets under certain conditions. Only in certain circumstances must theswine be accompanied by documents or identified. If they are moved froma state ``which requires the State animal health official * * * to be immediatelynotified of any suspected or confirmed case of pseudorabies in that Stateand which requires that exposed or infected livestock be quarantined''under certain conditions, then the swine must either: (a) Be accompaniedby an owner-shipper statement, moved directly from a farm of origin toan approved livestock market, and identified at the approved livestockmarket to the farm of origin by an identification tag (see andSection; 85.7(b)(3)(i));or must, among other things, (b) be accompanied by a certificate whichstates ``the identification of the farm of origin of each swine being movedby an earnotch recognized by a breed association, identification tag, tattoo,or similar identification * * * '' (see andSection; 85.7(b)(3)(ii)).Swine that have not been vaccinated for pseudorabies and that are not knownto be either infected with the disease or exposed to it, can be moved interstatefor other purposes only if they are accompanied by a certificate that includesthe number and description of the swine being moved, the points of originand destination, the consignor and consignee, and ``the identificationtag, tattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each animal being moved.'' (See andSection; 85.1, definition of ``Certificate''and andSection; 85.7(c)).Finally, Part 85 requires consignors ``of swine not vaccinated for pseudorabiesand not known to be infected with or exposed to pseudorabies which aremoved interstate directly to a feedlot, quarantined feedlot, quarantinedherd, or to an approved livestock market for subsequent movement directlyto a feedlot, quarantined feedlot or quarantined herd'' to maintain ``recordswhereby individual swine can be traced to the farm of origin.'' (See andSection;85.11(a)). Part 85 also requires consignors to maintain these records for2 years after the swine are moved interstate, and to make the records availableon request (see andSection; 85.11(b)).The APHIS regulations in Parts 78 and 85 are designed to provide a wayto locate swine infected with brucellosis or pseudorabies, trace them totheir sources, and identify all animals they may have exposed to diseaseand that may in turn have become infected and able to spread the disease.For this reason, most swine are required to be individually identified,accompanied during movement in interstate commerce by some document showingtheir ownership, origin, and destination, or both identified and accompaniedby certain documents. Only with this information can APHIS eradicate andcontrol brucellosis and pseudorabies in swine.However, these requirements do not effectively allow APHIS to trace allswine in interstate commerce. This is because some swine in interstatecommerce are not covered under any of the identification and documentationrequirements. The current regulations require identification and documentationof swine with respect to only two diseases; brucellosis and pseudorabies.If swine in interstate commerce are not required to be identified or accompaniedby documents under either Part 78 or Part 85, then no identification ordocumentation requirements apply to them, and they cannot be traced backthrough marketing channels. Also, because the current regulations do notrequire maintenance of records showing the ownership of swine at all timeswhile they are in interstate commerce, not all swine can be traced. A systemrequiring all swine in interstate commerce to be identified, and also requiringcomplete records of their ownership, would help APHIS trace diseased swine,control the spread of diseases, and eradicate sources of infection. Thistype of system would also help APHIS enforce its existing regulations concerninginterstate movement of swine.<ITAG tagnum="84">FSIS: Responsibilities and Current Regulations</ITAG>FSIS, under the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) (21 U.S.C. 601, <T3>et seq.</T3>), has responsibility for ensuring that meat and meat foodproducts intended for consumers in the United States are wholesome andnot adulterated or misbranded. The FMIA, among other things, requires theSecretary of Argiculture, through appointed inspectors, to conduct ante-mortemand post-mortem examination and inspection of certain livestock, includingswine, when these animals are slaughtered in an establishment that is subjectto federal inspection (see 21 U.S.C. 603 and 604). The inspection is performedby veterinarians or by trained food inspectors working under veterinarysupervision, and is administered by FSIS.FSIS conducts visual and manual inspections of animals and carcasses. Theagency also conducts the National Residue Program to help prevent productsthat are adulterated with residues of drugs and other chemicals, such aspesticides and industrial contaminants, from being distributed in commerce.In the monitoring phase of the program, tissue samples are collected byinspectors on a random basis. These samples are subjected to laboratoryexamination to determine, among other things, if levels of substances arehigher than the established tolerances. Besides the monitoring samples,other samples may be taken from specific animals and carcasses that FSIShas reason to believe may be adulterated. For example, if the FSIS inspectorfinds injection lesions or other conditions that indicate possible adulteration,the animal or carcass and parts may be retained until the results of laboratorytests on tissue samples are known.There are not enough FSIS personnel to test every animal or carcass forpossible adulteration with chemical residues, and even if there were, itis not practical to retain every carcass until test results are known.This fact was important consideration in establishing the National ResidueProgram. Also, the cost of testing all animals or carcasses and holdingthem for test results would be prohibitive. Therefore, a system wherebyFSIS could predict which animals or carcasses were most likely to be adulteratedwould help the agency more accurately to choose animals and carcasses forblood and tissue sample testing, use its personnel more efficiently, moreeffectively enforce its regulations, and more effectively keep adulteratedmeat out of the nation's food supply.To do this, FSIS needs a system in which all swine in interstate commercearriving at slaughter are identified and in which a record of the previousownership and location of each swine is provided. Then, when FSIS locatesan adulterated carcass, the animal from which the carcass is derived canbe traced through marketing channels. Tracing animals would allow officialsto locate other animals that are likely to yield adulterated meat. Thesespecific animals could then be tested at slaughter. For example, if a carcasswere adulterated with antibiotics, the animal from which the carcass isderived could be traced to the location where the antibiotics were given.Other animals from that location, which would also be likely to yield adulteratedmeat, could then be traced. Also, steps could be taken to stop more animalsfrom being improperly treated with antibiotics, and animals already treatedcould be held longer before slaughter, until the adulteration problem naturallycorrected itself. For another example, if a carcass is adulterated witha pesticide, the animal from which the carcass is derived could be tracedback to the farm or other premises where it came in contact with the pesticide.Again, other animals from the premises, which would also be likely to yieldadulterated meat, could be traced. Steps could then be taken to stop orreduce exposure of animals at the premises to the pesticide.However, the current identification requirements for swine do not providea means for all swine in interstate commerce to be traced through marketingchannels. The reasons for this are explained above in the discussion ofcurrent APHIS regulations. Requirements that swine be identified whilein interstate commerce, and requirements that records be maintained showingownership of swine, would help FSIS meet its responsibilities under theFMIA, would help FSIS more efficiently locate a larger proportion of adulteratedcarcasses at slaughter, and would allow sources of adulteration to be locatedand eliminated. With this type of regulation in effect, FSIS would be betterable to enforce its existing regulations and therefore better able to protectthe wholesomeness of the United States meat supply.<ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Regulations</ITAG>Under current law, there is only one feasible way to trace outbreaks ofswine diseases to their source, eradicate infection, control spread ofdiseases, and locate swine that are likely to have residue problems beforethey enter the nation's food supply. That is to require all swine in interstatecommerce to be identified, and to require records showing the identificationof all swine moved in interstate commerce to be kept. If the swine in interstatecommerce would be identified, and records would be kept showing that identification,the swine could be traced through marketing channels to their respectivesources. Tracing would be accomplished by starting with the current ownerand location of the swine, and working backwards through each previousowner and location of the swine, to the point when and where the individualswine entered interstate commerce. As explained below, under the proposedregulations, each person (individual, firm, corporation, or other legalentity) who owns or possesses or has owned or possessed a swine which wasor is in interstate commerce, and each person who applies or has appliedidentification to swine which were or are in interstate commerce, wouldhave to maintain a record of any identification the person applied to theswine, along with certain information about the person from whom he/sheor it acquired the swine and any identification on the swine when he/sheor it acquired the swine. To trace individual swine, USDA personnel wouldstart by interviewing and inspecting the records of the person currentlyowning or possessing the swine or its carcass. From those records, theywould learn the identity of the previous person which owned or possessedthe swine, the previous location of the swine, and any identification onthe swine when it was most recently acquired. If necessary, USDA personnelwould then go to the next person which owned or possessed the swine, movingbackwards in time, using the identification records to identify the specificswine being traced. This process would continue until the location wherethe swine were farrowed is reached. At each stop, USDA personnel wouldbe able, by examining the records, to trace animals back another step incommerce. In this manner, individual swine can be traced back through marketingchannels. This same method could be used to trace swine forward throughmarketing channels. This would be done when a source of disease is foundand all swine exposed to it must be located. The same tracing method wouldbe used.Tracing is impossible without two things: (1) The swine must be identifiedwith some marking or device; and (2) there must be a written record ofwho has owned or possessed the swine, where the swine have been located,and the identification applied to them. Both these requirements are includedin the proposed regulations, which are explained below. The written recordof ownership or possession and location alone, without the swine beingidentified, is not enough. For example, a slaughterhouse must keep writtenrecords of the persons from whom it has purchased swine. In turn, a personwho sells the swine to the slaughterhouse must, if the swine are in interstatecommerce, make a record of the source of the swine. But if the swine arenot individually identified, and the person purchased swine from more thanone source, then there may be no means of determining which swine camefrom which source. Therefore, individual swine could not be traced backthrough marketing channels in all instances without the swine being identifiedwith some marking or device.As explained above, various agencies within the Department do have someregulations requiring identification of swine and maintenance of variousrecords. However, the APHIS identification and documentation requirementsdo not cover all swine in interstate commerce, and the PSA record-keepingrequirements neither specifically require swine identification, nor authorizeFSIS and APHIS personnel to have access to the records.The Department therefore proposes various amendments to the regulationsin Title 9, Code of Federal Regulations\1\<NOTE/>. The Department proposes to require, with one exception,that no swine may be sold, transported, received for transportation, oroffered for sale or transportation, in interstate commerce, unless theyare individually identified by means of identification devices approvedby the Deputy Administrator (see proposed andSection;andSection;71.19 and 309.16(c)).The exception would be for swine from farrow to finish operations thatare taken directly to a slaughtering establishment from the premises wherethey were raised (see proposed andSection;71.19(c)).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The Food and Drug Administration of the Department ofHealth and Human Services (FDA), which is responsible, in part, for protectingthe American public against adulterated and misbranded foods and drugs,has informed FSIS that a swine identification program would greatly improvethe ability of FDA to take enforcement action in drug residue violationcases.Under the proposed regulations, only one identification marking or devicewould have to be applied to each swine. If persons applied additional markingsor devices, that would not conflict with the regulations. However, underthe proposed regulation, it would be illegal to remove or tamper with anyidentification while the swine is in interstate commerce (see proposedandSection;71.19(f)). In addition, the records required under the proposedregulations would have to list <T3>all</T3> identifications applied to each swine (see proposed andSection;andSection;71.19(d)(1)(iii)and (e), and 78.33(d)(1)(iii) and (e), which are explained more fully below.)The required swine identification would have to be maintained through post-morteminspection (see current andSection;310.2(a), which requires animal identificationto be maintained until post-mortem examination is completed). This is toensure that any test samples can be identified to the swine from whichthey came.Means of identification would be approved by the Deputy Administrator,Veterinary Services, APHIS, if he or she determines they can be used successfullyto trace a swine in interstate commerce. The proposed regulations listseveral approved means of identification, to be used in different circumstances,that APHIS has determined will provide the information necessary to tracethe prior movements of the animal through marketing channels (see proposedandSection;71.19(b)). Most of the listed means of identification could beused on any swine. However, United States Department of Agriculture swinebacktags and Veterinary Services-approved tattoos would be restricted touse on swine moving to slaughter, and even then Veterinary Services-approvedtattoos could not be used on sows and boars without prior approval fromthe Deputy Administrator. Backtags could be used only on slaughter swinebecause they are not suitable for long-term identification. They are madeof paper and glued to the animals back. They adhere to the animal and remainlegible long enough for the animal to be moved to slaughter. However, theywill not stay on the animal for longer periods of time. Veterinary Services-approvedtattoos could only be used on slaughter swine because these tattoos arenot legible unless the animal's hair is removed. This is done at slaughter,when most swine are scalded, scraped, and dehaired. However, VeterinaryServices-approved tattoos are not allowed to be used on sows and boarswithout prior approval from the Deputy Administrator because sows and boars,when slaughtered, are generally not scalded, scraped, and dehaired, butinstead are skinned. Unless the slaughtered swine are scalded, scraped,and dehaired, the tattoo is not legible and is useless as identification.Approval to use Veterinary Services-approved tattoos on slaughter sowsand boars is only given when they are to be scalded, scraped, and dehaired.Under the proposal, requests could be submitted to APHIS to have additionalmeans of identification approved (see proposed andSection;71.19(g)). If theDeputy Administrator determines that the requested devices and markingswill provide a means of tracing swine, a proposal will be published inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4> to add the devices and markings to the list ofapproved means of swine identification.The Department is also proposing to require that each person who sells,for his own account or as the agent of the buyer or seller, transports,receives for transportation, offers for sale or transportation, or otherwisehandles swine in interstate commerce, and each person who applies approvedmeans of identification to swine in interstate commerce, make and maintainrecords of the identification of the swine (see proposed andSection;andSection;71.19(d) and (e), and 320.1(b)(1)(ix)). This record would not accompanythe swine in interstate commerce, but would be maintained by the personrequired to make the record. If identification is or has been placed onthe swine, such as eartags, backtags, tattoos, and ear notching, a recordwould have to be made of each identification. The person would be requiredto maintain the records for at least two years, and would be required toallow authorized USDA employees to inspect and copy them (see proposedandSection;andSection; 71.19(d)(3) and (e), 309.16(e), 310.23(a) and (b), and320.1(b)(1)(ix)). The records would have to include information on theidentification of the swine, and on their origin and destination (see proposedandSection;andSection; 71.19(d) and (e), 309.16(e), and 320.1(b)(1)(ix)). TheDepartment is not proposing to require any particular form for these records;any documentation containing the required information would be acceptableunder the proposed rules. These records are necessary to allow swine tobe traced. The two-year retention requirement conforms with standard businesspractices in the industry, under which records of sale, delivery receipt,transfer of ownership, and other matters are commonly retained for at leasttwo years.A new andSection; 310.23(b) would be added to the regulations specificallyto provide that, if an establishment fails to provide required swine identification,the inspector shall order swine carcasses to be retained at an establishmentpending completion of tests to confirm that the carcasses are not adulterated.<ITAG tagnum="81">Miscellaneous</ITAG>The Department is proposing to add definitions of the terms ``Accreditedveterinarian,'' ``Area Veterinarian in Charge,'' ``Deputy Administrator,''``Interstate commerce,'' ``Official eartag,'' ``Premises of origin,'' ``Purebredregistry association,'' ``State animal health official,'' ``State representative,''``United States Department of Agriculture swine backtag,'' and ``VeterinaryServices approved tattoo'' to Part 71 (see proposed amendments to andSection;71.1).These terms are all included in proposed andSection; 71.19, and are new toPart 71. The proposed definition of ``Interstate commerce'' is intendedto cover as many swine as possible under the animal quarantine laws andthe Federal Meat Inspection Act, including those swine in foreign commercethat are imported into the United States. This appears to be necessaryto make the proposed regulations as effective as possible. The definitionsof ``Official eartag,'' ``United States Department of Agriculture swinebacktag,'' and ``Veterinary Services approved tattoo'' all refer to alpha-numericcoding systems. These systems, designed by APHIS, use a combination ofdigits and letters to identify the state, either the dealer or market,and either the individual swine, lot of swine, or premises where the swinecame from. Eartags have a nine character code: Two digits identifying thestate; three letters used to increase the number of digit and letter combinationsavailable, and therefore increase the number of unique tags available;and four digits identifying the individual swine. Backtags have an eightcharacter code: Two letters identifying the state; two letters identifyingthe dealer or market; and four digits identifying the individual swine.Tattoos have a six character code: Three letters identifying the stateand market, and three digits identifying tho lot of swine or premises wherethe swine came from. The eartag coding system has been in use for at least30 years, and the tattoo coding system since 1973. Backtags specificallyfor swine have been in use only since 1986. However, prior to that timecattle backtags could be used on swine. Cattle backtags have been usedsince 1959. They utilize a similar coding system, except 2 digits are usedto identify the state, 2 letters to identify the dealer or market, and4 digits to identify the individual animal. When APHIS adopted backtagsspecifically for swine, it was decided to change the use of digits andletters to distinguish the two types of tags while conveying the same information.The only other differences between cattle and swine backtags is that cattlebacktags are ovals made of plastic coated paper and swine backtags areround disks of vinyl.The Department is also proposing to amend Part 71 to revise the currentdefinition of ``State.'' The current definition does not include UnitedStates possessions or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,which are covered by the regulations in Part 71, including proposed andSection;71.19.Under the proposed swine identification requirements, individual swinemay need to be identified even if they are not immediately being movedinterstate. This is because the proposed regulations are based on the broadestpossible definition of ``interstate commerce'' under the animal quarantinelaws and the Federal Meat Inspection Act. Transactions and movements occurringprior to, during, and after an interstate transaction or movement wouldbe included as long as the commerce in the swine continued. For example,if a swine is sold and the buyer and seller are in different states, thatswine would be required under the proposed regulations to be identified,whether or not it moves interstate. That is because the transaction itselfwould be in ``interstate commerce,'' as the Department proposes to definethat term. Prior and subsequent movements and transactions would also bein interstate commerce, as long as the swine remain in commerce.The Department is also proposing to amend the current regulations in Parts78 and 85 to make them consistent with the requirements of proposed andSection;71.19. The Department is proposing, in Part 78, to amended the current definitionof ``United States Department of Agriculture backtag'' to refer to swineand to clarify that these backtags are intended for use on swine. The proposeddefinition would be identical to the proposed definition of ``United StatesDepartment of Agriculture swine backtag in andSection; 71.1.The Department is proposing to revise current andSection; 78.33(c) to referto the identification requirements in proposed andSection; 71.19. This referenceis needed because if proposed andSection; 71.19 is adopted, sows and boarsmoved in interstate commerce for purposes other than slaughter or breedingwould be required to meet the identification requirements of andSection;71.19. The Department is also proposing to revise current andSection; 78.33(d).Proposed andSection; 78.33(d) states that serial numbers of USDA backtagsand VS-approved tattoos will be assigned to ``each person who applies tothe state animal health official or the Area Veterinarian in Charge forthe state in which that person maintains his or her place of business.''Proposed andSection; 71.19(d) also states that ``[s]erial numbers of officialeartags will be assigned to each accredited veterinarian or state or federalrepresentative who requests official eartags from the state animal healthofficial or the Area Veterinarian in Charge, whichever is responsible forissuing official eartags.'' Current andSection; 78.33(d) does not make thesedistinctions as to accredited veterinarians and state and federal representatives,and other applicants for swine identification, though this regulation,and earlier versions of it, have always been interpreted and applied todistinguish among them. Official eartags are permanent identification.They are used not only for tracing animals to their herds of origin, butalso for identifying individual animals for disease control purposes. Toensure that official eartags are not removed and replaced to conceal theidentity of an animal, APHIS must closely control their availability andapplication. APHIS does this by issuing them only to accredited veterinariansand state and federal representatives. Therefore, the Department is proposingto amend andSection; 78.33(d) to make these distinctions clear. In addition, proposed andSection; 71.19(d) makes it clear that accreditedveterinarians, state, and federal representatives are responsible for usingofficial eartag identification numbers and for keeping records in the samemanner as are persons assigned USDA backtags and VS-approved tattoos. Thissame requirement appears in andSection; 78.33(d), though not in the samewords. Therefore, the Department is proposing to amend the wording in andSection;78.33(d) to conform to the wording in proposed andSection; 71.19(d). The Department is also proposing to amend andSection; 78.33(e). In part,this section requires certain records showing identification of sows andboars to be maintained. Proposed andSection; 71.19(e) contains similar provisionsconcerning all swine, but clearly requires that the records must includethe street address, including the city and state, or the township, county,and state, of the premises of origin of the swine, and must include thetelephone number, if available, of a person who owned or possessed theswine at the premises of origin. Under this proposal, the wording of andSection;78.33(e) would be amended to conform to the wording in proposed andSection;71.19(e). The Department is also proposing to amend andSection;andSection; 85.5, 85.6,and 85.7. These sections currently state that required permits and certificatesmust list the ``identification tag, tattoo, ear notch recognized by a breedassociation, or similar identification of each swine being moved.'' Underthe proposed regulations, these sections would be amended to remove thelist of identification methods, and would instead refer to proposed andSection;71.19 for means of approved identification. Only two substantive changes would be made in the existing requirementsfor sows and boars by these proposed amendments. One would be to requirethat swine, to be identified using ear notches, would have to be registeredwith a purebred registry association. The current regulations require registrationwith a breed association. A ``purebred registry association'' is the samething as a ``breed association.'' However, these organizations refer tothemselves as ``purebred registry associations.'' Also, ear tattoos registeredwith a purebred registry association would be allowed as identification.They are not currently allowed under these regulations. Ear notches andear tattoos are equally permanent and useful forms of swine identification.There appears to be no reason not to allow both types of identificationto be used. The Department is also proposing to remove current andSection; 85.11. Thissection concerns records used to trace individual swine to their herdsof origin. This material would be included in proposed andSection; 71.19.Therefore, to avoid confusion and to consolidate as many of the swine identificationand record-keeping requirements as possible in proposed andSection; 71.19,the Department proposes to delete this section.<ITAG tagnum="84">Executive Order 12291 and Regulatory Flexibility Act </ITAG>The Department is proposing this rule in conformance with Executive Order12291, and has determined that it is not a ``major rule.'' Based on informationcompiled by the Department, it has been determined that this proposed rulewould have an effect on the economy of less than $100 million; and wouldnot cause a major increase in costs or prices for consumers, individualindustries, federal, state, or local government agencies, or geographicregions; and would not cause a significant adverse effect on competition,employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or on the ability ofUnited States-based enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprisesin domestic or export markets. If this proposed rule were adopted, the Department anticipates that therewould be no significant effect on the number of owners, producers, markets,feedlots, and other entities, both large and small, that would be requiredto apply identification to livestock or keep records concerning their identification.Most of the livestock in interstate commerce are cattle that are alreadysubject to identification and documentation requirements similar to thoseproposed in this document for swine. Of those swine in interstate commerce,many are already subject to federal identification and documentation requirementsfor brucellosis and pseudorabies that are the same or substantially similarto those proposed in this document. In 1986, 1.84 million swine were identifiedin accordance with the APHIS regulations concerning brucellosis (see 9CFR Part 78). This compares with 54.043 million swine in the United Statesin 1985. The APHIS regulations concerning pseudorabies (9 CFR Part 85)have much broader identification requirements, and a much larger proportionof the swine population must therefore be identified in accordance withthese requirements. However, the Department does not have any statisticsavailable showing the number of swine identified in accordance with Part85. In addition to swine identified in accordance with federal requirements,many swine are subject to state-imposed identification requirements. Also,all packers, stockyards, and dealers under the jurisdiction of the Packersand Stockyards Administration are already required to maintain, for twoyears, records which may contain swine identification information. Only incomplete statistics concerning swine identification and record keepingare available to the Department. However, based on the information thatis available, the Department believes that adoption of these proposed amendmentswould not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number ofsmall entities. <ITAG tagnum="84">Executive Order 12372 </ITAG>These programs/activities under 9 CFR Parts 71, 78, and 85, are listedin the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance under No. 10.025 and aresubject to the provisions of Executive Order 12372, which requires intergrovernmentalconsultation with state and local officials. (See 7 CFR Part 3015, SubpartV). <ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act </ITAG>In accordance with section 3507 of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980(44 U.S.C. 3501, <T3>et. seq.,</T3>) the information collection provisions that are includedin this proposed rule have been submitted for approval to the Office ofManagement and Budget (OMB) under OMB control number 0579-0047. Your writtencomments will be considered if you submit them to the Office of Informationand Regulatory Affairs, OMB, Attention: Desk Officer of APHIS, Washington,DC 20503. You should submit a duplicate copy of your comments to StevenB. Farbman, Assistant Director, Regulatory Coordination, APHIS, USDA, Room728, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>9 CFR Part 71Animal diseases, Livestock and livestock products, Poultry and poultryproducts, Quarantine, Transportation.9 CFR Part 78Animal diseases, Cattle, Hogs, Quarantine, Transportation.9 CFR Part 85Animal diseases, Livestock and livestock products, Quarantine, Transportation.9 CFR Part 309Ante-mortem inspection.9 CFR Part 310Post-mortem inspection.9 CFR Part 320Records, Registration, Reports.Accordingly, it is proposed to amend parts 71, 78, 85, 309, 310, and 320as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 71_GENERAL PROVISIONS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 71 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 21 U.S.C. 111-113, 114a, 114a-1, 115-117, 120-126,134b, 134f; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(d).</ITAG>2. Section 71.1 would be amended by adding the following definitions inalphabetical order:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 71.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Accredited Veterinarian. </T3>A veterinarian who is approved by theDeputy Administrator, in accordance with Part 161 of this chapter, to performofficial animal health work of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Servicespecified in Subchapters, A, B, C, and D of this chapter; and to performwork required by cooperative state-federal disease control and eradicationprograms.<T3>Area Veterinarian in Charge.</T3> The veterinary official of VeterinaryServices, who is assigned by the Deputy Administrator to supervise andperform the official animal health work of the Animal and Plant HealthInspection Service in the state concerned.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Deputy Administrator.</T3> The Deputy Administrator, Veterinary Services,or any other person to whom the Deputy Administrator has delegated hisor her authority.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Interstate commerce.</T3> Trade, traffic, transportation, or othercommerce between a place in a state and any place outside of that state,or between points within a state but through any place outside of thatstate.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Official eartag. </T3>An identification eartag approved by VeterinaryServices as being tamper-resistant and as conforming to the nine-characteralpha-numeric National Uniform Eartagging System, which provides uniqueidentification for each animal.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Premises of origin.</T3> The farm or other premises where the animalsare farrowed and remain until moved in interstate commerce.<T3>Purebred registry association.</T3> A swine breed association formedand perpetuated for the maintenance of records of purebreeding of swinespecies for a specific breed whose characteristics are seet forth in constitutions,by-laws, and other rules of the association.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>State animal health official.</T3> The state official responsible forlivestock and poultry disease control and eradication programs.<T3>State representative.</T3> An individual employed in animal healthwork by a state or a political subdivision thereof and authorized by suchstate or political subdivision to perform the function involved.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>United States Department of Agriculture swine backtag. </T3>A backtagissued by Veterinary Services for use on swine, which conforms to the eight-characteralpha-numeric National Backtagging System and uniquely identifies eachindividual swine.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Veterinary Services approved tatto. </T3>A tattoo, conforming to thesix character alpha-numeric National Tattoo System, which provides uniqueidentification for each herd or lot of swine.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. In andSection; 71.1, the definition of ``State'' would be revised to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>State.</T3> Any of the fifty states, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the District of Columbia,and any territories and possessions of the United States.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>4. In Part 71, a new andSection;71.19 would be added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;71.19 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of swine in interstate commerce. </ITAG>(a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, no swine maybe sold, transported, received for transportation, or offered for saleor transportation, in interstate commerce, unless they are individuallyidentified by means of identification approved by the Deputy Administratorand listed in paragraph (b) of this section. All swine shall remain soidentified while they are in interstate commerce. (2) Each person who buys or sells, for his own account or as the agentof the buyer or seller, transports, receives for transportation, offersfor sale or transportation, or otherwise handles swine in interstate commerce,is responsible for the identification of the swine as provided by thissection. (b) Means of swine identification approved by the Deputy Administratorare: (1) Official eartags, when used on any swine; (2) United States Department of Agriculture swine backtags, when used onswine moving to slaughter; (3) Veterinary Services-approved tattoos, when used on swine moving toslaughter, except sows and boars as provided in andSection;78.33 of thistitle; (4) Ear notching when used on any swine, if the ear notching has been recordedin the book of record of a purebred registry association; and (5) Ear tattoos when used on any swine, if the ear tattoos have been recordedin the book of record of a purebred registry association. (c) Swine that are kept as a group are not required to be individuallyidentified when in interstate commerce if: (1) They were born on the same premises; (2) They were raised on the same premises where they were born; (3) They are moved in a group directly to a slaughtering establishmentfrom the place where they were raised; (4) They are not mixed with swine from any other premises, between thetime they are born and the time they arrive at the slaughtering establishment;and (5) They are slaughtered one after another, as a group, and not mixed withother swine at slaughter. (d) Serial numbers of United States Department of Agriculture swine backtagsand Veterinary Services approved tattoos will be assigned to each personwho applies to the state animal health official or the Area Veterinarianin Charge for the state in which that person maintains his/her or its placeof business. Serial numbers of official eartags will be assigned to eachaccredited veterinarian or state or federal representative who requestsofficial eartags from the state animal health official or the Area Veterinarianin Charge, whoever is responsible for issuing official eartags in thatstate. Persons assigned serial numbers of United States Department of Agricultureswine backtags, Veterinary Services approved tattoos, and official eartagsmust: (1) Record the following information on a document: (i) The street address, including the city and state, or the township,county, and state, of the premises where the approved means of identificationwere applied; (ii) The telephone number, if available, of the person who owns or possessesthe swine; and (iii) Any other serial numbers or other approved means of identificationappearing on the swine; (2) Maintain these records at the person's place of business for two years;and (3) Make these records available for inspection and copying during ordinarybusiness hours (8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) upon requestby any authorized employee of the United States Department of Agriculture,upon that employee's request and presentation of his or her official credentials.(e)(1) Each person who buys or sells, for his own account or as the agentof the buyer or seller, transports, receives for transportation, offersfor sale or transportation, or otherwise handles swine in interstate commerce,must keep records relating to the transfer of ownership, shipment, or handlingof the swine, such as yarding receipts, sale tickets, invoices, and waybillsupon which is recorded: (i) All serial numbers and other approved means of identification appearingon the swine; and (ii) The street address, including city and state, or the township, county,and state, and the telephone number, if available, of the person from whomthe swine were purchased or otherwise obtained. (2) Each person required to keep records under this paragraph must maintainthe records at his/her or its place of business for at least two yearsafter the person has sold or otherwise disposed of the swine to anotherperson, and for such further period as the Deputy Administrator may requireby written notice to the person, for purposes of any investigation or actioninvolving the swine identified in the records. The person shall make therecords available for inspection and copying during ordinary business hours(8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) by any authorized employeeof the United States Department of Agriculture, upon that employee's requestand presentation of his or her official credentials. (f) No person may remove or tamper with any approved means of identificationrequired to be on swine pursuant to this section while it is in interstatecommerce, except at the time of slaughter as provided in 9 CFR 309.16(e).(g) Written requests for approval of swine identification devices and markingsnot listed in paragraph (b) of this section should be sent to the DeputyAdministrator, Veterinary Services, Animal and Plant Health InspectionService, United States Department of Agriculture, Hyattsville, Maryland20782. If the Deputy Administrator determines that the devices and markingswill provide a means of tracing swine in interstate commerce, a proposalwill be published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>to add the devices and markings to the list ofapproved means of swine identification. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 78_BRUCELLOSIS </ITAG>5. The authority citation for Part 78 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>21 U.S.C. 111-114a-1, 114g, 115, 117, 120, 121, 123-126,134b, 134f; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(d). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;78.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>6. In andSection;78.1, the definition of ``United States Department of Agriculturebacktag'' would be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><T3>United States Department of Agriculture swine backtag. </T3>A backtagissued by Veterinary Services for use on swine, which conforms to the eight-characteralpha-numeric National Backtagging System and uniquely identifies eachindividual swine. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>7. In andSection;78.33, paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) would be revised toread as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;78.33 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Sows and boars. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) Sows and boars may be moved in interstate commerce for purposes otherthan slaughter or breeding without restriction under this subpart, if theyare identified as required by andSection;71.19 of this chapter. (d) Serial numbers of United States Department of Agriculture swine backtagsand Veterinary Services approved tattoos will be assigned to each person,other than an accredited veterinarian, who applies to the state animalhealth official or the Area Veterinarian in Charge for the state in whichthat person maintains his or her place of business. Serial numbers of officialeartags will be assigned to each accredited veterinarian or state or federalrepresentative who requests official eartags from the state animal healthofficial or the Area Veterinarian in Charge, whoever, is responsible forissuing official eartags in that state. Persons assigned serial numbersof United States Department of Agriculture swine backtags, Veterinary Servicesapproved tattoos, and official eartags must: (1) Record the following information on a document: (i) The street address, including the city and state, or the township,county, and state, of the premises where the aproved means of identificationwere applied; (ii) The telephone number, if available, of the person who owns or possessesthe swine; and (iii) Any other serial numbers or other approved means of identificationappearing on the swine; and (2) Maintain these records at the place of business for two years; and(3) Make these records available for inspection and copying during ordinarybusiness hours (8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) upon requestby any authorized employee of the United States Department of Agriculture,upon that employee's request and presentation of his or her official credentials(e)(1) Each person who buys or sells, for his own account or as the agentof the buyer or seller, transports, receives for transportation, offersfor sale or transportation, or otherwise handles swine in interstate commercemust keep records relating to the transfer of ownership, shipment, or handlingof the swine, such as yarding receipts, sale tickets, invoices, and waybills,upon which are recorded: (i) All serial numbers and other approved means of identification appearingon the swine; and (ii) The street address, including the city and state, or the township,county, and state, and the telephone number, if available, of the personfrom whom the swine were purchased or otherwise obtained. (2) Each person required to keep records under this paragraph must maintainthese documents at his/her or its place of business for at least two yearsafter the person has sold or otherwise disposed of the swine to anotherperson and for such further period as the Deputy Administrator may requireby written notice to the person, for purposes of any investigation or actioninvolving the swine identified in the records. The person shall make therecords available for inspection and copying during ordinary business hours(8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) by any authorized employeeof the United States Department of Agriculture, upon that employee's requestand presentation of his or her official credentials. <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 85_PSEUDORABIES </ITAG>8. The authority citation for Part 85 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>21 U.S.C. 111, 112, 113, 115, 117, 120, 121, 123-126,134b, 134f; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(d). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;85.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>9. In andSection;85.5, paragraph (a)(3), the phrase ``identification tag,tattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each swine being moved'' would be revised to read ``identification ofthe swine as required by andSection;71.19 of this chapter'', and the phrase``individual identification required by this paragraph'' would be revisedto read ``identification required by andSection;71.19 of this chapter''.10. In andSection;85.5, paragraph (b)(5), the phrase ``identification tag,tattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each animal being moved'' would be revised to read ``identificationof the swine as required by andSection;71.19 of this chapter''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;85.6 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>11. In andSection;85.6, paragraph (b)(2), the phrase ``identification tag,tattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each animal being moved;'' would be revised to read ``identificationof the swine required by andSection;71.19 of this chapter;''. 12. In andSection;85.7, paragraph (b)(3)(i)(B) would be revised to read asfollows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;85.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Interstate movement of swine not vaccinated for pseudorabies and notknown to be infected with or exposed to pseudorabies. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) * * * (3) * * * (i) * * * (B) The swine are identified at the approved livestock market to the farmof orgin by the identification required by andSection;71.19 of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>13. In andSection;85.7, paragraph (b)(3)(ii), the phrase ``an earnotch recognizedby a breed associated [sic.], identification tag, tattoo, or similar identification,''would be revised to read ``a means of identification required by andSection;71.19of this chapter,''. 14. In andSection;85.7, paragraph (c)(2)(i), the phrase ``identificationtag, tattoo, ear notch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each animal being moved;'' would be revised to read ``identificationrequired by andSection;71.19 of this chapter;''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;85.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed] </ITAG>15. Section 85.11 would be removed. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 309_ANTE-MORTEM INSPECTION</ITAG>16. The authority citation for Part 309 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 34 Stat. 1260, 79 Stat. 903, as amended. 81 Stat. 584.84 Stat. 91, 438; 21 U.S.C. 71 <T3>et seq</T3>., 601 <T3>et seq</T3>., 33 U.S.C. 1254, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>17. Section 309.16 would be amended by adding a new paragraph (e) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 309.16</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Livestock suspected of having biological residues.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e) The name of each and all person(s) who sold or consigned each swineto the establishment shall be made available by the establishment to anyProgram employee or other authorized employee of the United States Departmentof Agriculture upon that employee's request and presentation of his orher official credentials. Swine identification, by means approved by theAnimal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA, under Part 71 of thistitle, must be maintained throughout post-mortem inspection, in accordancewith andSection; 310.23(a) of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 310_POST-MORTEM INSPECTION</ITAG>18. The authority citation for Part 310 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 34 Stat. 1260, 79 Stat. 903, as amended. 81 Stat. 584.84 Stat. 91, 438; 21 U.S.C. 71 <T3>et seq</T3>., 601 <T3>et seq</T3>., 33 U.S.C. 1254, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>19. The Table of Contents would be amended to add, in numerical order,``310.23 Identification of carcasses and parts of swine.''20. A new andSection; 310.23 would be added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 310.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of carcasses and parts of swine.</ITAG>(a) The identification of the carcasses and parts of swine identified inaccordance with Part 71 of this title shall be made available to the inspectorupon the inspector's request throughout post-mortem inspection.(b) If the establishment fails to provide required swine identification,the inspector shall order the retention of swine carcasses at the establishmentuntil the completion of tests to confirm that the carcasses are not adulterated.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 320_RECORDS, REGISTRATION, AND REPORTS</ITAG>21. The authority citation for part 320 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 34 Stat. 1260, 79 Stat. 9903, as amended. 81 Stat.584. 84 Stat. 91, 438; 21 U.S.C. 71 <T3>et seq</T3>., 601 <T3>et seq</T3>., 33 U.S.C. 1254, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>22. Section 320.1(b)(1) would be amended by adding a new paragraph (ix)to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 320.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Records required to be kept.</ITAG>(b) * * *(1) * * *(ix) In the case of a person belonging to the class specified in paragraph(a)(1), and engaged, for commerce, in the business of slaughtering anyswine for use as human or animal food, the name and address (includingthe city and state, or the township, county, and state) of each personfrom whom the person belonging to the class so specified purchased or otherwiseobtained each swine, and the telephone number, if available, of the personfrom whom the swine were purchased or otherwise obtained, and all serialnumbers and other approved means of identification appearing on the swine.<ITAG tagnum="21">Done at Washington, DC, this 25th day of January, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Kenneth A. Gilles,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-1803 Filed 2-2-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-34-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>