<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88610-0119 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-10-88.f2.A1118</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 86-93] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Leo R. Miller, M.D.; Revocation of Registration </ITAG>On December 10, 1986, the Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of DiversionControl, Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), issued an Order to ShowCause to Leo R. Miller, M.D. (Respondent) on New York, New York, proposingto revoke his DEA Certificate of Registration AM1852474, and deny any pendingapplications for renewal of that registration. The statutory basis forthe proposed revocation was that Respondent's continued registration wouldbe inconsistent with the public interest based upon: (1) His lack of authorityby the State of New York to dispense Schedule II controlled substances;(2) his prescribing of controlled substances to drug dependent individualsfor maintenance purposes without being registered to do so; and, (3) hisprescribing of controlled substances outside the scope of professionalpractice and not for a legitimate medical purpose. Respondent, through counsel, requested a hearing by letter dated January21, 1987. The matter was docketed before Administrative Law Judge FrancisL. Young. Following prehearing filings, a hearing was held in Washington,DC on September 9, 1987. Judge Young issued his opinion and recommendedruling, findings of facts, conclusions of law and decision on December31, 1987. Respondent filed exceptions to the Administrative Law Judge'sopinion and recommended ruling. The Administrative Law Judge transmittedthe record in this matter to the Administrator on April 12, 1988. The Administrator,having considered the record in its entirety, hereby enters his final orderin this matter pursuant to 21 CFR 1316.67.The Administrative Law Judge found that an investigation conducted in 1983by authorities from the State of New York resulted in the revocation ofRespondent's privileges to utilize New York State triplicate prescriptionsby the New York State Department of Health. The Health Department alsoassessed a $35,000 civil penalty against Respondent. This action effectivelyterminated Respondent's authority to prescribe and dispense Schedule IIcontrolled substances. In 1987, the Commissioner of Education, State ofNew York, Board of Regents, placed Respondent's license to practice medicinein the State of New York on probation for two years. The Commissioner foundRespondent guilty of professional misconduct in that he unlawfully prescribedcontrolled substances not in good faith and not for a legitimate medicalpurpose during the period 1976 through August 1983 on a regular basis toat least 40 patients who were habitual drug users, in order to keep suchusers comfortable in their habits. The Administrative Law Judge found that Respondent wrote hundreds of prescriptionsfor Tuinal, a combination short acting and intermediate acting ScheduleII barbituate during 1981 and 1982. When questioned about these prescriptionsby a New York State investigator, Respondent stated he would rather givethe individuals prescriptions than have them get the drugs on the street.At the hearing in this matter, Respondent continued to maintain that patientswere better off receiving Tuinal in a controlled situation, such as underhis care, than obtaining it on the street. The Administrative Law Judgeconcluded that Respondent did not exhibit an appropriate awareness of thepotential danger of controlled substances and the hazards they may poseto individuals particularly susceptible to those hazards, and that Respondentshould not be entrusted with a DEA registration. On February 22, 1988, Respondent filed exceptions to the opinion and recommendedruling of the Administrative Law Judge. Respondent argued that the actionof the New York State licensing agency, placing Respondent on probationand requiring his prescribing and dispensing practices to be monitored,should be given greater deference by the Administrative Law Judge. TheAdministrative Law Judge, in his opinion and recommended ruling, foundthat the monitoring of Respondent's prescribing practices by the New YorkState Office of Professional Medical Conduct is not sufficiently strictto be an effective deterrent. The Administrative Law Judge relield insteadon the findings of both the New York Department of Health and the New YorkBoard of Regents which concluded that Respondent's activities were unprofessionaland constituted unlawful prescribing of controlled substances. Respondent also argues that the Administrative Law Judge incorrectly foundthat some of Respondent's patients were habitual users of controlled substances.Respondent indicates that the Administrative Law Judge based that conclusionon Respondent's written statement. In his opinion and recommended ruling,the Administrative Law Judge indicates that New York State authoritiesfound these patients to be habitual users of controlled substances, andthat he found no reason to reject that conclusion.Respondent further argues that the Administrative Law Judge failed to considerthe testimony of Dr. Yapalater. Dr. Yapalater's testimony, that Respondentprescribed controlled substances for legitimate medical purposes, if contradictedby the testimony of Dr. Edelman as well as the findings of the New YorkDepartment of Health and the New York Board of Regents. The weight of theevidence requires a finding that Respondent prescribed controlled substances,not in good faith, and not for legitimate medical purposes from 1977 throughAugust 1983.Respondent finally aargues in his exceptions that the recommended ``penalty''of the Administrative Law Judge is too severe in light of the length oftime that has passed since Respondent's violations and the fact that NewYork State has returned Respondent's privileges to utilize triplicate prescriptions.The revocation of a DEA Certificate of Registration is not a penalty ora punative measure. It is a remedial measure, based upon the public interestand the necessity to protect the public from those individuals who havemisused controlled substances or their DEA Certificate of Registration,and who have not presented sufficient mitigating evidence to assure theAdministrator that they can be trusted with the responsibility carriedby such a registration. It should also be noted that there was no evidencein the record that the State of New York had reinstated Respondent's triplicateprescription authority. Respondent first mentioned such a possibility inhis exceptions to the Administrative Law Judge's opinion and recommendedruling. The Government has had no opportunity to respond to Respondent'sstatement, which emphasizes the necessity for an open hearing where eachparty has the opportunity to respond to evidence presented by the otherparty to the proceeding. The Administrator will not consider such proffereddocuments unless they are properly admitted into evidence and the opposingparty has an opportunity to object to or rebut such evidence.The Administrative Law Judge recommended that Respondent's DEA Certificateof Registration be revoked because the evidence demonstrated that Respondentcould not be trusted with a registration. The Administrator adopts theopinion and recommended decision of the Administrative Law Judge in itsentirety. The Administrator concludes that based upon Respondent's pastconduct with regard to the prescribing of controlled substances to individualswho had a history of drug abuse over an extended period of time, his registrationis inconsistent with the public interest.Accordingly, the Administrator of the DEA, pursuant to the authority vestedin him by 21 U.S.C. 823 and 824 and 28 CFR 0.100(b), hereby orders thatDEA Certificate of Registration AM1852474 previously issued to Leo R. Miller,M.D., be, and it hereby is, revoked. Any pending applications for renewalof that registration are hereby denied. <ITAG tagnum="21">This order is effective July 11, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John C. Lawn,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: June 6, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-13123 Filed 6-9-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-09-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>