<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88916-0115 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-16-88.f2.A1114</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application Nos. D-7483 and 7485, et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; Emergency Medical Associates, Inc. Amended MultipleEmployer Profit Sharing Plan et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5669, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-4677, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Emergency Medical Associates, Inc. Amended Multiple Employer ProfitSharing Plan (the P.S. Plan) and Emergency Medical Associates, Inc. MultipleEmployer Money Purchase Pension Plan (the Pension Plan; collectively, thePlans) Located in Columbus, Ohio</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application Nos. D-7483 and D-7485]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)((1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to (1) a proposedextension of credit (the Loans) by the individual participant accounts(the Accounts) of T. William Evans, M.D. (Dr. Evans) in the Plans to EmergencyMedical Associates, Inc. (the Employer), the sponsor of the Plans; and(2) Dr. Evans' proposed personal guarantee of the Loans; provided thatall terms of the Loans are at least as favorable to the Accounts as thosewhich the accounts could obtain in an arm's length transaction with anunrelated party.Temporary Nature of ExemptionThe making of loans under this exemption, if granted, shall be limitedto the two-year period commencing on the date on which the Final Grantof the exemption is published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The P.S. Plan is a defined contribution plan with nine participantsand total assets of $2,223,137.23 as of December 31, 1987. The PensionPlan is a defined contribution plan with nine participants and total assetsof $1,464,604.11 as of December 31, 1987. The Employer is a closely-heldOhio personal service corporation engaged in the practice of medicine inColumbus, Ohio. Dr. Evans is the president and chief executive officerof the Employer and owns fifty-one percent of its outstanding common stock.Each of the Plans provides for individual participant accounts and thedirected investment of such accounts by the participants. The trustee ofthe Plans is the Society Bank of Columbus, Ohio (the Trustee), which executesinvestments of the Plans' assets according to individual participant direction.As of December 31, 1987 the Account balances for Dr. Evans were $670,686.09in the P.S. Plan and $293,264.12 in the Pension Plan.The Employer proposes to enter into a loan agreement with the Trustee (theAgreement) under which the Employer may make the Loans from the Accountsfor various purposes. Dr. Evans proposes to guarantee personally the Employer'sobligations under the Loans made pursuant to the Agreement. The Trusteeand Dr. Evans are requesting an exemption to permit the Loans and Dr. Evans'personal guarantee of them under the terms and conditions described herein.2. Dr. Evans has executed a written authorization directing the Trusteeto enter into the Agreement with the Employer and to proceed with the makingof the Loans if the exemption proposed herein is granted. Under the Agreementthe Employer will be able to borrow funds from time to time from the Accountsfor a period of two years commencing on the date (the Loan Date) this exemption,if granted, is published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The aggregate outstanding balance of the Loanswill not exceed the lesser of (1) $200,000 from the P.S. Plan plus $100,000from the Pension Plan, or (2) twenty five percent of the balance of eachof the Accounts at any time. Commensurate with the first of the Loans underthe Agreement the Employer will execute a primissory note (the Note) evidencingthe Loans which requires the Employer to reimburse the Accounts for anyfiling costs or similar fees required for the perfecting of security interestsunder the Note.The Note provides that the Loans will be payable upon demand, if made,by the Trustee on behalf of the Accounts. In the absence of such demand,all Loans will be amortized and repaid over a twenty-year period commencingon the Loan Date in equal quarterly payments of principal and interest,to commence the first calendar quarter after the Loan Date. Loan principalshall bear interest, adjusted quarterly, at the rate of one percent abovethe prime rate announced and charged by BancOhio National Bank (BancOhio)in Columbus, Ohio, but in no event will the interest rate be less thaneight percent. The initial interest rate shall be BancOhio's prime ratein effect on the Loan Date. Principal and interest of all Loans shall bepaid in full no later than the last day of the 80th quarter following theLoan Date.The Note provides that if any payment required thereunder is not paid whendue and remains in default for ten days after written notice to the Employer,or if the Employer defaults in the performance of any other obligationsunder the Note, the entire principal amount outstanding under the Note,plus accrued interest and late charges, shall become due and payable atthe option of the Trustee acting on behalf of the Accounts. The Note requiresthe Employer to pay all collection costs and expenses incurred with respectto any such default. From and after any payment default, the outstandingprincipal balance and any accrued interest shall bear interest at a ratewhich is four percent per annum above the interest rate otherwise in effectfor such payment.3. In addition to the Note, the Loans will be secured by a perfected firstsecurity interest in all the Employer's accounts receivable (the Collateral)for the duration of the term of the Loans. The Agreement requires thatthe value of the Collateral must remain at all times in an amount no lessthan two hundred percent of the outstanding principal amount of the Loan.Under the Agreement, if the value of the Collateral falls below that level,the Employer must immediately offer additional collateral to satisfy thesecurity requirement or repay so much of the outstanding indebtedness asto cause the security requirement to be satisfied. The Agreement providesthat the value of the Collateral is to be determined by independent certifiedpublic accountants and based on the Employer's historical collection recordwith respect to its accounts receivable. Under the Agreement the Employerwarrants to own the Collateral free and clear of any encumbrances exceptthe security interest granted to the Accounts under the Agreement.The Employer's payment of all indebtedness under the Note will be securedfurther by a written unconditional guarantee which Dr. Evans will executeon the Loan Date. Dr. Evans represents his net worth to be approximately$7,034,629 as of March 31, 1988.The terms of the proposed Loans pursuant to the Agreement and the Notehave been reviewed and evaluated by Edward N. Cohn (Cohn), president ofthe Franklin County Division of County Savings Bank (the CSB) in Columbus,Ohio. Cohn, who states that the CSB is independent of the Employer, representsthat CSB would be willing to make a loan to the Employer under the sameterms and conditions as those now proposed for the Loans from the Accounts.4. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionssatisfy the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act for the following reasons:(1) The transactions will affect only the Accounts, which are individually-directedparticipant accounts in the Plans; (2) The transactions will be pursuantto written directions of the Accounts' sole participant, Dr. Evans; (3)The Loans are repayable upon demand at any time by the Trustee on behalfof the Accounts; (4) The Loans will be secured at all times by a firstlien on collateral having a value of at least 200 percent of the outstandingprincipal amount of the Loans; (5) The Loans will be guaranteed personallyby Dr. Evans; (6) The Loan terms have been approved by the president ofCSB, which is independent of the Employer, as terms under which CSB wouldextend credit to the Employer; and (7) Dr. Evans is the only participantin the Plans affected by the transactions and he desires that they be consummated.Notice to Interested Persons: Because Dr. Evans is the only participantin the Plans to be affected by the proposed transactions, it has been determinedthat there is no need to distribute the notice of pendency to interestedpersons. Comments and requests for a hearing must be received by the Departmentwithin 30 days of the date of publication of this notice of proposed exemption.For Further Information Contact: Ronald Willett of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Individual Retirement Account of Robert E. Keefer (IRA) Located inHawthorne, California  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7525]  </ITAG>Proposed Exemption  The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of thecode shall not apply to the proposed sale of a parcel of real property(the Property) to the IRA by the Robert and Suzette Keefer Family Trust(the Trust), nor to the subsequent lease of the Property by the IRA toHawthorne Mazda, a company which is wholly owned by Mr. Keefer, providedthat the terms of the transactions are no less favorable to the IRA thanthose obtainable in arm's-length transactions with unrelated parties.\1\<NOTE/>  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Because the IRA does not meet the conditions describedin 29 CFR 2510.3-2(d), there is no jurisdiction under Title I of the Act.However, there is jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section4975 of the Code.  Summary of Facts and Representations  1. The IRA is a self-directed IRA described in section 408(a) of the Codewith Shearson Lehman Hutton Company acting as trustee. As of July 1988,the IRA had net assets of approximately $916,610.  2. The Property, located at 11977 Hawthorne Blvd, Hawthorne, California,consists of approximately 8750 square feet and is improved with an asphaltpaved parking lot. The Property is currently leased by the Trust to HawthorneMazda.  3. The Trust proposes to sell the Property to the IRA for $228,000 in cash,its appraised fair market value. No commissions or other expenses willbe paid by the IRA in connection with the sale. The Property was appraisedby Mr. John L. Schlueter (Mr. Schlueter), an unrelated appraiser with thefirm of Patrick E. Keller andamp; Associates Real Estate Appraisers andamp;Consultants, Hawthorne, Califonria, as having a fair market value of $228,000as of May 9, 1988.  4. The IRA proposes to lease the Property to Hawthorne Mazda for a primaryterm of 5 years with options for 3 additional 5 year terms. The lease isa triple net lease in favor of the IRA with annual rental payments of $27,000.The amount of the initial rental payment was determined by Mr. Schlueterin his appraisal of May 9, 1988. The lease also provides that the amountof rental will be increased annually based on the increase in the ConsumerPrice Index. In addition, Hawthorne Mazda will maintain fire and casualtyinsurance on the Property with the IRA named as loss payee.  5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionssatisfy the statutory criteria contained in section 4975(c)(2) of the Codebecause:  (a) No commission or other expenses will be paid by the IRA in connectionwith the transactions;  (b) The Property would represent less than 25% of the assets in the IRA; (c) The purchase price and the rental payments were determined by an independentappraiser; and  (d) Mr. Keefer is the only participant in the IRA and he has determinedthat the transactions are appropriate for and in the best interests ofthe IRA and desires that the transactions be consummated.  Notice to Interested Persons: Because Mr. Keefer is the only participantin the IRA, it has been determined that there is no need to distributethe notice of proposed exemption to interested persons. Comments and requestsfor a public hearing are due 30 days after the publication of this noticein the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.  FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Alan H. Levitas of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Tarrant Services, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (the Plan) Locatedin Fort Worth, Texas </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7628]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR184711, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) and 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedcash sale by the Plan of its general partnership interest (the Interest)in Galaxy Development Joint Venture II (the Partnership) to Tarrant Services,Inc. (the Employer), the sponsor of the Plan, provided that the sales priceis no less than the <T3>greater</T3> of: (1) The fair market value on the date of the saleof the Plan's Interest in the Partnership or (2) the costs to the Planassociated with the acquisition and holding of the Interest; and providedfurther that the Plan, the Partnership, and the Employer execute appropriatedocuments that reflect the substitution of the Employer as a partner inthe partnership and acknowledge that the Plan has been absolved and releasedof any further and continuing obligations in connection with the Partnership.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan, established January 1, 1981, is a defined compensation planwith approximately nine (9) participants. As of 1986, the approximate fairmarket value of the assets of the Plan was $272,417. The trustees (theTrustees) of the Plan are Perry Hoover (Mr. Hoover) and Phillip Godbey(Mr. Godbey). Both of the Trustees are participants in the Plan. 2. The Employer, located at 710 Main Street, Fort Worth, Texas, is engagedin the repair of real properties damaged by casualty losses, in the saleof carpet to builders of new residential construction, in the constructionof new single family residential properties and home improvements, andin other miscellaneous activities related to construction. Mr. Hoover andMr. Godbey serve, respectively, as president and secretary of the Employerand are each directors, employees, and fifty percent (50%) shareholdersof the Employer. The Trustees and the Employer (the Applicants) jointlyfiled the application requesting the exemption of the proposed transaction.3. In 1985, the Plan acquired at a price of $10,561 a 12.5% general partnershipinterest in the Partnership from Lowry Davidson (Mr. Davidson) who wasacting on behalf of Great Western Galaxy, Inc. (Great Western). It is representedthat both Mr. Davidson and Great Western were unrelated third parties withrespect to the Plan. The Partnership was formed for the sole purpose ofacquiring a tract of land (the Land), consisting of approximately 6.732acres on U.S. Highway 377 in Keller, Texas. The Land is approximately 18miles west of the central business district of Fort Worth and 18 mileswest of the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport. It is representedthat the Land is the only property owned by the Partnership.In acquiring its 12.5% interest in the Partnership, the Plan also becamea co-maker in the original first mortgage (the Mortgage) from an unrelatedbank in the amount of $477,000 which the Partnership used to acquire theLand. The terms of the Mortgage include an interest rate of 10% per annumpayable semi-annually to the bank. The entire principal balance on theMortgage is due and payable on September 30, 1995.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The Department herein is not proposing relief for anyviolation of Part IV of the Act which may have arisen as a result of theacquisition of the Interest by the Plan. Subsequently, the Plan's 12.5% interest in the Partnership was increasedto 28\1/8\%, because certain general partners in the Partnership defaultedand could not make capital contributions to the Partnership. As a result,the defaulting partners' ownership interests in the Partnership were distributed<T3>pro rata </T3>to the remaining partners, including the Plan. In addition,the defaulting partners forfeited to the Partnership all of their priorcapital contributions. It is represented that none of the defaulting partnerswere parties in interest with respect to the Plan. It is represented thatnone of the general partners of the Partnership is a party in interestwith respect to the Plan. 5. On August 9, 1988, Kerry McCombs (Mr. McCombs), a general partner andowner of a 15.62% interest in the Partnership, was asked by the Applicantsto value the Plan's interest in the Partnership. Mr. McCombs representshis independence from the proposed transaction in that he is not an owner,director, officer, or employee of the Employer, nor is he a participantor beneficiary in the Plan. Mr. McCombs states that he is familiar withthe value of real estate in the Dallas/Fort Worth area and has been dealingin real estate both as a buyer and seller, since 1972. In evaluating thePlan's Interest in the Partnership, Mr. McCombs took into considerationthe book value of the Partnership, its financial condition, lack of earningcapacity, the potential return on the investment, goodwill, and other intangiblesof the Partnership. In addition, Mr. McCombs considered the history andthe nature of the Partnership and the lack of a market or comparable salesfor the Plan's Interest in the Partnership. In Mr. McCombs' opinion, thePlan's Interest in the Partnership has no value in itself. Further, Mr.McCombs states that the only value to be attributed to the Plan's Interestin the Partnership is the underlying value of the Land owned by the Partnership.5. The Land underlying the Partnership was appraised by Mark Costanza (Mr.Costanza) in May 1988, at a value of $586,000. Mr. Costanza representsthat as a real estate agent/broker since 1983, he has been actively engagedin real estate sales and in providing market studies, appraisals, and counselingwith respect to all types of real property to government agencies, corporations,attorneys, accountants, and other individuals. Mr. Costanza is currentlyassociated with Century 21 in Euless, Texas and specializes in sales ofraw land and investment properties. Mr. Costanza is independent in thathe has no ownership interest in the Employer, he is not a director, officer,or employee of the Employer, nor is he a participant or beneficiary ofthe Plan.In his appraisal report. Mr. Costanza notes that no value has been placedon the two existing houses located on the Land, even though these housesdo have a current rental value, because they would have to be removed forthe Land to be developed. In Mr. Costanza's opinion, the current use ofthe Land is not the highest and best use for the property. Mr. Costanzastates that maximum productivity from the Land would be achieved by commercialor retail development to serve an increasing population in the area. However,it is represented by Mr. Costanza that such development should be deferredfor several years until economic circumstances in the area improve anddemand increases sufficiently to make development financially feasible.6. The Employer represents that in 1986 the Plan made distributions inthe amount of $62,000 or 30% of the assets of the Plan to three formerparticipants of the Plan. As a result, the Trustees maintain that the Plan'sremaining assets are illiquid. To remedy this situation and to avoid aforced sale of Plan assets in order to pay future benefits, the Trusteeshave decided to sell the Plan's Interest in the Partnership, rather thancontinue to hold it for appreciation. Also, it is represented that currentlythe Plan is receiving no income from its investment in the Partnership.Because real property values have decreased in Texas, it is representedthat there is a general lack of a market for the sale to third partiesof the Plan's Interest in the Partnership. Consequently, the Employer proposesto purchase for cash the Plan's 28\1/8\% Interest in the Partnership. Basedon an appraised value of $586,000 for the Land underlying the Partnership,the Applicants represent that the fair market value of the Plan's 28\1/8\%Interest in the Partnership is approximately $167,000. However, the Plan's<T3>pro rata</T3> share of the Mortgage in the amount of $477,000 wouldbe approximately $135,000. Therefore, the fair market value of the Plan'snet equity Interest in the Partnership is represented to be $31,000. TheEmployer proposes to relieve the Plans of its share of the liability forthe Mortgage and to pay to the Plan the <T3>greater</T3> of the Plan's net equity Interest in the Partnership onthe date of the sale or the total cost to the Plan to acquire and holdthe Interest which, as of July 1988, was estimated to be $34,544. It isrepresented that the Plan will not be required to pay any real estate fees,commissions, finders fees, or any other remuneration to any third partywith respect to the proposed transaction.7. In summary, the Applicants represent that the proposed transaction meetsthe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause:(a) The sale of the Plan's Interest in the Partnership will be a one timetransaction for cash;(b) The Plan will not incur expenses on the sale;(c) The Plan will be able to improve the liquidity of the Plan's assetswith the proceeds of the sale;(d) The sales price is based on a fair market value of the Land underlyingthe Partnership as determined by a qualified independent appraiser;(e) The Plan will receive the <T3>greater</T3> of its net equity Interest in the Partnership on the dateof the sale or its total expenses incurred in acquiring and holding itsInterest in the Partnership; and(f) The Plan will be relieved of any liability with respect to the existingMortgage on the Land underlying the Partnership.For Further Information Contact: Angelena C. Le Blanc of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85"> Health Care Administration Company Profit Sharing Plan and Trust(the Plan) Located in San Antonio, Texas  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71"> [Application No. D-7648]  </ITAG> Proposed Exemption   The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedsale by the Plan of certain certificates of deposit (the CDs) and certainoil well interests (the Oil Well Interests) to Health Care AdministrationCompany (HCAC), the Plan sponsor, provided that the price paid be no lessthan the greater of the fair market value of the CDs and the Oil Well Interestsas of the date of sale or the original prices paid for the CDs and OilWell Interests and all expenses to the Plan is connection with its acquisitionand holding of the CDs and Oil Well Interests to the date of sale.  Summary of Facts and Representations   1. The Plan is a terminated defined contribution profit sharing plan sponsoredby HCAC, owners and operators of nursing and retirement facilities. Thetrustees of the Plan are Robert T. Bowers and Gary L. Bowers, who alsoown a majority interest in HCAC. As of March 31, 1987, the terminationdate for the Plan, the Plan had $359,043 in assets and 80 participants.  2. Among the Plan's assets are two CDs issued by First Republicbank ofSan Antonio. The CDs are: andplusmin;4652, purchased on August 27, 1985 andmaturing on August 27, 1990 for $15,000 plus interest at 10%; and andplusmin;4816,purchased on September 25, 1985 maturing on September 25, 1990 for $12,000plus interest at 9.95%.   3. The Plan's assets also include a 1.5625% working interest in two oilwells (the Schwarz well and the Biller andplusmin;1 well) located in CanadianCounty, Oklahoma. The Plan paid $12,452.89 in May 1986, for its interestin the Schwarz well and has received a net income from that well of $1,316.32.The Plan paid $10,462.53 in June 1986, for its interest in the Biller andplusmin;1well and has received a net income from that well of $464.55.  4. On July 27, 1987, Bob B. Hunt, President of Hunt Engineering, Inc.,a petroleum consulting and property management enterprise located in OklahomaCity, Oklahoma, an independent and qualified appraiser, stated that thefair market value of the Plan's interests in the two wells is $3,662.  5. The applicant proposes, in order to expedite the distribution of theterminated Plan's assets to participants and beneficiaries, that the Plansponsor purchase the CDs and the Oil Well Interests for cash. The CDs willbe purchased for fair market value current as of the date of sale withoutany interest penalty. The Oil Well Interests will be purchased for thegreater of their fair market value as of the date of sale or for the totalamount expended by the Plan in connection with its acquisition and holdingof the Oil Well Interests.   6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionwill satisfy the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because, among otherthings: (a) The sale represents a one-time transaction for cash, whichcan be easily verified, (b) the Plan will receive for the CDs their fairmarket value as of the date of sale, without incurring any interest penalty;(c) the Plan will receive the greater of the fair market value of Oil WellInterests as of the date of sale or the total amount expended by the Planin connection with its acquisition and holding of the Oil Well Interests;(d) the terms of the transaction will be more favorable to the Plan thanthose obtainable by the Plan in arm's-length transaction with unrelatedthird parties; (e) the Plan will not pay any commissions, fees, or taxesin connection with the sale of the CDs and Oil Well Interests; and (f)the Plan will be able to complete distribution of its assets in a timelymanner.   For Further Information Contact: Joseph L. Roberts III of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)  <ITAG tagnum="85">Plan of First Wachovia Diversified Funds for Retirement Trusts (thePlan) Located in Winston-Salem, North Carolina </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7674)</ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and in accordance with the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemptionis granted the restrictions of section 406(b)(2) of the Act shall not applyto the proposed merger of the First Wachovia Income Fund (the First AtlantaFund), trusteed by First National Bank of Atlanta (First Atlanta Bank),into the First Wachovia Fixed Income Fund (the Wachovia Fund), trusteedby Wachovia Bank and Trust Company, N.A. (Wachovia Bank), provided thatupon completion of the merger the aggregate fair market value of the interestof each employee benefit plan participating (Participating Plan) in thetwo funds (collectively the Funds) equals the aggregate fair market valueof each such Participating Plan's interest in the Funds immediately precedingthe merger.Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan became effective on January 19, 1988, pursuant to an opinionletter issued by the Internal Revenue Service. The Plan was created forthe purpose of consolidating various commnon trust funds under it thathad been extablished by Wachovia Bank and First Atlanta Bank, respectively.This consolidation was undertaken in order to form a system of interbankcommon trust funds for the collective investment and reinvestment of fundsheld by the two banks, in their respective capacity as fiduciaries of ParticipatingPlans created or organized in the United States and forming part of a pension,profit sharing, or stock bonus plan which is exempt from Federal incometaxation under section 501(a) of the Code by reason of qualifying undersection 401(a) of the Code. As a consequence of the consolidation underthe Plan, two trust funds, the Wachovia Fund and the First Atlanta Fund,respectively, became part of the Plan. These Funds have substantially identicalinvestment objectives with assets of each invested in similar types offixed income securities.2. As of March 31, 1988, there were 1,334 Participating Plan with totalnet assets of approximately $941,220,047 invested in various funds underthe Plan. Also as of March 31, 1988, 211 of the Participating Plans hadapproximately $265,273,287 of their net assets invested in the WachoviaFund and 36 Participating Plans had approximately $24,588,405 of theirnet assets invested in the First Atlanta Fund.3. Wachovia Bank and First Atlanta Bank are members of an ``affiliatedgroup'' as defined in section 1504 of the Code and each is a National BankingAssociation under the laws of United States. Wachovia Bank is the principalsubsidiary of Wachovia Corporation, a North Carolina corporation and FirstAtlanta Bank is the principal subsidiary of First Atanta Corporation, aGeorgia corporation. In addition, Wachovia Corporation and First AtlantaCorporation are the principal subsidiaries of First Wachovia Corporation,a North Carolina corporation, and all three corporations are registeredbank holding corporations under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.4. The First Atlanta Bank and the Wachovia Bank in their fiduciary capacities,respectively, propose that the First Atlanta Fund merge into Wachovia Fund,and that the First Atlanta Fund cease to exist. The merger will becomeeffective on a date to be determined following receipt of the requestedexemption.5. To accomplish the merger the assets, including all accrued income, ofthe Funds will be valued at their fair market value as of the merger date.First Atlanta Bank will transfer the assets of the First Atlanta Fund asof the date of the merger to the Wachovia Fund. The transferred assetsof the First Atlantia Fund will be commingled with the Wachovia Fund forinvestment following the date of the merger and all income earned duringthe fiscal year in the First Atlanta Fund, preceding and following thedate of merger, will be deemed to have been earned in the Wachovia Fund.Participating Plans in the First Atlanta Fund will become ParticipatingPlan in the Wachovia Fund as of the date of the merger. A ParticipatingPlan may withdraw any or all of its assets on the last day of the month.As of the date of the merger, the First Atlanta Fund will have allocatedto its units in the Wachovia Fund representing the fair market value ofthe assets transferred from the First Atlanta Fund. Each ParticipatingPlan in the First Atlanta Fund immediately preceding the merger will haveallocated to it as of the date of the merger the proportion of such WachoviaFund units equal to its proportion of the units in the First Atlanta Fundimmediately preceding the merger. No fractional units of participationin the Wachovia Fund will be issued in the merger. The Wachovia Fund willpay cash equal to the fair market value of any such fractional unit towhich a Participating Plan in the First Atlanta Fund would otherwise havebeen entitled. Neither Wachovia Bank, First Atlanta Bank, nor any affiliatedparty will receive any fee or commission with respect to the merger. Themerger of the Funds will not result in any additional fees for the ParticipatingPlans.6. The applicants, the Wachovia Bank and the First Atlanta Bank, representthat because the investment objectives of the Funds are substantially identical,the Participating Plans best interests will be served by merging the Fundsin order to achieve certain operational efficiencies and economies of scale,and to make available greater opportunities for diversification of investments.7. In summary the applicants represent that the proposed merger meets thestatutory criteria contained in section 408(a) of the Act because (a) neitherWachovia Bank, First Atlanta Bank, nor any affiliate of either bank willreceive any fee or commission in connection with the merger; (b) the fairmarket value of the interests of the Participating Plans in the Funds willremain unchanged by the proposed merger; (c) the assets of each ParticipatingPlan will be invested in the same type of investment both before and afterthe proposed merger; and (d) the proposed merger will result in greateroperational efficiencies and economies of scale, and greater opportunitiesfor diversification of investment with the larger size of a single fund.For further Information Contact: Mr. C.E. Beaver of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number).<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information</ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under secton 408(a) of the Act and/orsection 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that the exemptionis administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan and of its participantsand beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participants and beneficiariesof the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 13th day of September, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and WelfareBenefits Administration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-21226 Filed 9-15-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>