<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88510-0025 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-10-88.f2.A1024</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">National Park Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">36 CFR Part 7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Big Cypress National Preserve, Florida; Indian Use and Occupancy Regulations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Park Service, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The proposed regulations set forth below are necessaryto define adequately the statutory rights of the members of the MiccosukeeTribe of Indians of Florida and the members of the Seminole Tribe of Indiansof Florida granted in the Big Cypress Act of 1974 which established thePreserve. This Act provides that the Indians shall be allowed to continuetheir usual and customary use and occupancy of Federal lands and waterswithin the Preserve, including hunting, fishing, and trapping on a subsistencebasis and traditional tribal ceremonials; and provides for maximum Indianparticipation in any authorized future revenue-producing visitor serviceswithin the Preserve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Written comments, suggestions, or objections will be accepteduntil July 11, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments should be directed to: Superintendent, Big CypressNational Preserve, Star Route Box 110, Ochopee, Florida 33943.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Fred J. Fagergren, Superintendent,Big Cypress National Preserve, Telephone: (813) 695-2000.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>These regulations are being proposed by the National Park Service (Service)to define the statutory rights granted to the members of the Miccosukeeand Seminole Tribe of Indians of Florida in Pub. L. 93-440, (88 Stat. 1258;16 U.S.C. 687f <T3>et seq.</T3>).On October 11, 1974, the Congress established Big Cypress National Preserve``to assure the preservation, conservation, and protection of the natural,scenic, hydrologic, floral and faunal, and recreational values of the BigCypress Watershed in the State of Florida and to provide for the enhancementand public enjoyment thereof * * *.''In Section 5 of Pub. L. 93-440 the Congress provided that: ``Notwithstandingthis section or any other provision of this act, members of the MiccosukeeTribe of Indians of Florida and members of the Seminole Tribe of Floridashall be permitted, <T3>subject to reasonable regulations established by the Secretary </T3>(emphasisadded) to continue their usual and customary use and occupancy of Federalor Federally acquired lands and waters within the Preserve, including hunting,fishing, and trapping on a subsistence basis and traditional tribal ceremonials.''Section 6 provides for maximum Indian participation in authorized revenue-producingvisitor services within the Preserve.A Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the proposed Big Cypress NationalPreserve was made available for public comment on February 5, 1972, witha Final Environmental Impact Statement (FES 75-39) completed and approvedon April 11, 1975. This FES dealt with the impacts of the Federal legislationestablishing Big Cypress, including the continuation of customary use andoccupancy of the Preserve by the Seminoles and Miccosukees, and their preferentialrights to future revenue-producing services. Copies of this document areavailable at the address noted above.Since the Indians' statutory right to remain within the Big Cypress NationalPreserve is ``subject to reasonable regulations established by the Secretary,''it is contingent upon the Service to interpret and define that statutoryright through the promulgation of regulations which are consistent withCongressional intent in establishing the Preserve and which meet the needsof the Indians and the Service.A formal opinion was requested from the Office of the Solicitor, Washington,DC to define the legal parameters of the Seminole and Miccosukee rightof usual and customary use and occupancy of the Preserve as granted inPub. L. 93-440. The Solicitor's opinion of April 25, 1979 has provideda basis for subsequent development of regulations consistent with Congressionalintent and existing case law. Copies of that opinion are available at theaddress noted above.Several preliminary meetings were held with individual Indians, Tribalrepresentatives and the Tribal legal counsels. These meetings assistedthe Service in identifying what constitutes ``usual and customary use andoccupancy'' and ``traditional,'' and to insure that Indian needs are reflectedin the proposed regulations to the maximum extent possible.On November 12, 1981 (46 FR 55709) the Service published proposed regulationsin the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Input received during the official review periodfor those proposed regulations, comments received thereafter, continuedgovernment review of these issues, and the revision of the general regulationsfor the Service all prompted changes in the original proposal. These changesresulted in this proposed rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Existing Conditions</ITAG>Residential UseThere are an estimated 100 to 150 Miccosukee and Seminole Indians residingwithin the Preserve. Some of these Indians are carried on the tribal rollsof their respective tribes and others are eligible for tribal membershipbut are unaffiliated by personal choice. They reside in 11 camps, villages,or individual homes within the Preserve. The majority of these camps areon Federaly acquired lands.Historically (pre-1900), Indians in the Preseve relocated frequently insearch of better hunting and agricultural lands. In the 1930's and 1940's,after the construction of U.S. Highway 41, the Indian lifestyle changedgradually. Camps were located more and more frequently beside the highwayand the Indians came to rely heavily on income from the tourist trade orfrom jobs in local commnities and thus, became less dependent on a subsistencelifestyle. In recent years, these camps have been relatively stable inpopulation and location. Expansion of existing camps or establishment ofnew camps has been due primarily to marriage and family growth, with somein and out migration from other areas.Camps are generaly one acre or less in size and consist of six to ten structures,most of which are traditional chickees_a roofed, opensided shelter constructedof cypress poles and thatched with a palm frond roof. Cleared and filledground generally does not extend much beyond the actual living area.Subsistence UseSubsistence use within the Preserve by Indians has declined substantiallyin recent years. Only a few camps within the Preserve have lands that arecleared specifically for agriculture. Several camps do contain small orchardsof fruit-bearing trees. Some corn is grown by Indians on hammocks withinthe Preserve. Gathering of native plants for food, medicine, and ceremonialpurposes also continues on a limited scale. Back-country use by Indiansfor hunting and gathering activities is limited. This is evidence by thegeneral lack of off-road vehicle trails near Indian camps. The low levelof use is perhaps due in part to low population levels of game species.The primary species taken by Indians are garfish, mudfish, deer, hog andturtles.Commercial UseThe number of camps open for commercial tourist trade is variable. At present,four camps within the Preserve are known to be open to tourists, but atleast three other camps have been open in the past. Commercial activityat these camps usually consists of a small curio shop where various handmadearticles can be purchased. A self-guided walking tour of the village issometimes available, allowing observation of Indian lifestyles.Commercial guiding of hunting parties by Indians is at present infrequent.However, there is a potential for expansion of this activity.The most significant Indian commercial activity within the Preserve isthe collection of native materials for curio and for chickee construction.The natural resource most actively sought is cypress. Small diameter cypresspoles are carved into toy canoes, knives and tomahawks, Cypress knees andslabs from larger cypress trunks are also harvested for sale as souvenirs.Most cypress taken, however, are for use as building materials in the constructionof chickees, both at a subsistence and commercial level.Since chickees have become popular as decorative shelters in nearby urbanareas, their construction has become a commercial enterprise. During previousdiscussions with the tribes, the Service was informed that no more thanseven Indian families within the Preserve had indicated an interest intaking Preserve cypress for commercial chickee construction. Local staffbelieves as many as nine families are now engaged in commercial chickeeconstruction. Since south Florida has one of the highest rates of urbangrowth in the nation and chickee construction provides a unique opportunityof commercial gain through the use of a traditional skill, the number offamilies or individuals engaged in commercial chickee construction willno doubt increase.Depending upon its size, a chickee requires 25-40 poles (trees) of varioussizes down to two inches in diameter. Since only straight trees of certaindiameters are desirable, cypress stands are generally selectively cut ratherthan clear cut. Due to access and transportation problems, suitable cypressstands near existing camps and roads are most favored for pole-cutting,thus visually impacting the natural scene of the scenic corridors (one-halfmile) along highways within the Preserve.Cabbage palm fronds for thatching of chickee roofs are also commerciallycollected from the Preserve. Since there are relatively few convenientlylocated large stands of palms, this activity may be minimal.The quantity of cypress harvesting for chickee construction, whether subsistenceof commercial, is extensive. Since the number of villages is known an therate of population growth can be projected, the impact of cypress harvestfor subsistence use can be managed. The Preserve may be able to sustainsuch use, if monitored and controlled. This activity, at this level, isconsistent with Pub. L. 93-440 and Service general regulations.However, the authorization of commercial harvesting of cypress is not anactivity directly and specifically provided by Congress. Economic usesof timber were therefore not granted to the Indians unless any such usewas ``usual and custmary'' in 1974. While commercial harvest could haveoccurred within the Preserve at an infrequent or sporadic level, only limitedanecdotal information is available on any level of occurrence of this activity.Notwithstanding the question of the level of this activity in 1974, theauthorization of commercial harvesting of cypress would result in the derogationof the values and purposes for which the Preserve was established.The legislative history of the Preserve is clear; the commercial use ofresources was not within the intent of Congress. Quoting House Report 93-502and Senate Report 93-1128; pages 6 and 5, respectively:<ITAG tagnum="21">The committee chose to call the area a preserve rather than a reserve,feeling that such a distinction may be important. Reserve refers to stock_acommodity held for future use. Preserve refers more definitely to the keepingor safeguarding of something basically protected and perpetuated for anintended or stated purpose, as with the specific objectives for Big Cypressprovided by this legislation.</ITAG>Service statutes and general regulations also clearly prohibit the useof natural resources for commercial activities unless in support of visitoractivities or specifically mandated by legislation. Neither of these twosituations exist with cypress harvesting or palm frond removal for commercialchickee construction.  In addition, the commercial harvesting of cypress poles interferes withthe Service's ability to preserve the resources for which the area wasestablished; i.e. it creates incompatible impacts upon the natural resources. Title 16 of the United States Code (Section 1a-1) places affirmative obligationson the Service to exercise its authority in a manner which will protectagainst derogation of park values. The following brief analysis supportsthe Service's determination that authorizing commercial harvest of cypresswould result in derogation of park values:  <ITAG tagnum="21">A 1986 vegetation map of the Preserve documents, that of the fourteen(14) vegetation types, harvestable cypress would come from only two vegetationtypes, cypress strands and domes. These constitute approximately 10% ofthe Preserve or 58,000 acres. This available acreage would be further reducedsince the Service wants to protect a one-half mile scenic corridor alongall established roads. In addition, Indian use of off-road vehicles islimited and therefore harvest would be concentrated within perhaps a one-milestrip, one-half mile off the established roads; approximately 22,000 acresof cypress strands and domes occur within that strip. While 300-750 cypresstrees may occur per acre, a much smaller number would meet size and straightnessrequirements.</ITAG>A family can construct up to 26 chickees per year and in the process require25-40 poles (trees) per chickee. If current estimates of seven to ninefamilies are correct, the Preserve would lose 5,000-10,000 trees per year.Growth rates in this area would provide two inch trees in perhaps 50 yearsand four inch trees in 100 years. The Service notes that the loss of cypressat the current estimate (5,000-10,000 per year) would result in the removalof 250,000-500,000 trees before the first tree harvested was replaced (5,000or 10,000 X 50 years).  Notwithstanding the current estimate of the number of families involved,the Service would expect that number to increase if commercial harvestingwere authorized. Given the high rate of urban growth in south Florida,the number of families involved in harvesting would be expected to increasesteadily; in a 50 year period, the number could reach 25 families or more.The annual impact to the Preserve at that level is estimated to be a lossof 26,000 trees per year.  Religious Use  The Miccosukee Indians currently utilize two sites which are in Federalownership for their major religious ceremony, the Green Corn Dance, a celebrationof tribal purification and renewal. The ceremony is normally held in Juneor July, and runs several days.  Ceremonial sites are usually located in hardwood hammocks. The developmentassociated with the ceremonial site is normally limited to some clearingof vegetation and construction of ceremonial chickees and the overall impactshould be minimal. The Indians normally utilize a site for several years.As Federal acquisition of land proceeds, other ceremonial sites will becomepotentially available to the Indians.  The extent of Miccosukee and Seminole use of native plant and animal lifefor religious purposes is not well known. Egret, turkey, and anhinga feathersand box turtle shells are reported to be used. Statements by the Chairmanof the Miccosukee Tribal Council (Mr. Buffalo Tiger) call for the opportunityfor Indians to collect, maintain, and use all plant and animal speciestraditionally employed in Indian medicine, religious, or cultural practices,unless protected by State or Federal law as threatened or endangered species. <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Major Issues  </ITAG>Paragraph (d)(2) Indian Residential Use  Subparagraph (i) clarifies that Indian owners of lands and improved propertiesare subject to the same acquisition authorities, rights of retention, anduse and occupancy as applied under the Act of any other landowner. It alsoensures that acquisition of private property from Indian owners, with orwithout a retention of use and occupancy would not affect the statutoryrights granted to Indians as members of the Seminole or Miccosukee Tribesof Florida.  Subparagraph (ii) provides that Indians would be able to continue theirusual and customary occupancy of camps existing at the time of Preserveestablishment and not more than four abandoned residential sites whichare located on Federally acquired lands. The Service arrived at the quantityof four abandoned sites for reoccupation after discussions with Indianleaders.  Subparagraphs (ii)(A) and (ii)(B) provide for the maintenance of existingstructures and construction of new structures in existing camps. They alsoprovide for Service review and permitting of any new development to ensurethat these activities meet appropriate zoning requirements and constructioncodes, and that any new developments would be environmentally compatible. Subparagraph (ii)(C) would provide for limited expansion of existing campsand limited resettlement of abandoned camps as consistent with recent Indianliving patterns.Subparagraph (ii)(D) would provide for continuance of subsistence, non-mechanizedagriculture adjacent to existing camps. Since this activity will be restrictedin location and scope to existing disturbed sites, it has little effecton the Preserve environment. The superintendent, through written notice,would have the opportunity to analyze agricultural activities and theirpotential impacts.Subparagraph (ii)(E) would provide for continuance or establishment ofsubsistence, non-mechanized agricultural plots elsewhere within the preserve.Through the permitting process, opportunity would be provided the superintendentto analyze expansion of agricultural activities, to regulate location,to minimize environmental impacts and environmental compatibility. Compatibilitywill consider but not be limited to concerns such as threatened or endangeredplants or animals, impacts to water quality or quantity or to soils orarcheological sites.Subparagraph (iii) would prohibit refuse disposal within the Preserve.Open garbage dumps, refuse pits, and open burning are common practicesat some camps within the Preserve. Open dumps and ptis are not in keepingwith Preserve purposes to protect the watershed and other resource valuesand should be terminated. Open burning without a permit is in violationof both existing State law and Federal regulations. This regulation wouldrequire some camp residents to seek new means for waste disposal.Paragraph (d)(3) Indian Subsistence Activities and AccessSubparagraph (i) states that Indians would be able to continue their subsistenceactivities on a year-round basis. Year-round subsistence activities arealready permitted under Florida Statute 380.055 and by the Act. Regulationof these activities is a joint State/Federal responsibility.Subparagraph (i)(A) requires that Tribal members carry their tribal identificationcard while engaged in subsistence activities. This card is issued by theTribes for purpose of Tribal member identification. Since some ``traditionalSeminoles'' do not belong to either tribe, the following procedure willapply when the superintendent has reason to believe that a person claimingto be a ``traditional Seminole'' may not be an Indian within the meaningof these regulations. The superintendent or his representative shall contacta representative of the traditional Seminoles to verify the status of suchperson. The traditional Seminoles shall furnish the superintendent withthe names of three persons authorized to be contacted for this purpose.This would preclude non-eligibles from claiming they are Indians huntingon a subsistence basis.Subparagraph (i) (B) requires Indians to obtain any licenses or other permitsas may be required by the State of Florida.Subparagraph (i) (C) requires Indians accompanying hunting parties to observeregular season, possession, and bag limits, eliminating the possible claimthat animals were taken under subsistence hunting rights.Subparagraph (ii) provides for the taking of renewable and non-renewableresources for religious purposes yet provides that all species protectedunder the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 <T3>et seq</T3>.), or protected from taking by Florida State law are protectedfrom taking under subsistence rights. Congressional intent is clear onthe protection of endangered and rare species within the Preserve; therefore,establishment of reasonable regulations to preclude their taking on a subsistencebasis is appropriate. Statements from the Miccosukee Tribal Chairman indicateIndian support of this concept. The statutory authority for Indian takingof resources necessary for religious purposes has been granted by section5 of the Act which provides for usual and customary Indian uses. This regulationrecognizes this statute and provides for continuation of existing conditionsbut does not include species protected under State or Federal statutesas threatened or endangered. Known Indian ceremonial use of resources isrestricted to common species in the Preserve.Subparagraph (iii) provides that Indians would be subject to public-wideclosures of Preserve areas to hunting, fishing, trapping, and entry. Thisregulation ensures inclusion of the Indians wherever or whenever the superintendentidentifies the need to close portions of the Preserve for resource protectionor emergency conditions.Subparagraph (iv) provides for the harvest of cypress or palm fronds forchickee construction at the subsistence level. Through the permitting process,the superintendent can regulate location and minimize environmental impacts.Subparagraph (iv)(A) limits subsistence level harvest of cypress or palmfronds to Indians residing within the Preserve or within that portion ofthe Miccosukee Reservation within Everglades National Park. The intentof Congress, reflected in the legislative history, emphasizes protectionof the rights of Indians living within the Preserve or Park. Harvest ofnatural resources for use by persons other than these groups would notbe in keeping with the legislative history and would open this removalof natural products beyond that reasonable for protection of Preserve resources.Subparagraph (iv)(B) assures that individual trees, from which fronds areharvested, are left with sufficient fronds to survive.Subparagraph (iv)(C) allows the superintendent to rotate areas for polecutting, thus allowing selection of areas based upon other resource concernsand assuring areas are not overharvested or clearcut.Paragraph (d)(4) Commercial ActivitiesSubparagraph (i) prohibits the taking of natural resource products forthe commercial construction of chickees and other structures. Previousdiscussions with the tribes revealed that perhaps seven Indian familieswithin the Preserve had an interest in this activity. The extent of cypressharvesting for chickee construction, whether subsistence or commercial,is substantial. Preserve staff have documented past incidents of in excessof 200 cypress trees being taken at one time and in one location. Sincethe number of villages is known and the rate of population growth can beprojected, the impact of harvesting for subsistence use can be managed.The Preserve may be able to sustain that level if monitored and controlled.However, the authorization of commercial harvesting of cypress would resultin derogation of park values and is not an activity directly and specificallyauthorized by Congress. Significant harvesting of cypress by Indians nowoccurs outside the Preserve on other public or private lands. This regulationwould impact Indians now commercially harvesting cypress within the Preserveand require them to seek other locations.Subparagraph (ii) provides for the continuance of curio sales outlets atexisting camps. The Preserve's legislative history documents Congressionalintent that there be a continuance of these small outlets. Currently, thereare four to seven Indian camps within the Preserve which have curio salesoutlets.Subparagraph (iii) limits the commercial taking of natural resource productsby Indians to that needed for small curio and handicraft items which willbe sold at curio outlets within the Preserve. It prohibits the taking ofcypress knees and trees larger than six (6) inches in diameter for saleas souvenirs. It provides authority to the superintendent to issue permitsfor this commercial taking to protect resources where harvest is creatingadverse impacts. The legislative history emphasizes protection of the curiooutlets within the Preserve. Commercial use beyond this level would conflictwith resource protection, the legislative history of Pub. L. 93-440, andthe general regulations for the Service. This regulation will provide theavailability of natural resource materials for small handicraft items butwill assure protection of Preserve resources at locations or times whenthe taking endangers park values.Subparagraph (iv) allows the Service to enforce Federal and Florida statuteson signing. This regulation would limit certain Indian advertising practices,but the visual quality along highway corridors would be improved followingthe elimination of non-conforming signs.Paragraph (d)(5) Indian Religious UseSubparagraph (i) provides protection to the two Green Corn Dance sitescurrently used by precluding general public use and access during thosetimes that the areas are used for a religious ceremony. The regulationwould require Indians to inform the superintendent at least 48 hours inadvance if they desire privacy. The regulation could intermittently closetwo areas comprising a total of 320 acres (about .06 percent of the Preserve)to public access. It would provide Indians the opportunity to conduct theirreligious ceremonies with customary privacy.Subpargraph (ii) would allow access to ceremonial sites but clarify thatIndians, even for religious purposes, are subject to the same vehicular(street or off-road) regulations applicable to any Preserve user. Bothceremonial sites now in use have lime-rock graded roads and are accessiblealong those corridors in street-legal vehicles.Subparagraph (iii) provides for construction and maintenance of traditionalfacilities used by Indians to exercise their religious beliefs. Other activitieswould require a permit from the superintendent. Issuance of the permitwould consider the environmental constraints and criteria utilized beforeapproval of similar non-Indian activities.Subparagraph (iv) provides for review by the superintendent during newsite selection. Knowledge of needed ceremonial site location changes wouldensure the Service could better aid the Indians in pursuit of their religiousrights by providing needed closures of areas on a temporary basis. Thesuperintendent would also be able to ensure that sensitive natural or culturalresources are not disturbed during selection of new ceremonial sites.Paragraph (g)(1) provides that failure to obtain a permit required pursuantto this section or failure to comply with the terms of a permit issuedpursuant to this section are prohibited acts and therefore subject to thepenalties set forth in 36 CFR. The Service has determined that the impositionof criminal sanctions for permit violations is fair and equitable and allowsthe Service to take a less severe form of corrective action for certainactivities conducted outside the scope of the permit or in violation ofthe permit terms and conditions. In some instances the total loss of theprivilege, through permit revocation, is a more severe penalty than theimposition of Section 1.3 penalties. Paragraph (g)(2) provides the superintendentwith general authority to revoke or suspend a permit for violation of itsterms or conditions.Public ParticipationIt is the policy of the Department of the Interior, whenever practicable,to afford the public an opportunity to participate in the rulemaking process.Accordingly, interested persons may submit written comments, suggestions,or objections regarding this proposed regulation to the address noted atthe beginning of the rulemaking. Drafting Information The principal author of this proposed rulemaking is Fred J. Fagergren,Big Cypress National Preserve, Ochopee, Florida guided by past counselfrom former staff of the Office of the Solicitor, Atlanta, Georgia. Paperwork Reduction Act The information collection requirements contained in this rulemaking havebeen approved by the Office of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3501<T3>et seq. </T3>and assigned clearance number 1024-0026. Compliance With Other LawsPursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4332) theService prepared a draft Environmental Impact Statement for the proposedBig Cypress National Preserve and circulated it for public comment on February5, 1972, with a final EIS (FES 75-39) completed and approved April 11,1975. This FES dealt with the impacts of the Federal legislation establishingBig Cypress, including the continuation of customary use and occupancyof the preserve by the Miccosukee and Seminole Indians, and their preferentialright to future revenue producing services. Further, the Service has determined that this proposed rulemaking willnot have a significant effect on the quality of the human environment,health and safety, because it is not expected to: (a) Increase public use to the extent of compromising the nature and characterof the area or causing physical damage to it; (b) Introduce noncompatible uses which might compromise the nature andcharacteristics of the area, or cause physical damage to it; (c) Conflict with adjacent ownerships or land uses; or (d) Cause a nuisance to adjacent owners or occupants.Based on this determination, this proposed rulemaking is categoricallyexcluded from the procedural requirements of the National EnvironmentalPolicy Act (NEPA) by Departmental regulations in 516 DM 6, (49 FR 21438).As such, neither an Environmental Assessment nor an Environmental ImpactStatement has been prepared.The Service has determined that this rulemaking is not a ``major rule''within the meaning of Executive Order 12291 [(46 FR 13193); February 19,1981]. The planned rulemaking would serve no more than to continue the``usual and customary use and occupancy'' of Federal lands. A small numberof Indians would be required to expend funds for solid waste disposal.Also a small number of Indians may have to harvest cypress, and other naturalresources, for commercial construction, from outside the Preserve. In accordancewith the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96-354) which became effectiveJanuary 1, 1981, the Service has determined that these proposed regulationswill not have a significant economic effect on a substantial number ofsmall entities, nor will they require the preparation of a regulatory analysis.The proposed regulations would impose no significant costs on any classor group of small entities. Indian tribal members would generally benefitand their rights would be more clearly defined.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 36 CFR Part 7</ITAG>National parks, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.In consideration of the foregoing, it is proposed to amend 36 CFR ChapterI as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 7_SPECIAL REGULATIONS, AREAS OF THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 7 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>16 U.S.C. 1, 3, 9a, 462(k); section 7.96 also issuedunder D.C. Code 8-137 (1981) and D.C. Code 40-721 (1981).</ITAG>2. In andSection; 7.86, by adding new paragraph (d), (g) and (h) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 7.86</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Big Cypress National Preserve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) <T3>Indian Use and Occupancy</T3>_(1) <T3>Definitions</T3>: As used in this section,(i) The term ``Act'' means Pub. L. 93-440 (88 Stat. 1258i; 16 U.S.C. 698f<T3>et seq</T3>.).(ii) The term ``Commission'' means the State agency having jurisdictionover hunting, fishing and trapping activities.(iii) The term ``existing camp'' means any of those residential and/orcommercial structures occupied by Indians on October 11, 1974, and notmore than four (4) designated abandoned residential sites previously occupiedby Indians on Federal or Federally-acquired lands; all of which are shownon a map available for public inspection in the office of the superintendent.(iv) The term ``Indian'' or ``Indians'' means those persons who are membersof the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe ofFlorida or those persons who are Miccosukee or Seminole Indians who areknown as the ``traditional Seminoles,'' as determined by the authorizedrepresentatives of the traditional Seminoles.(v) The term ``subsistence'' means customary and traditional use by Indiansof fish, wildlife, and plants for direct personal or family consumptionas food, shelter, fuel, clothing, tools, or transportation, and for themaking of small handicraft articles out of the non-edible byproducts ofplant, fish, and wildlife resources taken for personal or family consumption.(vi) The term ``tribe'' or ``tribes'' means the Seminole Tribe of Floridaand/or the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.(2) <T3>Indian residential use. </T3>(i) Indians who own lands and improvedproperty within the exterior boundaries of the Preserve are subject tothe same acquisition authorities, retention rights and use and occupancyas set out in the Act. The acquisition of private property from Indianowners, with or without a retention of use and occupancy pursuant to section1(c) of the Act, does not deny or restrict Indian owners or former ownerswithin the Preserve from enjoying the rights of usual and customary useand occupancy of Federal lands within the Preserve as members of the Seminoleor Miccosukee Tribes of Florida under section 5 of the Act and as definedin this section.(ii) Indian residential use at existing camps may continue at the October11, 1974, levels of use, occupancy and size under the following conditions:(A) Existing camps may be maintained, repaired and replaced only with liketype of construction and materials.(B) Any new development or new structure other than the traditional Indianchickee, any dredge or fill activity, or sewage or water system may occuronly pursuant to the terms of a permit issued by the superintendent authorizingsuch development. Issuance of a permit is conditioned upon a written determinationthat such development will comply with all State and county zoning requirements,construction codes, State and Federal dredge or fill regulations, and sanitation,health, and safety standards and be compatible with protection of Preserveresources.(C) Expansion of an existing camp, or the resettlement of a designatedabandoned residential site due to marriage and family growth may occuronly pursuant to the terms of a permit issued by the superintendent. Issuanceof a permit is conditioned upon receipt of an application stating the proposedlocation, the reason for the camp expansion, the type and number of chickeesand other structures to be built, and describing the provisions to be madefor sewage disposal.(D) Indians may continue or re-establish a subsistence, non-mechanizedagricultural plot adjacent to an existing camp by providing written noticeto the superintendent stating the location, size of plot, type of cropsbeing grown and expected periods of use. Such plots will be restrictedto existing disturbed areas and will not require the removal of trees.(E) Indians may continue or establish a subsistence non-mechanized agriculturalplot that is not adjacent to an existing camp only pursuant to the termsof a permit issued by the superintendent. Issuance of a permit is conditionedupon a written determination that existence of the plot would be compatiblewith protection of Preserve resources.(iii) The following are prohibited:(A) Burning refuse;(B) Using or maintaining a refuse dump; or(C) Using or maintaining an open garbage pit.(3) <T3>Indian subsistence activities and access. </T3>(i) Indians have year-aroundsubsistence hunting, fishing, trapping and gathering privileges. In orderto exercise such privileges, and Indian shall:(A) If a tribal member, carry a tribal identification card. However, whenthe superintendent has reason to believe that a person claiming to be a``traditional Seminole'' may not be an Indian as defined in this section,the superintendent shall contact a representative of the traditional Seminolesfor the purpose of verifying the status of the person in question. Thetraditional Seminoles shall furnish the superintendent with the names ofthree persons authorized to be contacted as a Seminole representative.(B) Possess all licenses, permits, tags, and stamps required by the Commission;and(C) If accompanying a non-Indian hunting party, observe the hunting seasons,possession rules, and bag limits established by the Commission for thePreserve.(ii) Except for an animal or plant that is identified by the U.S. Fishand Wildlife Service as an endangered or threatened species or whose takingor possession is prohibited by the State of Florida, the taking or possessionof plants, animals or minerals for use in Indian religious ceremonialsis allowed.(iii) Unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this section, Indians aresubject to all closures related to hunting, fishing, trapping, or entry,established for reasons of public safety, floral and faunal protection,or administrative activities of the Preserve.(iv) The taking of cypress or palm fronds for chickee construction forsubsistence use is permitted pursuant to the terms of a permit issued bythe superintendent and subject to the following conditions:(A) Subsistence taking within the Preserve is limited to Indians residingwithin the Preserve or within that portion of the Miccosukee Reservationwithin Everglades National Park;(B) The taking of palm fronds for thatching may result in the removal ofno more than half the palm fronds from any one tree; and(C) The superintendent may rotate areas for pole cutting every two years,with the areas allocated for pole cutting described in the permit for eachpermittee.(4) <T3>Commercial activities. </T3>(i) The taking of natural resource productsby Indians for commercial construction of chickees or other structuresfor use inside or outside the Perserve is prohibited.(ii) Indians residing in an existing camp have the right of continuingor establishing the sale of small Indian curio and handicraft items frompresent structures of existing camps or at resettled camp locations inchickee-type structures as approved by the superintendent.(iii) The commercial taking of natural resource products by Indians islimited to those used in the making of small curio and handicraft itemsfor sale at existing camps within the Preserve. Provided, however, thesuperintendent may require a permit, designate harvest sites or areas andestablish conditions for taking of natural resources for small curio andhandicraft items. The taking of cypress knees or trees larger than six(6) inches in diameter for sale as souvenirs is prohibited.(iv) The erection and maintenance of roadside advertising signs by Indiansshall be conducted in accordance with Federal and Florida State laws regardingroadside signs.(v) The superintendent shall consult with the tribes in a timely manneron matters pertaining to plans for the development of the Preserve. Tribesare provided the right of first refusal to provide or develop any new revenue-producingvisitor services within the Preserve but may exercise that right only within90 days after notification by the superintendent.(5) <T3>Indian Religious Activities </T3>(i) The two Corn Dance sites currentlyused by Indians may be reserved exclusively for Indian use and be closedto non-Indian public use and access. Indians shall inform the superintendentat least 48 hours in advance if they desire privacy at these locations.These sites are identified on a map available for public inspection inthe superintendent's office and, when closed, are posted with signs indicatingthe closure.(ii) Indians are allowed motorized access to ceremonial sites subject tothe provisions of this section pertaining to off-road travel and exceptwhere sites are within areas closed to motorized access. Maintenance orimprovement of access to the two current sites may occur only with appropriateState and Federal permits and after review and approval by the superintendent.(iii) Indians are allowed to construct and maintain chickees or other traditionalstructures needed for the exercise of their religious beliefs on the ceremonialsites. However, other maintenance, improvement, or dredge or fill activitiesmay occur only after review and approval by permit from the superintendent.Approval would be based upon the same environmental constraints and criteriautilized before approval of similar non-Indian activities.(iv) A ceremonial site may be abandoned, relocated or reestablished pursuantto the terms of a permit issued by the superintendent who may effect atemporary closure as required at the new site and release the former ceremonialsite from closure.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(g) <T3>Permits. </T3>(1) The following are prohibited:(i) Failure to obtain a permit required pursuant to this section.(ii) Failure to comply with the terms or conditions of a permit issuedpursuant to this section.(2) The superintendent may suspend or revoke a permit for violation ofany of its terms or conditions.(h) <T3>Information collection. </T3>(1) The information collection requirementscontained in this section have been approved by the Office of Managementand Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq. </T3>and assigned clearance number 1024-0026. The informationis being collected to solicit information necessary for the superintendentto issue permits. The information will be used to grant administrativeand statutory benefits. Response is required to obtain a benefit.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: April 6, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Susan Recce,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-10377 Filed 5-9-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-70-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>