<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88728-0020 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-28-88.f2.A1019</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4702"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 145 / Thursday, July 28, 1988/ Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 53, No. 145</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Thursday, July 28, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Agricultural Marketing Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Part 989 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[AMS-FV-88-106; Docket No. AO-198-A14] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Raisins Produced From Grapes Grown in California; Recommended Decisionand Opportunity To File Written Exceptions to Proposed Further Amendmentof Marketing Agreement and Order </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Proposed rule and opportunity to file exceptions.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary:</T2> This recommended decision invites written exceptionson proposed amendments to the marketing agreement and order for raisinsproduced from grapes grown in California. The proposed amendments wouldamend provisions of the order concerning the Raisin Diversion Program,expenses for alternate Raisin Administrative Committee (Committee) representatives,nomination procedures for independent producer representatives on the Committee,reserve pool procedures, producers' equity in reserve pools, handler compliancewith the marketing order, limitations on Committee members' tenure, andadd authority for continuance referenda. These changes would improve theoperation of the raisin marketing order program.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>date:</T2> Written exceptions must be filed by August 29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>address:</T2> Written exceptions should be filed with the Hearing Clerk,Fruit and Vegetable Division, AMS USDA, Room 1077-S, P.O. Box 96456, Washington,DC 20090-6456. Four copies of all written exceptions should be submitted,and they will be made available for public inspection during regular businesshours.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:</T2> Patricia A. Petrella, MarketingSpecialist, Marketing Order Administration Branch, Fruit and VegetableDivision, AMS, USDA, Room 2525-S, P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456;telephone: (202) 447-5697.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information:</T2> Prior documents in this proceeding:Notice of Hearing issued July 16, 1987, and published in the July 21, 1987,issue of the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (52 FR 27369). This administrative action isgoverned by the provisions of sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the UnitedStates Code and therefore is excluded from the requirements of ExecutiveOrder 12291. At the conclusion of the hearing the Administrative Law Judge fixed September25, 1987, as the final date for interested persons to file proposed findingsand conclusions or written arguments and briefs based on the evidence receivedat the hearing. The following persons submitted documents: Jerald Rebensdorf(Rebensdorf), Bob F. Hansen, Jr. (Hansen), Barry Kriebel (Kriebel), RichardGarabedian (Garabedian), Bill Feaver (Feaver), and Kalem Barsarian (Barsarian).In addition, six copies of the same letter in opposition to three of theproposals were received.<ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement </ITAG>Notice is hereby given of the filing with the Hearing Clerk of this recommendeddecision with respect to the proposed further amendment of Marketing Agreementand Marketing Order No. 989, regulating the handling of raisins producedfrom grapes grown in California, and of the opportunity to file writttenexceptions thereto. In addition to Patricia A. Petrella, whose addressis listed above, copies of this decision also may be obtained from RichardVan Diest, Fresno Marketing Field Office, AMS, USDA, 1755 N. Gateway, SuiteB, Fresno, California 93727. This notice is issued pursuant to the provisions of the Agricultural MarketingAgreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq.</T3>), hereinafter referred to as the ``Act,'' and the applicablerules of practice and procedure governing the formulation of marketingagreements and orders (7 CFR Part 900). The proposed further amendment of Marketing Agreement and Order No. 989is based on the record of a public hearing held in Fresno, California onAugust 5 and 6, 1987. Notice of this hearing was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on July 21, 1987. The notice of hearing containedfive proposals submitted by the Raisin Administrative Committee (Committee),which locally administers the order. Those proposals pertained to changingthe Raisin Diversion Program (RDP), nomination procedures for independentproducer representatives on the Committee, expenses for alternate Committeerepresentatives, reserve pool procedures, and handler compliance with themarketing order. Mr. John D. Pakchoian, chairman of the Committee, submitteda proposal which would require that independent producer representativesnot have an interest in handler operations. The notice also included threeproposals by the Fruit and Vegetable Division, Agricultural Marketing Service,U.S. Department of Agriculture (Department), which would limit Committeetenure, add authority for continuance referenda, and provide authorityto make any necessary conforming changes. <ITAG tagnum="84">Small Business Considerations </ITAG>In accordance with the provisions of the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)(5 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq.</T3>), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas determined that this action would not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. Small agricultural producershave been defined by the Small Business Administration (SBA) (13 CFR 121.2)as those having average annual gross revenues for the last three yearsof less than $500,000. Small agricultural service firms, which includeshandlers under this proposed agreement and order, are defined as thosewith gross annual revenues of less than $3,500,000. The purpose of the RFA is to fit regulatory actions to the scale of businesssubject to such actions in order that small businesses will not be undulyor disproportionately burdened. Interested persons were invited to presentevidence at the hearing on the probable regulatory and informatioinal impactof the proposed rule on small businesses. The record indicates that most,if not all, handlers regulated under this program would meet the SBA definitionof small agricultural service firms. Marketing orders and rules issuedthereunder are unique in that they are normally brought about through groupaction of essentially small entities for their own benefit. Thus, boththe RFA and the Act are compatible with respect to small entities. The Act requires the application of uniform rules to regulated handlers.Since handlers covered under M.O. 989 are predominantly small businesses,the order itself is tailored to the size and nature of these small busiensses.During the 1986-87 crop year, 23 handlers were regulated under M.O. 989.In addition, there are about 5,000 producers of raisins in the regulatedarea. The proposed amendments to the marekting agreement and order include aprovision pertaining to a production cap of 2.75 tons per acre for productionunits approved for participation in the Raisin Diversion Program (RDP).The RDP gives producers the means of voluntarily reducing the quantityof grapes grown for drying into raisins while receiving the equivalentquantity of raisins, represented on diversion certificates, to sell tohandlers as though the raisins were produced in the current crop year.The producer receives raisins from the previous year's reserve pool inan amount equal to the acreage removed or diverted under the RDP multipliedby the producer's previous year's production in tons per acre. This amountis represented on a diversion certificate. The production cap is designedto prevent producers applying to participate in the RDP from reportinggreater than actual raisin production. Since the RDP is a voluntary program,no producer is required to participate. If a producer historically producesabove the production cap, such producer may choose to produce a crop ratherthan participate in the RDP. The proposed changes to allow reconditioned raisins in the reserve poolsand establish an average maturity quality level that raisins must meetto be put in the reserve pools are intended to improve the quality of reservepool raisins and also improve grower equity returns. The proposed change that would require the Committee to reimburse alternateCommittee members their necessary expenses for attending Committee meetingswould have a positive effect on producers and handlers by increasing thelevel of expertise of Committee members. This additional expense wouldbe offset by assessments on handlers. Program operations benefit all handlersand producers and it is thus appropriate to provide a minimum level ofcompensation to alternate members, who serve in the industry's generalinterest.The proposed amendment to add a late payment and interest charge for handlerswho default on reserve pool sales would encourage prompt payment by handlers.Handlers would be required to pay such charges only if they are late inpaying the Committee for raisins released to them from the reserve pool.In addition, prompt payment by handlers will ensure more timely paymentsto producers who have equity in the reserve pools.The proposed amendments pertaining to operations of the Committee (tenureand periodic referenda) would provide more frequent opportunity for producervoting and an opportunity for broader based representation on the Committee.The change proposing that nominations for independent producer positionson the Committee be held by mail would have a positive impact on smallentities by increasing independent producer participation in the nominationprocess.All these changes are designed to enhance the administration and functioningof the marketing agreement and order and would have negligible, if any,economic impact on small businesses. Accordingly, it is determined thatthe proposed provisions of the order would not have a significant economicimpact on handlers or producers.In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 35),the reporting and recordkeeping provisions that are included in the proposedorder will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). Theywould not become effective prior to OMB approval.<ITAG tagnum="84">Material Issues</ITAG>The material issues of record addressed in this decision are: (1) Whethera mail balloting procedure to fill independent producer member positionson the Committee should be implemented; (2) whether a provision shouldbe added for alternate Committee members to be reimbursed for their necessaryexpenses; (3) whether a production cap of 2.75 tons per acre for productionunits approved for participation in the RDP should be established; (4)whether to allow reconditioned raisins to be placed in the reserve poolsand establish an average maturity quality level that raisins must meetto be put in the reserve pools; (5) whether to deny reserve pool salesto handlers who are not incompliance with the order and whether to establishan interest and late payment charge for handlers who default on reservepool sales; (6) whether to provide that independent producer members ofthe Committee cannot be associated with a handler of raisins; (7) whetherto add Committee tenure requirements to the order; (8) whether to providefor producer continuance referenda to be held every six years; and (9)whether any minor administrative and conforming changes should be madeto the order if any of these proposals were to become effective.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>The finding and conclusions on the material issues, all of which are basedon evidence adduced at the hearing and the record thereof are: (1) TheCalifornia raisin marketing order should be amended to establish a mailballoting procedure to fill independent producer member positions on theCommittee. The Committee currently consists of 47 members of which 35 representproducers, 10 represent handlers, one represents the cooperative bargainingassociation and one represents the public. To provide equitable representationthroughout the production area, representation is apportioned among threedistricts. They are: District 1, all counties north of Fresno County; District2, all counties south of Fresno County and; District 3, all of Fresno County.Independent producers currently have eight representatives on the Committee.One represents District 1, one represents District 2, and six representDistrict 3.The order currently specifies a nomination procedure for independent producermembers which entails holding nomination meetings in each district withnominations and voting for such members at such meetings. This proposalwould establish the procedures for Committee independent producer membersto be nominated by mail balloting. To effectuate such a change, andSection;989.29 of the order, ``Initial members and nomination of successor members,''would be revised.Record evidence shows that independent producer nomination meetings, currentlyheld as required by the order in the three districts, are poorly attendedby independent producers. Thus, this mail balloting proposal was recommendedto increase the opportunity for independent producers to participate inthe nomination process. As proposed, the process would begin with the Committeenotifying all independent producers of record of meetings to be held ineach district. Producers present at those meetings would offer in nominationcandidates who they wish to represent them on the Committee. Those producerswhose names are offered would be requested to prepare a brief statementas to their qualifications and reasons why they wish to represent independentproducers on the Committee. According to the evidence presented, thesebrief statements should include the nominees' qualifications to representindependent producers and the nominees' own abilities and affiliations,rather than a comparison of their own qualifications to that of their competitors.These brief statements, along with a ballot, would be mailed to all independentproducers on record with the Committee. Independent producers would voteonly for representatives in their own districts, and return the ballotsto the Committee office for tabulation. The vote count should be verifiedby an impartial person such as a field representative of the Department.Evidence presented at the hearing indicated that write-in candidates shouldalso be acceptable.Members and alternate members for each district would be determined bythe numbers of votes received. The nominees receiving the highest numberof votes would be designated as the member nominee, the second highestwould be designated as the second member or alternate member nominee dependingon the number of nominees needed to fill the vacant positions, as the casemay be, until all positions are filled. These nominees would then be submittedto the Secretary for selection.Currently, the order specifies that independent producers and producersaffiliated with cooperative marketing association handling less than 10percent of the total raisin acquisitions during the preceding crop yearbe nominated in the same manner. It is therefore appropriate for producerswho are affiliated with such cooperative marketing organizations to benominated by the same mail balloting procedure as proposed for independentproducers. Accordingly, such a procedure for this category of producersshould also be adopted. In addition, evidence further indicates that the Committee should be permittedto recommend, and the Secretary to establish, implementing administrativerules for the conduct of such nominations. For example, the Committee maywant to establish such rules and regulations in regard to specifying thedates when mail balloting would be held and to specify the items independentproducer nominees should include in their brief statements. (2) Section 989.39, ``Compensation and expenses,'' should be amended toprovide for reimbursement for alternate members for their actual expenseswhen attending Committee meetings. Currently, the provisions of the orderprovide for reimbursement of alternate members' expenses only when suchalternates are acting as members or when attending not more than threeCommittee meetings per crop year at which the member that they serve asan alternate is in attendence.Evidence at the hearing indicated that it is beneficial to the Committeeand the industry it represents for alternate members to be well informedof all matters applicable to the operation of the marketing order. By attendingmore meetings, alternate members would become more knowledgeable, be betterprepared to act in the absence of their members, and be better able tofunction as members in the future if selected to serve as such. Evidenceindicated that the added costs for the payment of alternate members' expenseswould be more than offset by the knowledge gained by alternate membersand the resultant benefit to Committee deliberations. (3) Section 989.56 (a) and (c) should be amended to add a production capof 2.75 tons per acre for those producers who apply participation in theRDP. Also, authority should be included for the Committee to recommendand the Secretary to approve further changes in the production cap, subjectto the 2.75 ton per acre limitation. The RDP was established in 1985 to help the industry bring raisin suppliesmore in line with demand. The RDP gives producers the means of voluntarilyreducing the quantity of grapes grown for drying into raisins while receivingthe equivalent quantity of raisins, represented on diversion certificates,to sell to handlers as though the raisins were produced in the currentcrop year. Producers wishing to participate in the RDP divert their grapecrop from production. In return, producers receive raisins from the previousyear's reserve pool in an amount equal to the acreage removed under theRDP multiplied by the producers' previous year's production in tons peracre. This amount is represented on a diversion certificate. Producersare paid, by handlers, the established field price minus the harvest costsdetermined for that year. The handlers redeem the certificates with theCommittee and receive the quantity of reserve pool raisins representedby the certificate. Record evidence shows that the Committee has had concerns in the past aboutprogram participants inflating their production units in the RDP. Inflatingmay occur when program participants report statistics allegedly showinghigher than actual raisin production. Since diversion certificate tonnageis based on the tons delivered per acre during the prior year, producerscould inflate their acreage by acquiring raisins from another source andadding them to deliveries from their production units, thereby receivingcredit for a higher amount of raisins than actually produced on the acreage.By inflating yield figures, producers could receive diversion certificatesequal to more raisins from the reserve pool than such producers actuallyproduced from those production units in the previous year. The record indicates that a production cap of 2.75 tons per acre wouldhelp prevent any alleged inflating of yields experienced by the Committeein the past. Program participants would receive 2.75 tons per acre if theirrecords indicated that they produced that amount or more during the previousyear. Those producers whose records indicated that they produced less thanthe 2.75 tons per acre level would receive raisins equivalent to theiractual reported production as a basis for payment on their RDP certificates.Raisin industry experts consider raisin production of 3 tons or more peracre to be very unusual. Production statistics released by the CaliforniaCrop and Livestock Reporting Service revealed that the average productionof raisins per acre for the 10-year period 1975 through 1985 was 2.01 tons.Those producers that may produce more than 2.75 tons per acre do not haveto participate in the RDP, since the RDP is a voluntary program, and noproducer is required to participate. Thus, producers who produce more than2.75 tons per acre may choose to produce and deliver a crop rather thanaccept a lower tonnage figure. Thus a production cap of 2.75 tons per acreshould be established for any production unit approved for participationin a diversion program. Messrs. Rebensdorf and Hansen filed briefs in opposition to this proposal,along with several other producers who submitted form letters in opposition.These briefs asserted that producers should not be ``penalized'' by theCommittee for increasing their yields per acre. Also, the briefs indicatedthat they were of the view that the proposed production cap would not solvethe problem of inflating crop yields under the RDP. As indicated abovethe RDP is a voluntary program, and no producer is required to participate.If producers have developed methods to increase their yields per acre,those producers can choose to produce that crop rather than participatein the RDP. The Committee also requested the authority to decrease the production capbelow the 2.75 ton per acre level. In years when damaging frosts or rainsoccur, average production levels could be reduced. Such damage would occurin the year prior to the year in which producers apply for an RDP. TheCommittee believes that the production cap should also reflect such a decrease,in recognition of the prior year's crop damage. The Department considersthat changes in the tonnage level, reductions below the established 2.75ton level or other adjustments, should be subject to approval by the Secretary.Therefore, the Committee should be authorized to recommend reductions inthe 2.75 ton per acre cap, subject to informal rulemaking procedures andthe approval of the Secretary. It is intended that the Committee wouldrecommend any such reduction at the same time that the diversion tonnagefor that season is announced. If there is not a recommendation for a reductionin the 2.75 ton per acre cap, the cap would remain at 2.75 tons for anydiversion program that may be recommended by the Committee. (4) Section 989.66 (b)(1), (b)(4) and (d) should be amended to permit handlersto set aside reconditioned raisins to satisfy their reserve pool obligationsand also to require handlers to set aside raisins in the reserve pool thatmeet the average incoming maturity level of raisins acquired by each handlerduring the applicable crop year. Raisins with certain defects are reconditioned by the handler to bringthe raisins within acceptable quality standards. For example, raisins embeddedwith sand could be run through a hot water bath and then through a highpressure wash to remove the sand. The reconditioning process usually removesthe ``bloom'' from the raisins. Bloom is a widely accepted term withinthe industry which describes the natural waxy coating on the surface ofraisins which would generally be removed by washing, processing or reconditioning.The record indicates that experience has shown that raisins with bloomwill store for longer periods without significant deterioration than raisinswith the bloom removed. Non-reconditioned raisins with the bloom stillvisible are referred to as natural condition raisins. Currently, the marketing order does not permit reconditioned raisins inthe reserve pool. However, the order does authorize the reconditioningof raisins, if necessary, to bring them up to acceptable quality standardsto be acquired by handlers. Evidence presented at the hearing showed thatnot allowing reconditioned raisins in the reserve pool may cause a burdenon handlers. During certain times of the year, handlers may not have enoughnatural condition raisins on hand to satisfy their reserve obligationsand may have to purchase natural condition raisins from other handlersin order to meet such obligations. Also, handlers could refuse to buy reconditionedraisins from producers if they cannot be set aside for reserve pool purposes.Evidence indicated that this proposal may benefit producers by providingadditional markets (i.e., reserve pool outlets) for reconditioned raisins.Since reconditioned raisins may not have the same storage characteristicsas natural condition raisins, handlers would be expected to process theseraisins for reserve pool sales for their own use first by blending themwith better quality raisins in order to bring the level of quality up toconsumer standards. Generally, reconditioned raisins are darker than thedesired color and are usually sold at a discounted price for this reason.Therefore, blending is usually done to ensure a better quality lot of raisins.Pursuant to the raisin marketing order, the Committee could request handlersto deliver non-reconditioned reserve pool raisins (natural condition) toother handlers. The Committee would like this provision to remain unchangedin the marketing order to ensure the Committee and other handlers of thequality of the raisins they would be receiving and released for likelyreserve pool sales. The Committee may request such delivery from handlerto satisfy reserve pool sales to other handlers that have insufficientraisins on their premises for such sales. These sales could include schoollunch, export incentive sales and other reserve pool sales. In the event that handlers have only reconditioned raisins on their premisesin the reserve pool, they could deliver packed raisins to the Committee.In addition, handlers could substitute free tonnage supply natural conditionraisins for reconditioned raisins that are in the reserve pool, in orderto satisfy a request from the Committee. The record also indicated that there will be no additional reserve poolcosts to producers by allowing reconditioned raisins in the reserve pools,since producers who deliver raisins in need of reconditioning usually payfor all reconditioning costs required on such producer's lot of raisins.Evidence showed that the proposal to allow reconditioned raisins in thereserve pool would work in conjunction with the proposed requirement forreserve pool raisins to meet an aggregate maturity level. Maturity refersto the amount of well-matured raisins in a particular lot. To meet acceptablestandards, a lot of raisins must contain at least 50 percent well-maturedraisins. It was testified that a handler's overall average maturity levelis usually between 58 and 62 percent. The proposed requirement would preventhandlers from setting aside the lowest quality raisins on their premisesthat meet acceptable grade standards to satisfy their reserve pool obligations.The record indicated that lower maturity raisins are difficult to reconditionand heavy processing losses are often experienced. In addition, the resultantproduct is generally below average quality levels. The record indicated that some handlers have experienced problems in thepast when they have insufficient reserve pool raisins stored on their ownpremises to satisfy a Committee release of reserve pool raisins to theirown ownership for their own sales. Such handlers then have to purchaseadditional reserve raisins from other handlers. Raisins purchased fromother handlers have often been of low maturity. In some cases, the conditionof the low maturity raisins has deteriorated and the acquiring handlerhas had to further process or blend the raisins to bring them up to acceptablestandards before a reserve pool sale could be made.Thus, the record indicates that each handler's reserve pool obligationraisins should meet such handler's own average for maturity for that cropyear, with a 2 percent allowance (subject to the minimum 50 percent maturitylevel). This proposal would improve the overall quality of the reservepools, since handlers would no longer be allowed to set aside their lowerquality raisins for the reserve pool.(5) The Notice of Hearing contained proposed amendments of andSection; 989.67(g)which would authorize the Committee to: Charge handlers interest and latepayment charges if handlers fail to pay for reserve pool raisins purchasedfrom the Committee; refuse to sell to handlers reserve pool raisins forexport, non-competitive uses, and free tonnage raisins pursuant to salesunder andSection; 989.54(g) and andSection; 989.67(j), for not complying withprovisions of the marketing order; and provide for handler appeals of theseCommittee actions pursuant to andSection; 989.67(g).The marketing order currently authorizes the Committee to refuse to sellreserve tonnage raisins for export purposes only to any handler who: (a)Is in default on any previous purchase of reserve tonnage raisins fromthe Committee; (b) is not in compliance with the provisions of a salesagreement covering reserve tonnage raisins; or (c) signifies an intentionto sell reserve tonnage to or through any person who has previously failedto complete a sale of reserve tonnage raisins to a foreign buyer in aneligible export market. All of these reasons directly relate to failuresin dealings with reserve tonnage raisins.The Committee proposed to deny reserve pool sales to handlers when theyare allegedly not complying with various provisions of the marketing order.This is not authorized under the provisions of the Act. The Act specificallyprovides remedies under Section 608 (a) and (c)(14) for handlers not complyingwith marketing order provisions. Accordingly, the Committee should handlesuch compliance actions by submitting them to the Department to be resolvedunder appropriate remedies specified in the Act. Therefore, this proposalis denied and not included in this recommended decision. The redesignatedparagraph (g)(1) under andSection; 989.67 would remain unchanged and theappeal procedure to review actions taken by the Committee under this sectionwould be retained as paragraph (g)(3). The procedure would include notificationto the handler, an informal hearing before an appeals subcommittee, andan appeal to the full Committee. The appeals subcommittee would consistof three to five members of the full Committee. The appeal to the fullCommittee would be a final action that would exhaust the informal appealsprocedure.Evidence adduced at the hearing did support an interest and late paymentcharge to be imposed on handlers who fail to pay for reserve pool raisinspurchased from the Committee. For example, all handlers may purchase reservepool raisins for free tonnage use each November under andSection; 989.54(g)of the order. The purchase agreement between the Committee (the Committeeadministers the reserve pool for the producer/equity holders) and the handlerspecifies the terms and conditions of the specific sale which includesthe date that payment is due for the raisins. Evidence showed that if thehandler is late in making the required payment, the handler should be subjectto late payment and interest charges. Equity holders in the reserve poolsare paid according to the proceeds from reserve pool sales to handlers,thus, handlers who are late in paying for reserve pool raisins cause delaysin payments to the equity holders of the pool. Funds received from interestand late payment charges should be distributed to the equity holders.The hearing record showed that the interest rate to be incurred by handlersin default on reserve pool sales should be the prime rate at the bank wherethe Committee's funds are deposited, plus 2 percent. The provision in theNotice of Hearing reflected several different interest rates. The hearingrecord reflects that it was the Committee's intent, and record evidencesupports, that the interest rate should be the prime rate at the bank wherethe majority of the Committee's administrative funds are deposited, plus2 percent. The interest rate, as proposed, would accrue only on the principalamount owed and would be added to the handler's monthly bill until thehandler's delinquent amount owed plus applicable interest charges havebeen paid.The record indicated that the Committee should have the authority to recommendan increase in the interest rate from the prime rate plus 2 percent, tothe prime rate plus a different percentage. The Committee requested thatthis alternate interest rate would apply on an individual handler basisdepending on how severely the handler violated the purchase agreement.However, the Act requires that all handlers be treated equitably undermarketing orders. Therefore, such a change in the rate of interest to beapplied individually to handlers by the Committee is not authorized bythe Act. The Committee, however, should be authorized to recommend changesin the interest rate applied uniformly to all handlers, subject to approvalby the Secretary through informal rulemaking procedures. (6) The proposed amendment to andSection; 989.27 would have required thatno owner, partner, or employee of a handler could be selected to representindependent producer members on the Committee, regardless of whether ornot such individuals are also producers. A proponent of this proposed amendmenttestified that producers with an interest in handler operations cannotact as ``true'' Committee producer members because of an alleged conflictof interest.Opponents, however, testified that producers who are also handlers arearticulate and have developed good communication skills while conductingbusiness within the raisin industry. Persons who fit this category believethat their experience as handlers can only benefit them in representingindependent producers who are also on the Committee. Opponents to the proposaltestified that producers who are also handlers are able to view both sidesof issues that are raised at Committee meetings and are able to make sounddecisions. Opponents testified that a possible solution would be to haveindependent growers actively solicit other independent growers to attendthe nomination meetings and nominate only non-handler producers as representativesif independent producers are dissatisfied with producer/handler representatives.Messrs. Hansen (Committee producer member) and Barsarian (representingMadera Packing Co.) filed briefs concerning this proposal. Both opposedthe proposal on the basis that producers who are also handlers have moreknowledge of the raisin industry and understand the operations of the marketingorder. Therefore, it is beneficial to have producers who are also handlerson the Committee to represent independent producer interests. Accordingly, the record evidence does not support the amendment to requireCommittee independent producer members to be solely producers and haveno interest in handler operations. In addition, the proposal to authorizemail balloting procedures for the nomination of independent producer memberswill provide all independent producers additional opportunity to selectthose individuals they feel will best represent their interests. Therefore,this proposed amendment is not adopted. (7) Section 989.28, ``Term of Office,'' should be amended to provide fora six-year limit on Committee member's tenure. It is the Department's view that a limit on tenure for Committee membersimproves representation on marketing order committees by allowing for differentand more contemporary ideas, and that such a limit will be beneficial tothe Committee's operations. The Department's goal is to encourage and fosterto the maximum extent possible, broad-based participation by all membersof the regulated community in the administration of the marketing order.This objective is best met by such a limitation. Proponents testified thatthe tenure limitation would improve representation and would be beneficialto the operation of the Committee. This change is consistent with the Secretary's ``Guidelines for Fruit,Vegetable, and Specialty Crop Marketing Orders,'' which provides for limitingcommittee tenure of members and alternates. The Department's policy pursuantto the guidelines is that a committee member's consecutive service be limitedto a total of six years. Therefore, it is proposed that the order should be amended to limit thetenure of members to three full consecutive terms. Any member would becomeineligible to serve on the committee after having served three full consecutiveterms. Such individuals could again become eligible to serve on the Committeeby not serving on the Committee for one full term as either a member oralternate member. Because of the large size of the Committee (47 members and an alternatemember for each), the tenure limitation should apply only to Committeemembers. Alternate Committee members serve in the place of members in theevent of the member's absence at a particular meeting. Generally, it takesseveral years for alternate members to become knowledgeable about the operationsof the marketing order. Often, alternate members are nominated and selectedto serve as members on the Committee only after they have gained experiencein marketing order matters by serving first as alternates. It is unlikely that the tenure requirements would cause all members, oreven a majority of the members, to leave the Committee at any one timebecause of the natural turnover between members and alternate members.Therefore, it would serve no useful purpose to limit the tenure of alternatemembers. This change in tenure requirements should become effective beginningwith the 1990 term of office. Members who have served on the Committeefor six consecutive years would not be eligible for reelection for theterm of office which begins May 1, 1996. Briefs were filed by Messrs. Hansen and Kriebel, and numerous producerswho filed the same letter, opposing this proposal. The briefs stated thatCommittee members need more time to become familiar with the operationsof the order and the Committee would lose needed experience and continuityin members by imposing such a limitation. Opponents to the proposal atthe hearing also testified that the Committee experiences a natural turnoverof member representatives, and imposing an artificial turnover would causethe Committee to lose experience, continuity and expertise among its members.One opponent testified that it takes five to six years for a Committeemember to really understand Committee operations. However, as discussedabove, such expertise can be developed by serving as an alternate member.Also, it is unlikely that Committee members would be nominated to serveon the Committee by the industry unless such members had demonstrated totheir constituents that they had the necessary qualifications, experience,and like, to adequately represent them on the Committee. It is the Department's view that a limit on tenure for Committee memberswill improve representation on marketing order committees and will be beneficialto the Committee's operations. Thus, in conformance with this policy, suchtenure limitations should be adopted. (8) The order should be amended, as hereinafter set forth, to require referendato be held every six years relative to the continuance of the order. The Secretary of Agriculture has determined that continuance referendaare an effective means for ascertaining whether producers favor continuationof marketing order programs. Currently, the order and the Act provide thatthe Secretary shall terminate the marketing order program whenever, throughthe conduct of a referendum, it is indicated that a majority of all producersfavor termination and such majority produced more than 50 percent of thecommodity for market during a representative period. Since less than 50percent of all producers usually participate in a referendum, it is difficultto determine producer support or opposition for termination of an order.Thus, to provide a basis for determining whether producers favor continuanceof the order, a new paragraph (d) should be added to andSection;989.91 toprovide for continuance referenda. Current paragraph (d) should be redesignatedas paragraph (e). Also, proponents at the hearing testified that considerationregarding continuance of the order should be based on two-thirds of theproducers voting in the referendum or producers of two-thirds of the volumeof raisins represented in the referendum. Opponents to the proposal also favored the concept for the conduct of continuancereferenda. However, they opposed the two-thirds vote requirement. Theytestified that a simple majority of the producers voting, who representa simple majority of the tonnage voting, should be adequate to indicateproducer sentiment. They also terminated that one-third of the industryshould not be allowed to control decades of program planning and experience.They claimed that majority rule should determine its continuance. Also,one opponent suggested that continuance referenda be scheduled and completednot later than January 1 of any crop year in order to plan accordingly.The Committee plans many programs months in advance and will need to knowthe results of any such referendum as soon as possible after it is conducted.The results of continuance referenda should be based upon the same percentageof support required in section 8c(8) of the Act with respect to producerapproval of the issuance of a marketing order. This requirement is consideredadequate to measure producer support to continue the marketing order. TheSecretary would consider termination of the order if less than two-thirdsof the producers voting in the referendum and producers of less than two-thirdsof the volume of raisins represented in the referendum favor continuance.In evaluating the merits of continuance versus termination, the Secretaryshould not only consider the results of the referendum but also shouldconsider all other relevant information concerning the operation of theorder and the relative benefits and disadvantages to producers, handlers,and consumers in order to determine whether continued operation of theorder would tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act. In thisregard, in the event of an adverse vote by producers in a continuance referendum,the Secretary may solicit input from the public through meetings, pressreleases, or other means. In any event, section 8c(16)(B) of the Act requires the Secretary to terminatethe order whenever the Secretary finds that the majority of all producersfavor termination, and that such majority produced more than 50 percentof the commodity for market. To be effective, termination of the order,resulting from any referendum, should be announced on or before the lastday of the then current crop year. The crop year ends July 31. This dateprecedes the beginning of the Committee's operation for a new crop yearand is considered to be an appropriate time to gradually terminate theoperations of the order. As stated, the Secretary's ``Guidelines For Fruit, Vegetable, and SpecialtyCrop Marketing Orders'' provide for periodic referenda to allow producersthe opportunity to indicate their support for or rejection of a marketingorder. It is the position of the Department that periodic referenda ensurethat marketing order programs continue to be accountable to their producers,obligate producers to evaluate their programs periodically, and involvethem more closely in their operation. The record evidence supports thesegoals. Section 989.91(d) has been revised in this recommended decision for clarityand to reflect language more common to marketing order provisions in otherorders that provide for continuance referenda. <ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Briefs of Interested Persons</ITAG>Briefs, proposed findings and conclusions, and the evidence in the recordwere considered in making the findings and conclusions set forth in thisrecommended decision. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested persons are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsof this recommended decision, the requests to make such findings or toreach such conclusions are denied. <ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings</ITAG>Upon the basis of the record it is found that: (1) The findings hereinafter set forth are supplementary to the previousfindings and determination which were made in connection with the issuanceof the marketing agreement and order and each previously issued amendmentthereto. Except insofar as such findings and determination may be in conflictwith the findings and determinations set forth herein, all of the saidprior findings and determination are hereby ratified and affirmed; (2) The marketing agreement and order, as amended, and as hereby proposedto be further amended, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, willtend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act; (3) The marketing agreement and order, as amended, and as hereby proposedto be further amended, regulate the handling of raisins grown in the productionarea in the same manner as, and are applicable only to, persons in therespective classes of commercial and industrial activity specified in themarketing agreement and order upon which a hearing has been held; (4) The marketing agreement and order, as amended, and as hereby proposedto be further amended, are limited in their application to the smallestregional production area which is practicable, consistent with carryingout the declared policy of the Act, and the issuance of several ordersapplicable to subdivisions of the production area would not effectivelycarry out the declared policy of the Act; and (5) All handling of raisins grown in the production area as defined inthe marketing agreement and order, as amended, and as hereby proposed tobe further amended, is in the current of interstate or foreign commerceor directly burdens, obstructs or affects such commerce. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 989</ITAG>Marketing agreements and orders, Raisins, Grapes, California. <ITAG tagnum="84">Recommended Further Amendment of the Marketing Agreement and Order</ITAG>The following amendment of the marketing agreement and order, both as amended,is recommended as the detailed means by which the foregoing conclusionsmay be carried out: <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 989_RAISINS PRODUCED FROM GRAPES GROWN IN CALIFORNIA</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 7 CFR Part 989 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-674.</ITAG>2. Section 989.28 is revised as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;989.28</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Term of office.</ITAG>The term of office of all representatives serving on the committee shallbe two years and shall end on April 30 of even numbered calendar years,but each such member and alternate member shall continue to serve untiltheir successor is selected and has qualified. Beginning with the 1990term of office, no member shall serve more than three full consecutiveterms: <T3>Provided,</T3> That members serving three consecutive terms could againbecome eligible to serve on the committee by not serving for one full termas either a member or alternate member. 3. Section 989.29 is amended by revising paragraph (b)(2) and paragraph(b)(4) as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;989.29 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Initial members and nomination of successor members. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG>(b) * * *<ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG>(2)(i) Any producer representing independent producers and producers whoare affiliated with cooperative marketing association(s) handling lessthan 10 percent of the total raisin acquisitions during the preceding cropyear must have produced grapes which were made into raisins in the particulardistrict for which they are nominated, to represent said district as aproducer member or alternate producer member on the committee. In the eventany such nominees are engaged as producers in more than one district theymay be a nominee for only one district. One or more producers may be nominatedfor each such producer member or alternate member position. (ii) Each such producer whose name is offered in nomination shall be giventhe opportunity to provide the committee a short statement outlining theirqualifications and desire to represent on the committee independent producersor producers who are affiliated with cooperative marketing associationshandling less than 10 percent of the total raisin acquisitions during thepreceding crop year. These brief statements, together with a ballot andvoting instructions, shall be mailed to all independent producers and producerswho are affiliated with cooperative marketing associations handling lessthan 10 percent of the total raisin acquisitions during the preceding cropyear of record with the committee in each district. The producer receivingthe highest number of votes shall be designated as the first member nominee,the second highest shall be designated as the second member nominee oralternate member nominee, as the case may be, until nominees for all memberand alternate member positions have been filled. (iii) Each independent producer and producers affiliated with cooperativemarketing association(s) handling less than 10 percent of the total raisinacquisitions during the preceding crop year shall cast only one vote withrespect to each position for which nominations are to be made. Write-incandidates shall be accepted. The person receiving the most votes withrespect to each position to be filled, in accordance with paragraph (b)(2)(ii)of this section, shall be the person to be certified to the Secretary asthe nominee. The committee may, subject to the approval of the Secretary,establish rules and regulations to effectuate this section. <ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG>(4) Each vote cast shall be on behalf of the person voting, the person'sagent, subsidiaries, affiliates, and representatives. Voting at each handlermeeting shall be in person. The results of each ballot at each handlermeeting shall be announced at that meeting. <ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG>4. Section 989.39 is revised as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 989.39 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Compensation and expenses.</ITAG>The members and alternate members of the committee shall serve withoutcompensation, but shall be allowed their necessary expenses as approvedby the committee.5. Section 989.56 is amended by revising paragraphs (a) and (c) as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 989.56 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Raisin diversion program.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Announcement of program. </T3>On or before November 30 of each cropyear, the committee shall hold a meeting to review production data, supplydata, demand data, including anticipated demand to all potential marketoutlets, desirable carryout inventory and other matters relating to thequantity of raisins of all varietal types. When the committee determinesthat raisins exist in the reserve pool in excess of projected market needsfor any varietal type, it may announce the amount of such tonnage eligiblefor diversion during the subsequent crop year. As the same time, the committeeshall determine and announce to producers, handlers, and the cooperativebargaining association(s) the allowable harvest cost to be applicable tosuch diversion tonnage. A production cap of 2.75 tons of raisins per acreshall be established for any production unit approved for participationin a diversion program. The committee, with the approval of the Secretary,may recommend at the same time that the diversion tonnage for that seasonis announced, a change in the production cap for that season's diversionprogram of less than 2.75 tons per acre for any production unit approvedfor the diversion program.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) <T3>Issuance of diversion certificates. </T3>After the committee announcesa raisin diversion program, any producer may divert grapes of their ownproduction and receive from the committee a diversion certificate in accordancewith the applicable rules and regulations. Such certificates may only besubmitted by producers to handlers in accordance with applicable rulesand regulations. Diversion certificates issued by the committee shall applyto a specific production unit and shall be equal to the creditable fruitweight, not to exceed the production cap established pursuant to paragraph(a) of this section, of such raisins produced on such unit during the priorcrop year or the last prior crop year eligible for such diversion: <T3>Provided, </T3>That in the case of a production unit, or partial productionunit, removed from production through vine removal or other means establishedby the committee, it may issue a diversion certificate in an amount greaterthan the creditable fruit weight of the raisins produced therein or theproduction cap applicable.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>6. Section 989.66 is amended by revising paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(4), and(d) as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 989.66 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">reserve tonnage generally.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b)(1) Each handler shall hold in storage all reserve tonnage raisins acquiredby such handler and all reserve tonnage transferred to such handler bythe committee until such handler has been relieved of such responsibilityby the committee, either by delivery to the committee or otherwise. Suchhandler shall store such reserve tonnage raisins in such manner as willmaintain the raisins in the same condition as when such handler acquiredthem, except for normal and natural deterioration and shrinkage, and exceptfor loss through fire, acts of God or other conditions beyond the handler'scontrol.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(4) The committee may, after giving reasonable notice, require a handlerto deliver to it, or to anyone designated by it, at such handler's warehouseor at such other place as the raisins may be stored, part or all of thereserve tonnage raisins held by such handler. Reserve tonnage raisins deliveredby any handler to the committee, or to any person designated by it, inthe form of natural condition raisins shall in the aggregate be not morethan 2 percent less than the average maturity quality of all raisins suchhandler acquired during the applicable crop year. The committee may requirethat such delivery consist of natural condition raisins with the bloomstill visible, or it may arrange for such delivery to consist of packedraisins.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) Reserve tonnage raisins delivered by any handler to the committee,or to any person designated by it, whether in the form of natural conditionraisins with the bloom still visible or packed raisins shall meet the applicableminimum grade and condition standards, except for normal and natural deterioration.The committee shall have the authority to require, in its discretion andat its expense, such reinspection and certification of reserve pool tonnageraisins as it may deem necessary.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>7. Section 989.67 is amended by revising paragraph (g) as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 989.67 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Disposal of reserve raisins. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g)(1) The committee may, subject to review by the Secretary, refuse tosell reserve tonnage raisins for export: (i) To any handler who is in default on any previous purchase of reservetonnage raisins from the committee; (ii) to any handler currently not incompliance with the provisions of a sales agreement covering reserve tonnageraisins, executed by such handler with the committee; or (iii) To any handler who signifies an intention to sell reserve tonnageto or through any person who has previously failed to complete a sale ofreserve tonnage raisins to a foreign buyer and such raisins remain to beexported and remain unsold to any foreign buyer in an eligible export market.(2) Handlers who are in default of timely payment under any purchase agreementare subject to an interest and late payment charge(s) recommended by thecommittee and approved by the Secretary on the delinquent amount that isowed the committee. The interest charge shall be the current prime rateplus 2 percent established by the bank in which the committee has its administrativeassessment funds deposited, on the day the amount owed becomes delinquent;and further, that such rate of interest be added to the bill monthly untilthe handler's delinquent amount owed plus applicable interest has beenpaid: <T3>Provided, </T3>That the committee, with the approval of the Secretary,may recommend changes in the rate of interest to another rate of interest.When the committee determines to change the rate of interest or a latepayment charge is needed, and such change is approved by the Secretary,the committee shall announce the change in the rate of interest or therate of late payment charge through a mailing by the committee to handlers.(3) <T3>Appeals. </T3>If a determination is made by the committee that a handlerhas not complied with the provisions of this section and any actions allowedunder this section are taken against the handler, such handler may requesta hearing before an appeals subcommittee established by the committee.If the handler disagrees with the subcommittee's decisions, the handlermay request the committee to review the subcommittee's decision. The committeemay, subject to the approval of the Secretary, establish additional proceduresconcerning appeals procedures. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>8. Section 989.91 is amended by redesignating and revising paragraph (d)as paragraph (e), and adding a new paragraph (d) as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 989.91 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Suspension or termination. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) The Secretary shall conduct a referendum in crop year 1993-94 and everysix years thereafter to ascertain whether continuance of this amended subpartis favored by raisin producers. The Secretary may terminate the provisionsof this amend subpart at the end of any crop year in which the Secretaryhas found that continuance of this subpart is not favored by producers,who during a representative period determined by the Secretary, have beenengaged in the production for market of grapes used in the production ofraisins in the State of California. Such termination shall be effectiveonly if announced before July 31 of the then current crop year. (e) The provisions of the amended subpart shall, in any event, terminatewhenever the provisions of the Act authorizing them cease to be in effect.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: July 21, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J. Patrick Boyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-16997 Filed 7-27-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>