<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881017-0012 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-17-88.f2.A1011</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR Part 52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRL-3461-1]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plans; Illinois</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The USEPA announces disapproval of the Chicago portionof the Illinois State Implementation Plan (SIP) for Ozone and the extensionunder section 110(a)(2)(I) of the Clean Air Act (Act) of a pre-existingconstruction ban on new and modified major sources of volatile organiccompounds (VOC), a precursor of ozone pollution, located in that area.USEPA's action is based upon a plan which was submitted by the State tosatisfy the requirements of Part D of the Act.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>The final rulemaking becomes effective on November16, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Copies of the SIP revisions, public comments on thenotice of proposed rulemaking and other materials relating to this rulemakingare available for inspection at the following addresses: (It is recommendedthat you telephone Randolph O. Cano, at (312) 886-6036, before visitingthe Regional V Office).<ITAG tagnum="15">U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region V, Air and RadiationBranch, 230 South Dearborn Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Air PollutionControl, 2200 Churchill Road, Springfield, Illinois 62706.</ITAG>A copy of today's disapproved revisions to the Illinois SIP is availablefor inspection at: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Public InformationReference Unit, 401 M Street SW., Washington, DC 20460.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Randolph O. Cano, Air and RadiationBranch (5AR-26), Environmental Protection Agency, Region V, Chicago, Illinois60604, (312) 886-6036.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Introduction</ITAG>On July 14, 1987 (52 FR 26424), the United States Environmental ProtectionAgency (USEPA) proposed to disapprove a revision to the Illinois SIP becausethe revision did not satisfy the requirements of Part D of the Act. Whilethe July 4, 1987, proposed rulemaking concerned the SIP for the Illinoisportion of both the Chicago and East St. Louis Metropolitan areas, today'sfinal rule only concerns the SIP for the Illinois portion of Chicago area.The Chicago area ozone demonstration includes six Counties: Cook, DuPage,Kane, Lake, McHenry and Will. Four of these Counties, Cook, DuPage, Kaneand Lake, are presently designated as not attaining the National AmbientAir Quality Standards (NAAQS) for ozone. USEPA's final action on the SIPfor the East St. Louis area will be the subject of a separate rulemaking.In the July 14, 1987 notice USEPA cited several deficiencies which areparaphrased below.1. The SIP revision did not contain a persuasive demonstration that theChicago ozone nonattainment area would attain compliance with the ozonenational ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) by December 31, 1987, orany near-term, fixed date thereafter. USEPA based this conclusion on twofacts. First, the State was behind schedule in adopting all stationarysource control measures. Thus it was unlikely that Illinois could achieveall the projected emission reductions by December 31, 1987 or even shortlythereafter. Second, air quality data for 1984-1986 showed little or noimprovement over the 1979-81 peak levels; that information called intoquestion whether or not the quality of emission reductions that the planhad projected would be achieved by the control measures adopted would beenough to produce attainment in the near term.2. Due to delays in adopting certain control measures, the State failedto demonstrate reasonable further progress (RFP) toward attainment of theOzone NAAQS.3. The State failed to adopt the required IEPA/Secretary of State jointmemorandum <T3>Technical Procedures for Enforcement,</T3> an essential portion ofIllinois' vehicle inspection and maintenance program.(It should be noted that the joint memorandum was finally adopted and submittedto USEPA on July 1, 1987, thereby eliminating this third deficiency.)USEPA also proposed to extend a pre-existing major source constructionban imposed pursuant to section 110(a)(2)(I) of the Act for the Illinoisportions of the Chicago ozone nonattainment area.Section 110(a)(2)(I) growth restrictions have been in effect in all Illinoisprimary nonattainment areas (as to all pollutants for which those areasare designated primary nonattainment) since May 26, 1981, when the SeventhCircuit Court of Appeals invalidated USEPA's approval of the State's newsource review rules on State law procedural grounds. See <T3>CBE v. EPA,</T3> 649 F.2d 522 (7th Cir. 1987).USEPA received comments on the General Preamble to the July 14, 1987 proposeddisapproval of a number of ozone and carbon monoxide plans and on the specificproposal to disapprove the Illinois SIP revision. This final rulemakingresponds only to the comments on the proposal to disapprove the IllinoisOzone SIP. USEPA will respond to comments on the General Preamble thatdo not relate to the Illinois SIP rulemaking in a subsequent <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice, in connection with USEPA's final Post-1987Ozone Nonattainment Policy.Today's final rulemaking disapproves that portion of the Illinois OzoneSIP which deals with the Chicago nonattainment area because it does notsatisfy the requirements of Part D of the Act. In particular, the planneither includes a persuasive demonstration that the Chicago area willattain the ozone NAAQS by any near-term fixed date, nor shows reasonablefurther progress toward attainment of the ozone NAAQS. In the future, USEPAwill take separate rulemaking action on each component of the Illinoisplan other than the attainment and RFP demonstrations for Chicago, whichare formally disapproved today. Some of the comments that follow deal withboth the Chicago and East St. Louis areas. Today, USEPA will respond onlywith regard to comments related to Chicago. In the future, USEPA will takeformal rulemaking action with respect to the East St. Louis portion ofthe Illinois Ozone SIP revision.This final rulemaking also extends the construction ban already imposedpursuant to Section 110(a)(2)(I) of the Act, on major new stationary sourcesand major modifications of stationary sources of VOC (precursor of ambientozone) in the four counties presently designated nonattainment within theIllinois portion of the Chicago ozone demonstration area. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Responses to Comments on the Proposed Rulemaking </ITAG>Most of the comments summarized below were submitted by Michael J. Hayes,Manager of the Division of Air Pollution Control of IEPA on October 29,1987. The Illinois Chamber of Commerce submitted comments, which are addressedin the responses below. General comments submitted by D. Theiler of theState of Wisconsin are addressed here, or in the Response to comments onaction relating to the proposed disapproval of the Indiana SIP, publishedseparately in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. 1. Comment Since the July 14, 1987 notice of proposed rulemaking fails to give noticeof what the USEPA intends by its proposal, as required by the Federal AdministrativeProcedures Act, the USEPA must repropose, specifying what action it istaking, on what elements, and what its rationale is. In its July 14, 1987notice of proposed rulemaking, the USEPA proposed to disapprove the IllinoisOzone SIP. The notice, however, does not state the precise nature of thatdisapproval. Nowhere does the USEPA propose to disapprove any specificelement of Illinois' Ozone SIP submittal. If USEPA is proposing to disapproveIllinois' attainment demonstration, this should be specifically stated,as should the basis for, and consequences of the disapproval. An importantissue underlies the uncertainties of USEPA's proposed rulemaking. Thisissue is whether USEPA is taking the position that, or reviewing the SIPon the basis of a standard which means that, the USEPA can never approvethe 1982 Ozone SIP submittal of the State of Illinois. It must be notedthat Illinois has submitted to the USEPA the same rules which have ledto USEPA approval of the Ozone SIPs of other States. It is, therefore,arbitrary and capricious to disapprove the SIP submittal for Illinois,especially in light of the potential consequences of such a disapproval.USEPA's position on the Illinois SIP is a matter of vital interest andconcern to the State, to which adequate notice and an opportunity to commentmust be provided. Specifically, would USEPA's proposed rulemaking meanthat USEPA will not be able to approve otherwise approvable elements ofthe SIP even after the SIP itself has already been disapproved? Response The USEPA makes it very clear, in its proposed rulemaking of July 14, 1987(52 FR 26424), that it is proposing to disapprove the Illinois Ozone SIPbecause it does not meet all requirements of Part D of the Act. In particular,the plan does not demonstrate timely attainment of the ozone NAAQS andreasonable further progress toward attainment during the interim. Section172(a)(2) of the Act requires that the SIP revision provide for attainmentof the primary NAAQS for photochemical oxidants (now covered by the ozoneNAAQS) by no later than December 31, 1987. Section 172(b)(3) requires thatthe SIP revision provide for reasonable further progress (RFP) in the interim.The proposed rulemaking makes it clear that the USEPA does not believethat Illinois' 1982 SIP revision meets either of these requirements basedon recent air quality data and delays in the adoption and implementationof mobile and stationary source control measures. The July 14, 1987 (52 FR 26427) proposed rulemaking also states that ``[i]nseparate <T4>Federal Register</T4> notices, USEPA will propose rulemaking on thestationary and mobile source control measures adopted by the State''. Thus,while the Part D plan, as a whole, cannot be approved, USEPA will takerulemaking action on separate components of the plan. Some of those componentsmight be approved as part of the federally enforceable SIP if they wouldnot interfere with RFP and timely attainment. Since USEPA cannot approvethe Part D plan as a whole, USEPA proposed to maintain, pursuant to section110(a)(2)(I) of the Act, an existing major new source construction andmajor source modification ban for the Chicago ozone nonattainment areauntil such time as the SIP deficiencies are eliminated and the SIP, asa whole, is approved. On November 24, 1987 (52 FR 45044), USEPA proposed a policy of dealingwith areas that failed to demonstrate attainment by the December 31, 1987attainment date. After reviewing all public comments on that proposed policy,and in the absence of any Congressional action on amendments to the CleanAir Act, USEPA intends to publish a final policy which will further delineatethe type of SIP revision Illinois must submit to lift the ban resultingfrom today's disapproval of the Illinois ozone attainment demonstrationfor the Chicago area. IEPA asserts that USEPA is acting arbitrarily because it proposes to disapproverules here which it has approved in other instances. Today's rulemaking,however, does not concern itself with individual rules to control volatileorganic compound emissions from stationary and mobile sources but ratherthe adequacy of the control strategy as a whole to attain and maintainthe ozone NAAQS. USEPA has indeed approved Part D ozone plans for otherareas when those plans included the same types of rules Illinois has beenpromulgating. However, those approvals were based on records and air qualitydata that showed at the time that those plans would produce timely attainment.Subsequent events, including delays in Illinois' rulemaking and new airquality data, make approval of the Illinois SIP at this time unwarranted.The issue of whether the individual Illinois rules will meet particularPart D requirements (e.g., RACT) will be addressed in separate <T4>Federal Register</T4> notices. 2. Comment USEPA has arbitrarily selected Illinois and several other States for disapprovalof Ozone SIPs and has done so for reasons not stated in the notice or understoodby Illinois. The July 14, 1987, proposed rulemakings selected eight Statesfor action on pending Ozone and Carbon Monoxide (CO) SIPs. There were noproposed approvals in the package of proposed rulemakings. There appearsto be no consistent basis for the selection of the States singled out forspecial action. This is particularly true since USEPA has had the legalobligation to act upon the SIPs for an extended period of time. Actingon some States' SIPs and not on others' creates arbitrary results for theseStates, including Illinois. The group of States for which proposals were made in the July 14, 1987,<T4>Federal Register</T4> does not include all States without approvedOzone SIPs. The proposal also does not include all areas which USEPA believeswill have ozone nonattainment problems after the end of 1987. Many Stateswith extension areas for which USEPA has not acted on SIPs were not proposedfor disapproval by the USEPA. These areas include: Detroit, Michigan; Cleveland,Ohio; Cincinnati, Ohio; and Richmond, Virginia. There are also numerousareas for which USEPA considers States not to have submitted adequate OzoneSIPs in response to SIP calls, such as for: Birmingham, Alabama; Phoenix,Arizona; Santa Barbara, California; Miami, Florida; Baton Rouge, Louisiana;Kansas City, Missouri; Tulsa, Oklahoma; Memphis, Tennessee; and El Paso,Texas. USEPA has also proposed no disapprovals for the numerous States,many with significant nonattainment areas, which have SIPs that were conditionallyapproved, but for which outstanding conditions have not been satisfied.Some States have SIPs with outstanding conditions comparable in air qualitysignificance to the deficiencies USEPA is citing as the basis for the proposeddisapproval of SIPs cited in the July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking; yetthe USEPA is not proposing to disapprove any of the unsatisfied conditionsor the overall SIPs due to those failures. This issue was raised with USEPA in a June 11, 1987 letter from MichaelJ. Hayes, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA), to J. CraigPotter (USEPA). In the July 20, 1987, USEPA response, the rationale fordisapproval is offered: `` * * * for all of the SIPs recently proposedfor disapproval, the reason for the proposed action was that * * * theseSIPs did not, in USEPA's opinion, fulfill the Clean Air Act requirementto demonstrate attainment by a near-term fixed date.'' As discussed, nodisapprovals have been proposed for the other States that fall into thiscategory, so some other basis for selection must have been used. All States are entitled to equitable treatment by USEPA in the processingof their SIP submittals. Furthermore, it is arbitrary and capricious forUSEPA to use the selective timing of its SIP actions as an instrument ofunstated policies, especially when the deadline for acting on the submittalshas already passed. Response USEPA acknowledges that USEPA has not taken action yet on a number of SIPsubmittals and outstanding SIP conditions have not yet been acted on bythe USEPA. As indicated in the July 14, 1987, general preamble and noticeof future actions (52 FR 26404), the rulemaking actions started on July14, 1987, were by no means the last actions USEPA plans regarding the 1982SIPs and post-1982 SIPs. Therefore, although the Illinois SIP was amongthose addressed on July 14, 1987, it will be followed by rulemaking onother SIPs. USEPA did find it necessary to prioritize its rulemaking. USEPA's delayedrulemaking does not warrant further delay as IEPA seems to imply. Rather,USEPA must move forward incrementally, towards resolving all of the outstandingSIP problems. The actions selected for July 14, 1987, were judged to havethe highest priority because of a combination of continued air qualityproblems and incomplete SIP or incomplete rule submittals. USEPA was convincedthat all of the SIPs acted upon applied to areas very unlikely to attainthe ozone or CO standard by December 31, 1987, or even the near term thereafter.In addition, at the time of the July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking, amongthe States lacking approved SIPs, Illinois lagged far behind the othersin submitting adopted stationary source control rules. All outstanding SIPs will be judged on their merits considering currentair quality and the status of rule submittal. USEPA is currently involvedin preparing such rulemaking actions for other areas. 3. Comment USEPA's past failure to take any final action on the 1982 Illinois OzoneSIP submittal or any element thereof precludes disapproval of the attainmentdemonstration at this time and precludes the imposition of any sanctionfor failure to have an adequate SIP approved by the USEPA. On June 30,1982, the IEPA submitted the proposed Illinois SIP for Ozone for the Chicagoand Metro-East St. Louis areas. Since that date, USEPA has failed to takefinal action on any element of the SIP submittal or any of the numerousrules which have been submitted as elements of the SIP. For USEPA to failto act on Illinois' SIP submittal, and particularly its attainment demonstration,for an extended period of years and then to propose to disapprove it immediatelybefore the final deadline is arbitrary and improper. Such a position underminesthe entire SIP process and the role of the States in that process. TheStates simply can not carry out the role given them by Congress in theface of such inaction by USEPA. Response As noted in the July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking (52 FR 26125), USEPAinitiated rulemaking action on the Illinois SIP on two occasions: February3, 1983, (48 FR 5110), and on August 15, 1984 (49 FR 32601). The February3, 1983, rulemaking proposed to disapprove the demonstration of attainment.Following this proposal, USEPA received a number of submittals from theIEPA revising the demonstration of attainment or promising to correct notedSIP deficiencies which would affect the demonstration of attainment. Ratherthan publish a final disapproval of the demonstration of attainment, theUSEPA assumed that Illinois was making a good faith effort to correct SIPdeficiencies. The iterative negotiation process which followed acted todelay the SIP rulemaking process. Thus, it is very misleading to cite June30, 1982, as the date upon which USEPA had the current SIP revision beforeit. Further, USEPA's August 15, 1984 (49 FR 32601), proposed approval clearlystated that USEPA was proposing rulemaking on the draft CO and ozone SIPrevision at the request of the State to parallel process the action, 49FR at 32601. USEPA could not finally approve the SIP until all the requisitecontrol measures were finally adopted and submitted. USEPA withheld takingfurther rulemaking until it was certain the State could not complete implementationof its plan by December 31, 1987. Illinois submitted the final portionof the required control strategy on April 8, 1988, well after the December31, 1987, implementation deadline. Finally, even assuming an extended period of USEPA review, USEPA cannotbe estopped from disapproving a SIP. Rather, the appropriate action isto take final rulemaking action based on the record as it has evolved duringthe intervening years, which is what USEPA announces today. 4. Comment Since 1983, when the IEPA proposed to use data from the Racine, Wisconsinmonitoring site as its design value for the purpose of determining theozone attainment demonstration requirements, Illinois' attainment demonstrationhas not changed in any significant manner. As set out in a history of Statesubmittals, USEPA rulemaking, and USEPA correspondence (contained in theState's comments on the July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking), that attainmentdemonstration has been accepted by the USEPA; indeed, the USEPA has toldthe IEPA that the attainment demonstration was properly done and, if thecontrol measures were put into place pursuant to that demonstration, theSIP would be approved. Therefore, the demonstration itself could have andshould have been approved by the USEPA sometimes during the last four years.Response An ozone attainment demonstration is composed of two basic components:(1) A modeling analysis to determine the appropriate VOC emission reductionrequirement; and (2) a projection of the timing and magnitude of emissionreductions resulting from the implementation of emission control regulations.USEPA agreed that the IEPA had an acceptable modeling analysis competedas early as 1983. In addition, USEPA believed that the emission reductionsprojected at that time were sufficient, based on the modeling analysis,to result in attainment of the ozone standard. USEPA proposed such a findingin the August 15, 1984, proposed rulemaking (49 FR 32601). That notice,however, noted that the acceptability of the demonstration of attainmentwas based on the assumption that all required emission controls would bein place by December 31, 1987. On April 22, 1985, the IEPA submitted a revised demonstration of attainmentfurther claiming to achieve sufficient VOC emission reductions by the attainmentdeadline. As USEPA reviewed this demonstration of attainment, it becameapparent that Illinois was falling behind schedule in adopting and implementingVOC emission control rules for stationary sources. It is now apparent thatthe second component of Illinois' attainment demonstration for the Chicagoarea is not supported by the schedule for rule adoption and implementation.This raises significant doubts about the validity of the attainment demonstration.Although the required rules have been adopted and submitted to USEPA, severalwere not adopted until after the December 31, 1987, attainment deadline.During the delays in rule adoption, USEPA has became aware that the ozonelevels have not decreased nearly as much as expected in the Chicago area,even accounting for those delays. (This issue is more fully discussed ina July 5, 1988, technical support document, and a subsequent technicalsupport document of September 1988, which are available for inspectionat the Region V Office listed above.) The ozone levels have raised questionsabout the level of the VOC emission reductions calculated in the ozoneattainment demonstration. Based on current data, it appears that even withthe rules recently submitted by the State, the VOC emission reduction requirementsfor the Chicago area are insufficient to assure attainment of the ozonestandard in the near term. Although USEPA could have approved the SLIP'sozone attainment demonstration in 1984, it is incorrect to do so now giventhe current ozone data and emission control status. Comment USEPA should not now be permitted to disapprove Illinois' attainment demonstrationon a separate basis from the rest of the SIP since it has for years refusedto consider the demonstration separately for purposes of approval. To holdotherwise would be inconsistent with the action USEPA has taken in otherStates where USEPA has in fact approved attainment demonstrations eventhough all the rules were not in final approved form. For example, sinceits July 14, 1987, proposal, the USEPA has made just such a proposal forKansas City, Kansas (52 FR 36963, Octoer 2, 1987). USEPA has used the conditionalapproval method for approving the attainment demonstration of other Stateslacking adopted rules. This has occurred in two States bordering Illinois,the States of Missouri and Wisconsin, where USEPA approved attainment demonstrationswithout fianl approval of the States' required rules. USEPA has also proposedto do the same for Indiana. In fact, within the last three years, USEPAhas approved the State of Missouri's attainment demonstration (51 FR 31328,September 3, 1986), which has the same design value and design site asthe Illinois SIP for the Metro-East St. Louis area. Response It is true that USEPA conditionally approved the ozone attainment demonstrationsin the Missouri and Wisconsin SIPs. This was done when it could be assumedthat all required control measures would be adopted, USEPA approved, andimplemented by the attainment deadline. In addition, USEPA was convincedthat the required VOC emission reduction requirements in the two Stateswere sufficient to attain the ozone standard. Two facts distinguish the Illinois SIP from those which USEPA conditionallyapproved. First, the attainment date has passed and Illinois still hasseveral stationary source control measures which have not been approvedby USEPA. The reductions from these measures are necessary to demonstrateattainment and for plan approval but several of these measures had notbeen implemented by the December 31, 1987, attainment date. Second, currentair quality data convinces USEPA that even if those rules are fully implementedin the near term, Illinois will not attain the ozone standard in the Chicagoarea during that period. A number of distinctions may be noted between the Kansas City, Kansas SIPand the Illinois SIP. First, the Kansas City, Kansas SIP is a post-1982SIP revision mandated by a USEPA SIP call issued on February 20, 1985,rather than a SIP revision required by July 1, 1982. The progress madeby Kansas appears to be more rapid than that made by Illinois in adoptingand submitting the required rules. Second, air quality and emissions estimatescurrent at the time of the conditional plan approval, showed that the ozonestandard could be attained by a fixed, near-term date sometime in 1988.The same cannot be said for the Chicago ozone demonstration area. Third,the attainment demonstration for Kansas City was derived considering onlypreviously adopted control measures. The Kansas draft proposed for approvalin the October 2, 1987, proposed rulemaking (52 FR 36967) will supersedethe older adopted rules, thereby providing additional VOC emission reductions.At the time, EPA believed this would provide additional assurance of timelyattainment. The currently adopted regulations in Illinois are not sufficientto guarantee attainment of the ozone standard by a fixed, near-term date.Finally, it should be noted that the USEPA did not complete final rulemakingon the Kansas City, Kansas SIP until the State of Kansas had submittedfinally adopted regulations (52 FR 17700, May 18, 1988). 6. Comment It is arbitrary and capricious for USEPA to disapprove the Illinois OzoneSIP without acting on the elements which comprise the ozone submittal.It appears that USEPA is proposing an overall disapproval of the State'sOzone SIP without acting on any of the individual elements which comprisethe submittal other than the vehicle inspection/maintenance (I/M) program.Some elements of the Illinois SIP have been pending before the USEPA infinal form for over four years, and other elements have been pending beforethe USEPA under its own parallel processing procedure while the rules comprisingthe elements are pending for adoption by the Illinois Pollution ControlBoard (IPCB). One of the reasons this proposal by USEPA is inappropriate is that it leadsto general disapproval without ever incorporating into the SIP the specificelements of progress which have been made by Illinois. Failure to act onelements of the SIP deprives the State of an opportunity to exercise theright to appeal granted by the Act because USEPA never makes the disapprovaldecisions which might be appealed and instead holds the rules until theState changes them in a manner consistent with USEPA's interpretation ofwhat is RACT. This inaction is coercive because a failure to act has thesame effect as a disapproval. This is an exercise in discretion that USEPAdoes not possess under the Act and which violates the SIP review deadlines(four months after the submittal of a SIP revision) given to the USEPAby Congress. During the past four to five years, USEPA has been ambivalent on the issueof whether all the elements of a SIP have to be present before USEPA cantake action, or whether EPA can take action on individual elements beforeacting on the entire plan especially when done for the purpose of forcingthe State to adopt exactly the measures which USEPA wants to have adopted.Pursuant to Sections 110(a) and 172 of the Act, USEPA has an obligationto take action on all SIP revisions which are submitted to it. IEPA questionsUSEPA's ability to take action to disapprove the SIP as a whole withoutanalyzing all portions of the SIP that are before it.ResponseUSEPA continues to believe that it can act independently on individualportions of the SIP. For example, on July 11, 1985 (50 FR 28228), USEPAproposed separate rulemaking on Illinois' stationary source RACT II rules.That action proposed to approve some rules and disapprove others. USEPAproceeded with final rulemaking for those rules found to be acceptableon November 27, 1987 (52 FR 45333). Illinois has revised the rules proposedfor disapproval and submitted them to USEPA. The State of Illinois hassubmitted to USEPA RACT III and major non-CTG RACT rules for the requiredcategories. These rules are in various stages of review and rulemakingdevelopment. Finally, as noted in the July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking,the USEPA is taking independent action on I/M in Illinois. All of theseactions are relatively independent of each other and independent of USEPA'sactions on the SIP's demonstration of attainment. USEPA intends to proceedexpeditiously to complete rulemaking on them. It has not intentionallydelayed rulemaking on these SIP elements.The review of the demonstration of attainment, unlike the review of otherportions of the SIP, does depend on the status of rule adoption and implementationfor the various source categories as a whole. When evaluating the progressof emission reductions towards attainment of the air quality standard bya particular date, it is important to establish the likelihood that a projectedemission reduction will actually occur. If rule development and implementationis significantly delayed beyond the attainment deadline, it is inappropriateto assume that the rule(s) will have the claimed impact at the attainmentdeadline. USEPA's schedule for acting on individual rules that the State<T3>has</T3> adopted is irrelevant to the analysis of the adequacy of theattainment demonstration. Section 172(a)(2) of the Act requires that SIPsdemonstrate attainment of the ozone standard no later than December 31,1987 in extension areas. In light of the delay in the Illinois rulemakingsand the intervening air quality data, USEPA finds that the Illinois SIPdoes not convincingly demonstrate attainment by December 31, 1987, or evenshortly thereafter. Thus, as indicated in the notice, USEPA finds thatthe SIP does not meet all requirements of the Act.This does not mean that all elements of the SIP are disapprovable. It simplymeans that at least one of the Act's required elements is not present.USEPA considers the demonstration of attainment to be a crucial elementof the SIP. In the absence of an adequate attainment demonstration, USEPAcannot approve the overall Part D SIP.7. CommentIn the July 14, 1987, notice of proposed rulemaking and the April 13, 1987,technical support document (TSD), ``Status of RACT Rules in Illinois andIndiana Extension Areas'', USEPA has listed the various RACT rules whichhave been adopted by the IPCB or are pending before the IPCB. There is,however, no discussion whatsoever of the reductions in emissions that theRACT rules have achieved or will achieve, and there is no discussion ofthe impact of these rules on Illinois' attainment of the ozone standard.USEPA merely asserts that it proposes to find that ``the plan as a whole,taking into account legally adopted control measures, does not adequatelydemonstrate attainment of the NAAQS. * * *'' Nowhere does USEPA identifywhich ``legally adopted control measures'' it has taken into account inmaking its proposed finding. Whether these measures are only those thatUSEPA has approved, and whether these include regulations which the IPCBhas adopted but which USEPA required to be corrected before it will takefinal action cannot be divined from the July 14th notice; both the noticeof proposed rulemaking and the supporting TSD are completely silent onthis point.At this time, there are pending before USEPA for action ten sets of RACTrules which have been adopted in final form by the IPCB. There are an additionaleight sets of rules pending before the IPCB. At this time, only two ofthese pending rules are not likley to be adopted in final form by the endof 1987: the synthesized pharmaceutical manufacturing RACT rule and thenon-CTG generic RACT rule. These two RACT regulations account for one percentof the SIP emission reduction requirement in the Chicago area.ResponseThe July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking was actually supported by a numberof Technical Support Documents (TSDs), including: an April 15, 1987, TSD,``Approvability of Ozone Demonstrations of Attainment in the Illinois andIndiana''; an April 14, 1987, TSD, ``Review of the Illinois and NorthwestIndiana Ozone SIPs Based on Recent Air Quality Data, and an April 10, 1987,TSD, ``Review of the Inspection and Maintenance and Transportation ControlPortions of Illinois and Indiana 1982 Ozone and Carbon Monoxide SIPs'',as well as the April 13, 1987, TSD noted by the commenter. The April 15,1987, TSD notes that complete RACT adoption and implementation is unlikelyto occur by December 31, 1987. It is the April 14, 1987, TSD, however,which explains that the ozone NAAQS is unlikely to be attained by December31, 1987, in the Chicago area. This TSD compared the 1979 to 1981 ozonedata with the 1984 to 1986 ozone data and concluded the VOC emission reductionrequirements for the areas would change little between a base year of 1979and a base year of 1984. The TSD then compared the emission reductionsprojected by the SIP to occur between 1984 and the end of 1987. The TSDconcludes that the needed VOC emission reductions significantly exceedthe SIP-projected 1984-1987 VOC emission reductions. Thus, the TSD concludesthat even assuming full implementation, the ozone standard will not beattained by December 31, 1987, or even shortly thereafter in the Chicagoarea. This is the primary basis of the proposed disapproval of the SIP'sattainment demonstration.The July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking concluded this even while notingthat a number of RACT II and III and major source non-CTG RACT rules arestill awaiting final adoption by the IPCB. Since the notice of proposedrulemaking, USEPA has received from the State IPCB finally adopted rulesfor the following source categories: leaks from gasoline tank trucks; miscellaneousmetal coating; graphic arts; external floating roofs; large petroleum drycleaners; polystyrene resin manufacturing; heatset web offset printing;wood furniture coating; synthetic organic chemical manufacturing industry-leaks;synthesized pharmaceutical manufacturing, a generic rule covering majorsources in nonattainment areas; and synthetic organic chemical manufacturingindustry-air oxidation. These rules are undergoing USEPA review and willbe the subject of separate rulemaking.On April 8, 1988, USEPA received the IPCB finally adopted rules for twosource categories: manufacturing of synthesized pharmaceuticals; and major,non-CTG sources not covered by the heatset web offset printing and woodfurniture coating rules. They also are undergoing USEPA review and willbe the subject of separate rulemaking. However, based on the analysis discussedin the proposal TSDs and as confirmed recently by the 1987 air qualitydata (see 1988 TSDs), USEPA continues to believe that even with these recentrule adoptions the modeling demonstration of attainment is no longer reliableand the current Illinois plan will not produce attainment even by a fixeddate shortly after 1987.8. CommentThe USEPA proposal to disapprove the 1982 SIP on the basis of failure toachieve Reasonable Further Progress (RFP) is arbitrary and capricious.On October 2, 1986, Illinois submitted to USEPA an RFP report for 1985which demonstrated that Illinois is meeting the RFP requirements of Section172 of the Act. In addition, Illinois has recently, on September 28, 1987,submitted its RFP report for 1986, which demonstrates that Illinois continuesto make RFP.USEPA has taken no action to approve or disapprove the RFP reports. Further,there is no analysis whatever of the 1985 Illinois RFP report in the July14, 1987 notice of proposed rulemaking or in the TSDs supporting the rulemaking.There is no basis for disapproving the RFP portion of the SIP.ResponseThe USEPA agrees that the TSDs for the July 14, 1987, proposed rulemakingdid not address RFP. USEPA also agrees that Illinois has submitted airquality and emissions reports for 1985 and 1986 demonstrating that annualincremental emissions reductions have been such that VOC emissions remainbelow the levels indicated in the SIP as reflecting linear decreases betweenthe base year (1979) levels and the 1987 demonstrated attainment levels.However, reports indicate that the 1986 VOC emissions in the Chicago areawere above the 1986 levels projected in the SIP.The RFP reports imply that the Chicago area is complying with the Act'sdefinition of RFP. At issue, however, is the RACT requirement of section172(b)(3). Section 172(b)(3) states that the adoption, at a minimum, ofRACT is required to assure reasonable further progress. Since the requiredRACT measures have not been fully adopted for the Chicago area, one canquestion whether or not RFP is being achieved in the area. Further, continuedviolations of the ozone NAAQS have undermined the underlying attainmentdemonstrations on which the RFP analysis is based. While further progressin emission reductions is being recorded, ozone data indicate that theChicago area is not close to attainment and will not be close in the nearterm even with full RACT implementation; thus reasonable further progressas defined in section 171(1) of the Act has not occurred.\1\<NOTE/> It should be noted that the Clean Air Act does not specificallyrequire USEPA to approve or disapprove RFP reports; they are required toprovide USEPA with information on whether the State is adequately carryingout the SIP.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Section 171(1) of the Act defines reasonable further progressas follows: The term ``reasonable further progress'' means annual incrementalreductions in emissions of the applicable air pollutant (including substantialreductions in the early years following approval and promulgation of planprovisions under this part and section 110(a)(2)(I) and regular reductionsthereafter) which are sufficient in the judgment of the Administrator,to provide for attainment of the applicable national ambient air qualitystandard by the date required in section 172(a).9. CommentUSEPA's TSD cannot have been the technical basis for the decision to disapprovethe Illinois Ozone SIP and is inconsistent with USEPA's own requirements.USEPA consistently stated to the IEPA from 1984 through 1986 that the 46percent emission reduction requirement was sufficient for attainment ofthe ozone standard in the Chicago area. The USEPA had accepted IEPA's 1984technical demonstration of the 46 percent VOC emission reduction requirementsas being consistent with USEPA procedures and requirements. USEPA advisedIEPA that in February 1987 the Administration decided to disapprove IllinoisSIP. This reversal occurred prior to the drafting of the techncial supportdocument which is the proposed basis of this disapproval. It is questionablewhether a TSD can be a technical basis for a decision already made.USEPA's July 14th proposal represents a major reversal of USEPA policyon the standard of approvability of ozone SIPs. The USEPA does not givethe rationale for such a policy reversal. Such a rationale is a legal prerequisitefor such a policy reversal.ResponseUSEPA agrees that it informed the IEPA during the 1984-1986 period thata 46 percent VOC emission reduction for the Chicago area was correct givenUSEPA's ozone modeling guidance. Given the available data at the time,this was a correct conclusion. The disapproval of Illinois' SIP, basedon current data, however, is not a reversal of policy. It has always beenUSEPA's policy to use all available data when reviewing SIPs and othersubmittals. The current, 1984 through 1986, ozone data, coupled with theSIP's VOC emission projections indicate that the calculated allowable VOCemission rates are not nearly low enough to achieve the ozone standardin the Chicago area. It would not be logical to approve a 46 percent emissionreduction requirement as adequate for Illinois when subsequently obtaineddata demonstrate that this emission reduction is inadequate to demonstrateattainment of the ozone NAAQS. Numerous technical support documents havebeen prepared in support of USEPA's proposed action on the Illinois OzoneSIP. Each provided an analysis of some portion of the State's plan. Whileone document may have been prepared after February 1987, other documentshighlighting the strengths and weaknesses of the Illinois plan were availableprior to February 1987.10. CommentAn assessment of the TSDs by the IEPA indicates the following: (1) Theair quality evaluation was performed in a manner totally inconsistent withUSEPA's own analysis requirements (this is so stated in the TSD); (2) USEPAhas ignored factors necessary to perform a proper analysis; (3) the re-evaluationof the required SIP reduction level was based on methods that are not apart of the USEPA review procedures or Act requirements; and (4) USEPA'sstatement that Illinois is not meeting RFP is based on a method of analysiswhich is inconsistent with USEPA's own definition of RFP. Had the IEPAsubmitted to USEPA an analysis like that contained in the TSDs, it wouldbe rejected by USEPA as technically inadequate. Clearly the TSDs do notfollow EKMA modeling procedures established by USEPA. A TSD, in fact, pointsout the shortcomings by indicating:<ITAG tagnum="21">It is important to note certain cautions in using concentration dataalone to approximate control requirements. Control requirements can besignificantly affected by other variables, such as HC/NO<T2>x</T2> ratio, ozone transport, and mixing height rise, so that comparabilityof concentrations does not guarantee comparability of control requirements.</ITAG>The TSD fails to account for variations between 1979 and 1984 in sourceemissions in the source mix in Illinois. One of the key input parametersto the EKMA model is the variation in the hourly emission density thatthe urban plume experiences as it moves from the urban core to the designsite. The emission density used in the 1982 SIP was appropriate for a 1979base year. The emission density for 1984 would be much smaller than thoseused originally. USEPA's failure to account for these differences underminesthe validity of its entire analysis and points out the inadequacy of theUSEPA analytical method under in the TSD.No modeling was done to support USEPA's proposed rulemaking. This is especiallyarbitrary and unacceptable in light of the very significant use to whichthe ozone data are put, i.e., the disapproval of the entire ozone SIP forthe Chicago area. Clearly it is arbitrary for USEPA to use an analysisfor SIP disapproval when USEPA would itself disapprove the use of suchan analysis in the preparation of a SIP.The TSD states that ``* * * the necessary input data for EKMA or for anyother suitable model are not available for the relevant days for 1984 and1986.'' All the data are in fact available from State and Federal sources.USEPA chose to ignore these data, and instead produced a new ozone airquality analysis based on incomplete data and unacceptable modeling procedures.``Reasonable further progress'' is defined in section 171(1) of the Actas:<ITAG tagnum="20">annual incremental reductions in emissions of the applicable pollutant(including substantial reductions in early years following approval andpromulgation of plan provisions under this part and Section 110(a)(2)(I)and regular reductions thereafter) which are sufficient in the judgmentof the Administrator, to provide for attainment of the applicable nationalambient air quality standard by the date required in Section 172(a).</ITAG>USEPA's long-standing guidance on approval of SIP revisions includes thefollowing statement (43 FR 21675, May 19, 1978):<ITAG tagnum="21">Reasonable further progress will be determined for each area by dividingthe total emission reduction required to attain the applicable standardby the number of years between 1979 and the date projected for attainment(not later than 1987). This is represented graphically by a straight linedrawn from the emissions inventory submitted in 1979 to the allowable emissionson the attainment date.</ITAG>In its TSD, USEPA has departed from the definition of RFP in the Act andfrom its own guidance and instead has used a comparison of current airquality (1984-1986) with air quality from the design period (1979-1981).ResponseIt is agreed that USEPA used an analysis technique deviating from ozonemodeling guidance published by USEPA. It is also agreed that USEPA's analysis,as discussed in an April 14, 1987, TSD, is associated with a significantamount of uncertainty. This is openly admitted in the April 14, 1987, TSD.USEPA disagrees that the approach taken in the April 14, 1987, TSD is withouttechnical merit and invalid. At the time the USEPA developed the TSDs tosupport the most recent proposed rulemaking, it legitimately lacked theinput data needed to run the city-specific Empirical Kinetics ModelingApproach (EKMA). Nonetheless, as stated above, USEPA's policy is to useall available data when evaluating submittals. The USEPA did have current(1984-1986) air quality data as well as data on the status of VOC emissioncontrol rule adoption and RFP as supplied by the State. USEPA believesit is justified in using these available data to evaluate the SIP's demonstrationsof attainment. The USEPA believes the approach taken, although associatedwith uncertainties, was sufficiently conservative to support the conclusiondrawn.The State argues that the USEPA ignored the post-1979 decrease in VOC emissiondensities, which it believes to be a crucial input for the city-specificEKMA. USEPA disagrees with this conclusion. Emission densities are notinput directly into city-specific EKMA. They are used to calculate post-8a.m. emission fractions, which are directly used in the modeling. The emissionfractions represent the relative contributions of the downwind (relativeto the urban core) emissions to the ozone precursor mixture. As areawideVOC emission densities decrease through the implementation of VOC emissioncontrols, the emission fractions may change little. The emission fractionswould only change significantly if VOC emission controls or VOC sourcegrowth occurred nonuniformly on a spatial basis in the ozone generationarea (demonstration area). USEPA has no reason to believe this has happened.The State has not provided data to prove otherwise.With regard to RFP, it must be noted from section 171(1) of the Act thatRFP occurs if the annual emission reduction is such that in the judgmentof the Administrator, the standard will be attained by the statutory deadline.The 1984-1986 data (as confirmed by the 1987 data) make it clear that theIllinois SIP, even as modified by recent RACT submittals, will not achieveozone standard attainment by December 31, 1987, or even shortly thereafter.Thus, it is appropriate for USEPA to question the RFP for the Chicago area.In addition, as noted above, section 172(b)(3) of the Act states that SIPsmust achieve RFP by requiring RACT for all applicable sources. Since Illinoisis significantly behind schedule for RACT regulation adoption and implementation,the State has jeopardized RFP for the Chicago area. USEPA does agree thatthe State is meeting the RFP criteria specified in 43 FR 21675 (May 19,1978). The VOC emissions have remained below the previously determinedstraight line emission reduction levels. What is at question here are thecorrect VOC emission levels needed to attain the ozone standard by thestatutory date and the correct straight line VOC emission reduction rate.If the emissions attainment levels have been overestimated, it is likelythat current VOC emissions would be above the correct straight line reductionlevels, thereby violating the RFP requirements of 43 FR 21675.As a final note on assessing the likelihood of the modeled emission reductionrequirements to attain the ozone standard, one can look at the availableozone and emissions data in a slightly different manner. The 1985 RFP reportfor Illinois shows a 34.5 percent VOC emissions drop during the 1979-1985period relative to the 1979 base level for the Chicago area. This comparesto a 1.1 percent drop in the ozone design value (fourth highest concentration)between the 1979-1981 period and the 1984-1986 period at the Racine, Wisconsin,site and to an actual increase in the ozone design value from 0.143 ppmto 0.146 ppm over the same periods for the Waukegan, Illinois, site.Clearly ozone concentration reductions downwind of Chicago are not as sensitiveto VOC emission reductions in the Chicago area as anticipated by the IllinoisSIP. If we assume, as Illinois does, that the majority of the expectedVOC emission reductions has already occurred in the Chicago area, the factthat in the same period there has been only a small positive impact (ornegative impact in the case of Waukegan ozone concentrations) toward attainingthe ozone standard downwind of Chicago, shows that the full implementationof the SIP is unlikely to result in the attainment of the ozone standardby the deadline or any other fixed, near-term date. Moreover, USEPA doesnot believe that shortfalls in the necessary emission reductions in Indianacould account for all the margin of ozone violations downwind of Chicago.11. CommentIn the July 14, 1987 notice of proposed rulemaking, USEPA proposed to disapprovethe 1982 SIP on the basis of its conclusion that the SIP does not persuasivelydemonstrate attainment of the ozone standard by December 31, 1987, noris attainment likely to occur shortly thereafter, and, as a consequence,the SIP does not meet the requirements of Part D of the Act. Disapprovalon this basis is contrary to USEPA's policy as stated in its November 2,1983, announcement of policy (48 FR 50686). In that Notice, USEPA statedthat it interpreted the language and legislative history of section 172(a)(1)as requiring SIP's to ``provide for attainment in a prospective or planningsense.'' The State believes that, consistent with this policy, USEPA maynot disapprove the 1982 Ozone SIP on the basis of failure to attain theozone standard by December 31, 1987. USEPA has, since its August 15, 1984 proposed approval of the Ilinois OzoneSIP (49 FR 32601), consistently taken the position that the attainmentdemonstration contained in the Ilinois SIP does provide for attainmentof the ozone NAAQS in Illinois and southeastern Wisconsin in a planningsense. USEPA has consistently agreed with Illinois that the VOC emissionreduction requirement of 46 percent in northeastern Illinois was sufficientto attain the ozone NAAQS by December 31, 1987. USEPA has stated that themethodology used by Illinois to calculate the VOC emission reduction requirementswas consistent with USEPA modeling guidelines. Finally, USEPA has agreedwith Illinois that the regulations proposed by Illinois provide sufficientVOC emission reductions to meet the 46 percent emission reduction target.The fact that, as the 1987 deadline approaches, the validity of the assumptionscontained in the Illinois SIP can be questioned in light of current data,does not, consistent with USEPA's November 2, 1983 policy statement, renderIllinois' Ozone SIP disapprovable. Nor does the fact that USEPA has notapproved Illinois's SIP place the SIP beyond the scope of the November2, 1983 policy. For over three years USEPA did not waiver from the positionthat a 46 percent (Chicago) reduction in emissions was sufficient to achieveattainment in the Chicago area and that the Illinois rules would achieveand surpass the reduction requirements. In this respect, Illinois is inthe same situation as 70 other areas in the country, where States followingUSEPA procedures have underestimated that VOC emission reductions necessaryto attain the ozone NAAQS by the end of 1987. USEPA's technical error inselecting and requiring attainment demonstration procedures should notbe disapproval of the SIP.ResponseUSEPA acknowledges that, from mid-1984 through 1986, the USEPA informedthe State that it agreed with the 46 percent VOC emission reduction requirement.This reduction requirement, however, did not pass the test of time. Inlight of subsequently available information, USEPA can no longer concludethat this emission reduction level is adequate to attain the ozone standardby either December 31, 1987 or any near-term date thereafter. To approvethe SIP with the assumption that it will lead to attainment by such a datein the face of contradictory empirical data or that it should be approvedbecause Illinois followed USEPA modeling quidelines using older ozone datacan not be technically supported in light of current ozone data. This view is not inconsistent with the November 2, 1983 policy statement,which held that States with previously approved SIPs should not be sanctionedsimply because ozone standard violations were found after an attainmentdeadline. This policy does not preclude the USEPA from using current data(data collected after the generation of a SIP revision) to judge the abilityof a SIP to achieve the NAAQS. USEPA has used similar data in other SIPactions, such as the proposed disapproval of Ohio's first round 1982 SIPsfor Cleveland and Cincinnati, and is being used for other areas coveredby proposed rulemaking on July 14, 1987. Morever, USEPA proposed to conclude,and confirms today, that the Illinois SIP, even if fully adopted and implemented,will not produce attainment of the ozone standard even a few years fromnow. Thus, USEPA is judging the Illinois plan by applying the type of prospectivetest discussed in the November 1983 policy. USEPA cannot, however, followIllinois' suggestion that this prospective evaluation ignore recent airquality trends.12. CommentIn its analysis of the approvability of the Illinois SIP, the USEPA mustseparate the 1982 SIP requirements (including the requirement for RACT)from the attainment demonstration and look only to the 1982 requirementsas the basis for any disapproval of the SIP. Even if the USEPA concludesthat Illinois will not attain the ozone NAAQS by the end of 1987, thisis not a proper basis to disapprove the Illinois SIP as not meeting therequirements of Part D of the ActResponseFor the reasons described in USEPA's proposed disapproval and the GeneralPreamble of July 14, 1987, the Agency believes that it can approve a PartD SIP for ozone only if the plan contains a persuasive demonstration thatthe measures in the plan will produce attainment by the end of 1987 <T3>or </T3>a fixed near-term date thereafter. Thus, USEPA has not limitedits review to whether the Illinois plan shows attainment by the end of1987. Moreover, in analyzing whether the Illinois' plan meets this test,USEPA is not limited to evaluating whether the State has adopted all ofthe RACT requirements identified as necessary components of 1982 plansgenerally. Rather, the Agency must perform a more careful scrutiny of whetherthe State's demonstration of attainment is persuasive in light of all relevantfacts available now, including both adoption of RACT measures and recentair quality data. As explained in the proposal and elsewhere in today'snotice, USEPA has rationally concluded from recent air quality data that,despite the State's recent adoption of RACT measures called for in 1982,the plan does not persuasively show that attainment will occur by a fixednear-term date after 1987.13. Comment.The USEPA has stated in its July 14, 1987 notice of proposed rulemakingthat its proposal to disapprove the Illinois SIP is based in part on afailure to adequately demonstrate attainment of the NAAQS by ``any fixed,near-term date.'' This language presents a complex change in the standardsfor approval of a SIP. In fact, demonstration of attainment by any fixed,near-term date is a new standard, the terms of which are undefined andwere unknown to the States at the time they had to do the work for anysuch demonstration. Such a standard would appear, in effect, to requirean entirely new modeling exercise and presents a plethora of unansweredquestions and issues associated with such an exercise: the determinationof an appropriate base year; the requirements for a new emissions inventory;and the potential reevaluation of numerous other parameters such as theozone design value and the design site. No State has carried out such amodeling exercise, nor has such an exercise ever been previously suggestedby USEPA or required as necessary for an approvable 1982 SIP.Because States have relied on the existing modeling standards, and becauseSIP work and any such showing of attainment takes a considerable amountof time if properly done, a belated new standard is an arbitrary standard,in part because the new standard causes a moving target. It would be inappropriatefor USEPA to disapprove the 1982 Illinois Ozone SIP for failure to meetan emissions reduction requirement that was properly arrived at throughthe application of USEPA approved methodology and which USEPA, for thelast three years, has agreed is approvable. USEPA's failure to approveit when it was legally required to do so does not justify a later reversalby USEPA.ResponseThe ``fixed, near-term date'' concept does not impose any new standardsor requirements on the State of Illinois. It is merely an indication that,even if a SIP revision fails to demonstrate compliance by December 31,1987, USEPA might nonetheless approve the revision if USEPA believes thatit will result in attainment by some ``fixed, near-term date.''This reflects USEPA's policy of November 3, 1983, in which the Agency statedits intent to look at the SIP's ability to produce attainment prospectively,rather than by an elapsed statutory date. The General Preamble of July14, 1987 explains the basis for insisting that the plan be adequate toshow attainment by a fixed date and, beyond that by a fixed date that isconsistent with Congress historical notion of short-term plan periods.USEPA discussed this concept further in proposing its Post-1987 nonattainmentpolicy on November 24, 1987 (52 FR 45004).Rather than refuting the logic of these policies, Illinois effectivelyendorsed them by commenting that USEPA's focus on the December 31, 1987,statutory date is inconsistent with the Agency's own 1983 policy. The decisionto evaluate the Illinois plan for whether it will attain in the near termafter 1987 does not, as Illinois asserts, require new modeling, emissioninventories or determinations of base years. Rather, as explained in theTSDs and above, USEPA has reached its conclusion that the plan will meetthis near-term attainment test by performing a qualitative analysis inlight of expected emmission trends and air quality data. With regard tothe last part of this comment, USEPA does not deny that the State of Illinoisproperly applied USEPA's ozone modeling guidance in 1984. (It failed todo so before in submitting its orignial version of the 1982 SIP, whichresulted in subsequent delays in final rulemaking on the SIP and numerousmodifications of the SIP by the State.) USEPA agrees Illinois properlyapplied the modeling and demonstration of attainment guidelines in 1984.Before USEPA could complete final rulemaking on the SIP, however, new ozonedata became available and delays in the adoption of some RACT rules haveoccurred. These changed circumstances lead USEPA to conclude that the SIPdoes not demonstrate attainment of the ozone NAAQS.<T3>14. Comment   </T3>USEPA should act to approve the numerous rules, including the vehicle Inspection/Maintenance(I/M) program, which Illinios has submitted as revisions to the Ozone SIP. <T3>Response</T3>   USEPA agrees that it should act on these submittals and, as described above,is working on separate rulemaking and technical reviews of them.<T3>15. Comment</T3>  USEPA has insisted that Illinois design its Ozone SIP for the Chicago areato control for a design site located in Racine, Wisconsin. (A similar requirementhas burdened Indiana.) This requirement imposes a substantially higheroverall emission reduction level on Illinois than would be the case ifthe design value were located at a site within Illinois. However, USEPAhas not imposed such a control requirement on the State of Wisconsin tosubmit a SIP designed to control for the air quality levels in Racine,and has not required controls in Wisconsin's conditionally approved OzoneSIP based on air quality levels in Racine. This is inconsistent with theAct, which explicitly places ``primary'' responsibility for nonattainmenton the State where the nonattainment area is located (Section 107(a)).A State which contributes to a nonattainment problem in another State isobliged only to not ``prevent'' attainment in that other State (Section110(a)(2)(E)). Any reasonable interpretation of these provisions must require,at minimum, a level of control in the State where the nonattainment areaexists equal to the level of control required of nearby upwind States.This should hold true unless it is determined that emissions from the nonattainmentarea State have no effect on that State's nonattainment problem. In thiscase, no such determination has been made, and requiring increased levelsof control from Illinois to address the interstate nonattainment problem,without even requiring a SIP from the State in which the nonattainmentexists, is clearly an unreasonable interpretation of the Act provisions.USEPA has not required controls in the Wisconsin Counties of Kenosha andRacine to be equivalent to those in northeastern Illinois although emissionsfrom both Counties clearly impact the ozone nonattainment in Racine. Thepercentage reduction requirements that address the nonattainment problemin Racine are substantially less in those counties (34%) than the percentagereduction requirements for Illinois and Indiana (46%). Moreover, the reductionrequirements in place in these two Wisconsin counties are designed to addressthe nonattainment problem in Milwaukee, and not in Racine.   USEPA has not acted consistently in its review of SIPs for interstate ozonenonattainment areas. USEPA has approved or proposes to approve SIPs forthe St. Louis and Philadelphia metropolitan areas in which an equal percentageemission reduction was required for the States involved. In the case ofSt. Louis, both the Missouri SIP and the Illinois SIP called for the samepercentage emission reduction; similarly, the same percentage reductionwas required of Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware in connection withthe city of Philadelphia. On the other hand, this equal percentge reductionwas not required in the New York and Chicago metropolitan areas. Instead,the downwind area in each case was given a lower percentage emission reductionrequirement than the rest of the metropolitan area. Southwestern Connecticutwas allowed a much lower percentage emission reduction than the rest ofthe New York metropolitan area_even though the design monitor for the NewYork metropolitan area is in Connecticut. Similarly, the Kenosha-Racinearea of southeast Wisconsin has a lower emission reduction requirementthan the Chicago-Gary area of Northeastern Illinois and Northwestern Indiana,even though the design monitor for the Chicago metropolitan area is inRacine.The proper approach, based on USEPA guidance, was the one used for theSt. Louis and Philadelphia areas. From USEPA's guideline for use of city-specifiedEKMA in preparing ozone SIPs (EPA-450-80-027), the OZIPP/EKMA modelingprocedures assume a column of well-mixed ozone and precursor laden airoriginating in the urban core (downtown Chicago), that begins moving at0800 LCT toward the site of the peak ozone concentration (in the Chicago-Gary-RacineSIP, this is Racine, Wisconsin). The EKMA model assumes the column movesat uniform speed on a straight line path to the site of the peak ozonevalue and that it arrives at that site at the time of the observed peakcondition. Within OZIPP, emissions data are used as inputs to the modelfor each hour after 0800 LCT. County-wide emissions inventories are necessaryto develop emissions densities representative of the area over which thecolumn is assumed to pass each hour. Thus, the emission densities represent the average emissions density ``asseen by the column'' for each hour between the model simulation start andthe time of the measured peak. In the case of Chicago, emissions densitieswere input to the model for the Illinois counties of Lake and Cook, andthe Wisconsin counties of Kenosha and Racine. Figure 3-3 from Page 30 ofthe EKMA manual previously referenced illustrates this concept. IEPA followed this procedure in conducting its analysis of the Chicagoozone reduction requirements, including the emissions from Kenosha andRacine Counties, Wisconsin. It is clear from this example and the EKMAprocedures, that the design control requirement should apply to the entirearea over which the ozone trajectory passes, from the starting urban coresite (Chicago) to the site of the peak ozone concentration (Racine). Thedesign control requirement also applies to portions of the Indiana CountiesLake and Porter and the Illinois Counties Kane, DuPage, Will, and McHenrybecause emissions from these Counties have an impact on background ozonelevels and precursor levels in the urban core due to transport. A recent new source review permit issued by the State of Wisconsin foran American Motors Corporation plant in Kenosha, Wisconsin, upwind of Racine,illustrates the unjustness of this situation. The permit allows an actual300-400 ton increase in VOC emissions that will contribute to ozone formationin Racine. Such a permit requires, under Federal law, that offsetting emissionreductions be obtained. Wisconsin has allowed this to be done by the useof reductions in Milwaukee. These reductions in Milwaukee are far downwindof Racine, and do not offset the large increase in emissions from Kenoshathat affects Racine. The result of Wisconsin's action will be a seriousaggravation of the nonattainment problem in Racine. This arrangement is clearly arbitrary, capricious and contrary to the Act.USEPA has failed to require the measures prerequisite to the disapprovalof the Illinois Ozone SIP due to air quality in Wisconsin. Because of USEPA'sfailure to require Wisconsin to submit SIPs designed to address the ozoneair quality problems in Kenosha-Racine, Sheboygan and Manitowoc, Illinois'SIP requirements remain unfairly high. If EPA had acted appropriately,the Wisconsin SIPs would be required to achieve greater reductions throughoutSoutheast Wisconsin. Under the Act, these failures must be rectified asa prerequisite to any adverse final action on Illinois' SIP based on interstateair quality levels. The State of Illinois is committed to meet its obligations under the Act,including its obligation pursuant to section 110(a)(2)(E) to refrain frompreventing nonattainment in Wisconsin. The Illinois SIP submittal addressesthat interstate pollution problem in the manner and to the level whichUSEPA stated was necessary. However, it would be arbitrary and capriciousto disapprove the Illinois SIP without requiring Wisconsin to address theproblem first and meet its primary responsibility under the Act. Were USEPAto impose these requirements upon Wisconsin, the air quality concerns regardingRacine might appear very different from the present situation. Although the Illinois 1982 Ozone and Carbon Monoxide SIP covers both theChicago and Metro-East St. Louis areas, each area is independent of theother, the nonattainment circumstances are different, and the attainmentdemonstrations are different for each area. Consequently, the State believeseach should be viewed independently, and separate decisions should be renderedon each. Response Based on past data analyses and a general concept of ozone production andtransport (relevant supporting documentation is contained in the RegionV docket supporting rulemaking on an ozone redesignation request for Kaneand DuPage Counties, Illinois), USEPA concludes that the Chicago urbanarea (including Lake and Porter Counties, Indiana) is the probable ozoneprecursor source area for the high ozone concentrations observed in Kenoshaand Racine Counties, Wisconsin. Similarly, the USEPA concludes that Kenoshaand Racine Counties' VOC emissions significantly contribute to high ozoneconcentrations in and downwind of Milwaukee. USEPA believes that VOC emissionsin Racine and Kenosha Counties have little impact on the maximum ozoneconcentrations observed in Racine. These peak concentrations are observedtypically on days with resultant (considering the variation of wind directionduring the hours when ozone is formed) winds from the southeast throughthe southwest. The peak concentrations also are typically observed frommid to late afternoon (3 p.m. to 6 p.m. or later) under conditions of moderatewind speeds (5 to 15 miles per hour). This implies the critical sourcearea is some distance to the south, namely the Chicago urban area. Underthese conditions, Racine and Kenosha Counties' VOC emissions would contributemost significantly to peak ozone concentrations in and north of Milwaukee.It is true that, under Section 107(a) of the Act, the State of Wisconsinhas a responsibility to assure the attainment of the air quality standardsthroughout the State. The USEPA, however, believes that attainment of theozone NAAQS in Kenosha and Racine Counties depends primarily upon appropriateVOC emission reductions in the Chicago urban ozone demonstration area.Failure to adequately reduce VOCs in the Chicago area will prevent attainmentof the ozone NAAQS in Kenosha and Racine Counties. The State of Illinois argues that USEPA has acted arbitrarily in its requirementsfor various area SIPs. The States of Missouri and Illinois have adoptedthe same VOC emission reduction requirement for their respective portionsof the St. Louis ozone demonstration area. The States of Pennsylvania,New Jersey, and Delaware have adopted the same VOC emission reduction requirementfor their respective portions of the Philadelphia demonstration area. Onthe other hand, despite the fact that the same design ozone monitoringsite is used for both SIP analyses, USEPA has allowed New York and Connecticutto adopt different VOC emission reduction requirements. Likewise, eventhough the design site for the Chicago Ozone SIP is in Wisconsin, USEPAhas allowed Wisconsin to adopt a VOC emission reduction requirement forRacine and Kenosha Counties which differs from the Chicago VOC emissionreduction requirement. USEPA has not applied the policy arbitrarily. The St. Louis ozone demonstrationarea covers counties in both Missouri and Illinois. The Philadelphia ozonedemonstration area contains portions of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware.It makes technical sense to accept single VOC emission reduction requirementsfor these areas. In contrast, at the time New York and Connecticut containedseparate uniquely identifiable urban VOC source areas. Meteorology duringpeak ozone concentrations showed that assigning unique VOC emission reductionrequirements to each of the urban source areas comported best with theirrelative contribution to the problem. Similarly, northeast Illinois andSoutheast Wisconsin contain the separate, uniquely identifiable urban sourceareas of Chicago and Milwaukee. Based on downwind ozone data, these urbanareas should have different VOC emission reduction requirements. Basedon the consideration of ozone precursor and ozone formation/transport,it was most appropriate to include Kenosha and Racine in the Milwaukeedemonstration area because the emissions in these Counties contribute moresignificantly to ozone concentrations downwind of Milwaukee than to theconcentrations monitored in these Counties.\2\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Recently EPA issued a call for Wisconsin to develop aSIP revision for, among other areas, Kenosha County, and proposed to placethat County into the Chicago ozone planning area for purposes of futureplanning. This was based on new factors (e.g., commuting patterns) thatEPA has not traditionally considered in defining ozone planning areas.Even if EPA had initially included Kenosha County in the Chicago demonstrationarea, however, the increased control burden on that County would not havelightened the control burden on Illinois enough to compensate for the largeemission reduction shortfalls that recent air quality shows remain in theIllinois SIP. USEPA acknowledges that the post-8 a.m. emissions fractions from Kenoshaand Racine Counties were properly included in the EKMA analysis for Chicago.It is also acknowledged that the inclusion of post-8 a.m. emission fractionsfor Kenosha and Racine Counties may have affected the calculated Chicagoarea VOC emission reduction requirement. The commenter, however, failsto discuss the degree of this impact. The relevant question is whetherthe difference in control requirements (46 percent if the Counties areincluded in the Chicago demonstration area versus 34 percent if they areincluded in the Milwaukee demonstration area) will have a significant impacton the ability of the Chicago emissions control strategy to achieve attainmentof the ozone standard. The USEPA has seen no evidence that it does, and,therefore, continues to assume the proper emissions control level for Kenoshaand Racine Counties is that of the Milwaukee demonstration area. The commenter argues that the USEPA has failed to require Wisconsin emissioncontrol measures prerequisite to the disapproval of the Illinois OzoneSIP due to air quality in Wisconsin. IEPA claims that because of USEPA'sfailure to require Wisconsin to submit SIPs designed to address the ozoneair quality problems in Kenosha, Racine, Sheboygan, and Manitowoc, Illinois'SIP requirements remain unfairly high since, if ``corrected,'' the WisconsinSIP should require higher VOC emission reductions throughout the southeasternWisconsin area. Under the Act, Illinois argues, the failures of the WisconsinSIP must be rectified as a prerequisite to any final action on the IllinoisSIP based on interstate air quality levels. The USEPA disagrees with this argument. Illinois' argument is that we mustgo back and require more of Wisconsin. As discussed above, USEPA continuesto believe that in the Chicago demonstration area emissions of VOCs andoxides of nitrogen from Illinois and Indiana sources are the primary sourceof the ozone standard exceedances observed in Racine and Kenosha. In lightof 1984-1987 air quality data, it is apparent that further reduction inthe Chicago area emissions beyond the 46 percent planned in the SIP areneeded to eliminate future ozone standard violations at the design sitesfor the Chicago area (Kenosha and Racine). Any further emission reductionsdownwind of Racine, in the Milwaukee area, to correct for recently observedozone standard violations in Sheboygan and Manitowoc will not result inan air quality improvement upwind in Racine and Kenosha. Finally, unlikeIllinois, Wisconsin adopted, or satisfactorily committed to adopt, requiredemission control measures and applied proper ozone analysis techniquesearly in the SIP adoption and submittal process, and, thus, received arelatively quick approval of their 1982 Ozone SIP. USEPA recently issueda finding that the 1982 Wisconsin SIP for Milwaukee area is substantiallyinadequate and therefore must be revised. Nothing in the Act requires thatWisconsin's response to USEPA's call for a SIP revision must precede USEPA'sdisposition on the pending Illinois Part D plan. 16. Comment All of the emission control regulations required as part of the SIP, includingall of the rules which are RACT requirements, are either adopted in approvableform or are close enough to final approvability that USEPA can proceedto final approval. When that approval occurs, the State of Illinois shouldbe placed in the same position as other States which have met all the requirementsof, and submitted all of the control elements needed for, a 1982 OzoneSIP. Should USEPA determine that attainment of the ozone standard willnot be achieved by the end of 1987, USEPA should still approve the SIPand act to place the State of Illinois in the same status as other Statesthat have complied with the necessary control requirements for a 1982 SIPbut that have not achieved attainment. The imposition of a constructionban is inappropriate and contrary to USEPA's own policy. Response Illinois has submitted, for USEPA approval, all of the necessary emissioncontrol regulations. USEPA is reviewing these regulations and will takeseparate rulemaking action on them in the future. USEPA cannot, however,approve the overall Illinois Part D SIP when those rules receive finalUSEPA approval. Once again, IEPA fails to grasp the very necessary connectionbetween the attainment demonstration and approval of a Part D SIP. As describedabove, USEPA has rationally concluded that the Illinois SIP, despite recentRACT adoptions, will not produce attainment by the end of 1987 or evenshortly thereafter. The Agency therefore has no choice, under the attainmentdemonstration and RFP requirements of section 172 of the Act, but to disapprovethe SIP. IEPA asks to be placed in the same position as those States thatalready had approved Part D plans which have, based on current data, provedto be inadequate to attain compliance by December 31, 1987. The fundamentaldistinction between Illinois and those States is that Illinois slippedso far behind schedule in adopting all of the necessary control measuresthat new data indicating that Illinois will not attain the NAAQS by thedeadline became available. The other States had shown based on all dataavailable at the time of their complete SIP submittals that they wouldattain the NAAQS. For those areas where the demonstration proved inaccurate,USEPA issued SIP calls pursuant to the reasoning of the November 3, 1983policy cited by Illinois; those notices call for revisions to those areas'SIPs to account for the inaccurate prediction of attainment. Apparently,IEPA believes that the imposition of a construction ban is inappropriatebecause no such ban is imposed on those areas with approved plans but whichfailed to attain compliance in fact i.e., those areas issued SIP calls.USEPA concluded in its 1983 policy-making that withdrawing the Agency'sprevious approval of those plans based on subsequent air quality wouldbe unlawful. The Agency stated that the Act requires the Part D plans bedisapproved and bans imposed only if the plans fail to contain a persuasive<T3>prospective </T3>projection of timely attainment. Thus, impositionof the ban in areas with <T3>previously </T3>approved Part D plans simply on the basis of new airquality data would not be consistent with the Act. However, the Act isclear in requiring the imposition of this sanction against Illinois, inthat information available when Illinois was still developing its planand while USEPA was reviewing the plan shows that the plan submittal thatjust recently became complete is not adequate.Comment USEPA's July 14, 1987, proposed rulemaking is silent on the Illinois CarbonMonoxide SIP. USEPA should proceed to complete final rulemaking on Illinois1982 CO SIP. Response USEPA agrees with this comment and will propose rulemaking on the CO SIPincluding the vehicle inspection and maintenance portion of the SIP ina separate <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Rulemaking Action </ITAG>After due consideration of the public comments received and the IllinoisSIP submittal, USEPA announces final disapproval of the Illinois ozoneattainment demonstrations for the Chicago area. This final disapprovalis based on the two plan deficiencies cited in the July 14, 1987 proposeddisapproval which remain. 1. The SIP revision did not adequately demonstrate that the Chicago ozonenon-attainment area would attain the national ambient air quality standards(NAAQS) by December 31, 1987, or any near term, fixed date thereafter.USEPA based this conclusion on two facts. First, the State was behind schedulein adopting all stationary source control measures. Thus, it is unlikelythat Illinois could achieve all the projected emission reductions by December31, 1987 or even shortly thereafter. Second, air quality data for 1984-1986showed little or no improvement over the 1979-81 peak levels; that informationcalled into question whether the quantity of emissions reductions thatthe plan had projected would be achieved by the control measures and wouldbe enough to produce attainment in the near term. 2. Due to delays in adopting certain control measures, the State failedto demonstrate reasonable further progress (RFP) toward attainment of theozone NAAQS. Further, as a result of the disapproval, USEPA retains the constructionban as provided for in section 110(a)(2)(I) of the Act on major new stationarysources and major modifications of stationary sources of VOC in the fourcounties presently designated nonattainment within the Illinois portionof the Chicago ozone nonattainment area, i.e., Cook, DuPage, Kane and LakeCounties. Under Executive Order 12291, today's action is not ``Major''. It has beensubmitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for review. Undersection 307(b)(1) of the Act, petitions for judicial review of this actionmust be filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the appropriatecircuit by December 16, 1988. This action may not be challenged later inproceedings to enforce its requirements. (See 307(b)(2).) <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52 </ITAG>Air pollution control, Carbon monoxide, Hydrocarbons, Intergovernmentalrelations, Ozone.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: September 30, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Lee M. Thomas, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart O_Illinois </ITAG>Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter I, Part 52, is amendedas follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 52_APPROVAL AND PROMULGATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PLANS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 52 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 7401-7642.</ITAG>2. Section 52.726 is amended by adding paragraph (c) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.726 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Control Strategy_Ozone. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) Part D Disapproval_The Administrator finds that Illinois' ozone planfor Cook, Lake, DuPage and Kane Counties, which was required to be submittedby July 1, 1982, does not satisfy all the requirements of Part D, TitleI of the Clean Air Act and, thus, is disapproved. No major new stationarysource, of major modification of a stationary source, or volatile organiccompounds may be constructed in Cook, Lake, DuPage or Kane Counties, unlessthe construction permit application is complete on or before November 16,1988. This disapproval does not affect USEPA's approval (or conditionalapproval) of individual parts of Illinois' ozone plan, and they remainapproved.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-23894 Filed 10-14-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>