<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88711-0040 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-11-88.f2.A1039</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 132 / Monday, July 11, 1988 /Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Fish and Wildlife Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">50 CFR Part 20</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Migratory Bird Hunting; Proposed Frameworks for Early Season MigratoryBird Hunting Regulations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency: </T2>Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action: </T2>Supplemental proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary: </T2>This document supplements proposed rules published onMarch 9, 1988 (53 FR 7702), and June 7, 1988 (53 FR 20874), which notifiedthe public that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (hereinafter the Service)proposes to establish hunting regulations for certain migratory game birdsduring 1988-89, and provided information on certain proposed regulations.This proposed rulemaking provides frameworks or outer limits for datesand times when shooting may begin and end, and the number of birds thatmay be taken and possessed in early seasons for migratory bird hunting.These are hunting seasons that open prior to October 1 and relate to mourning,white-winged and white-tipped doves; band-tailed pigeons; woodcock; commonsnipe; rails; common moorhens; purple gallinules; sea ducks; experimentalSeptember duck seasons in Florida, Kentucky, and Tennessee; experimentalSeptember Canada goose seasons in Illinois, Michigan, and Minnesota; aspecial Canada goose season in southwestern Wyoming; sandhill cranes; extendedfalconry seasons; and migratory game birds in Alaska, Puerto Rico and theVirgin Islands.The Service annually prescribes hunting regulations frameworks to the Statesfor season selection purposes. The primary purpose of this proposed ruleis to facilitate establishment of early-season migratory bird hunting regulationsfor 1988-89. Additional information relevant to the outlook for duck productionthis year is becoming available almost daily. If this additional informationindicates substantially greater adverse impacts of the drought, it maybe necessary to further restrict those waterfowl seasons proposed herein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>dates: </T2>The comment period for the proposed early-season frameworkswill end on July 20, 1988, except for Hawaii where the comment period closedon June 22, 1988. The comment period for the proposed frameworks for Alaska,Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands, which was identified in previous <T4>Federal Register </T4>documents mentioned above as ending on June 22,1988, is reopened and extended to July 20, 1988. The comment period forlate-season proposals will close on August 29, 1988.A Public Hearing on Late-Season Regulations will be held August 3, 1988,starting at 9 a.m.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>addresses: </T2>Comments should be mailed to Director (FWS/MBMO), U.S.Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, Matomic Building_Room536, Washington, DC 20240. The August 3 Public Hearing will be held inthe Auditorium of the Department of the Interior Building on C Street,between 18th and 19th Streets, NW., Washington, DC. Notice of intentionto participate in this hearing should be sent in writing to the Director(FWS/MBMO), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior,Washington, DC 20240.Comments received on this supplemental proposed rulemaking will be availablefor public inspection during normal business hours in Room 536, MatomicBuilding, 1717 H Street, NW., Washington, DC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact: </T2>Rollin D. Sparrowe, Chief, Officeof Migratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Departmentof the Interior, Matomic Building_Room 536, Washington, DC 20240, (202)254-3207.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information: </T2>The annual process for developing migratorygame bird hunting regulations deals with regulations for early and lateseasons, and regulations for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and the VirginIslands. Early seasons are those that open before October 1; late seasonsopen about October 1 or later. Regulations are developed independentlyfor the early and late seasons, and Alaska and insular areas. The early-seasonregulations relate to mourning doves; white-winged and white-tipped doves;band-tailed pigeons; rails; common moorhens; purple gallinules; woodcock;common snipe; sea ducks in the Atlantic Flyway; experimental duck seasonsopening in September in Florida, Kentucky and Tennessee; experimental Canadagoose seasons opening in September in Illinois, Michigan and Minnesota;sandhill cranes in the Central Flyway and Arizona and Utah; a special Canadagoose season in southwestern Wyoming; and some extended falconry seasons.Late seasons include the general waterfowl seasons; special seasons forscaup and goldeneyes; extra scaup and teal in regular seasons; coots; andother extended falconry seasons.Certain general procedures are followed in developing regulations for theearly and late seasons. Initial regulatory proposals are announced in a<T4>Federal Register </T4>document published in March and opened to publiccomment. The proposals are supplemented as necessary with additional <T4>Federal Register </T4>documents. Following termination of comment periodsand after public hearings, the Service further develops and publishes proposedframeworks for times of seasons, season lengths, shooting hours, dailybag and possession limits, and other regulatory elements. After considerationof additional public comments, the Service publishes final frameworks inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Using these frameworks, State conservation agenciesthen select hunting season dates and options. Upon receipt of State selections,the Service publishes a final rule in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, amending Subpart K of 50 CFR Part 20, to establishspecific seasons, bag limits and other regulations. The regulations becomeeffective upon publication. States may prescribe more restrictive seasonsthan those provided in the final frameworks.The regulations schedule for this year is as follows. On March 9, 1988,the Service published for public comment in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (53 FR 7702) a proposal to amend 50 CFR Part20, with comment periods ending as noted earlier. On June 7, 1988, the Service published for public commment a second document(53 FR 20875) which provided supplemental proposals for early- and late-seasonmigratory bird hunting regulations frameworks, with comment periods endingJune 22, 1988, for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands,July 18, 1988, for remaining early-season proposals, and August 29, 1988,for late-season proposals. This document reopens and extends the commentperiod for Alaska, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands through July 20,1988. This document is the third in a series of proposed, supplemental and finalrulemaking documents for migratory bird hunting regulations and deals specificallywith supplemental proposed frameworks for early-season migratory bird huntingregulations. It will lead to final frameworks from which States may selectseason dates, shooting hours and daily bag and possession limits for the1988-89 season. All pertinent comments on the March 9 proposal receivedthrough June 22, 1988, have been considered in developing this document.In addition, new proposals for certain early-season regulations are providedfor public comment. Comment periods on this third doucment are specifiedabove under <T2>DATES.</T2> Final regulatory frameworks for migratory game bird huntingseasons for Alaska, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands, and early seasonsin other areas of the United States are scheduled for publication in the<T4>Federal Register</T4> on or about August 10, 1988. On June 22, 1988, a public hearing was held in Washington, DC, as announcedin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of March 9 (53 FR 7702), June 7 (53 FR 20874),and June 10 (53 FR 21924), 1988, to review the status of mourning doves,woodcock, band-tailed pigeons, white-winged and white-tipped doves, rails,common moorhens, purple gallinules, common snipe, sandhill cranes, andpreliminary waterfowl information. Proposed hunting regulations were discussedfor these species and for migratory game birds in Alaska, Puerto Rico andthe Virgin Islands; experimental duck seaons in September in Florida, Kentuckyand Tennesse; experimental September Canada goose hunting seasons in Illinois,Michigan and Minnesota; a special Canada goose season in southwest Wyoming;specials sea duck seasons in the Atlantic Flyway; and extended falconryseasons. This supplemental proposed rulemaking consolidates further changes in theoriginal framework proposals published on March 9, 1988, in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (53 FR 7702).The regulations for early waterfowl hunting seasons proposed in this documentare based on the most current information available at this time aboutthe status of waterfowl populations and habitat conditions on the breedinggrounds. The drought that has plagued the prairies and parklands of Canadaand the United States through most of the 1980s has reached its most severeand widespread level in 1988. It is affecting not only breeding areas butalso migration and wintering areas.<ITAG tagnum="84">Presentations at Public Hearing</ITAG>A number of reports were given on the status of various migratory birdspecies for which early hunting seasons are being proposed. These are brieflyreviewed as a matter of public information, and to facilitate the Service'sresponse to public comments from the public hearing on June 22 and in correspondence.Unless otherwise noted, persons making the presentations are Service employees.Mr. Brad Bortner, Woodcock Specialist, reported on the 1988 status of Americanwoodcock. The report included harvest information gathered over the last23 years and breeding population information collected since 1968. Thetwo surveys are cooperatively run by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,Canadian Wildlife Service, and 39 State and Provincial wildlife agencies.The most significant findings were from the recently conducted singing-groundsurvey. This survey of woodcock breeding populations in the United Statesand Canada indicated minor increases in woodcock in both the Eastern Region(Atlantic Flyway) and the Central Region (Mississippi Flyway and a portionof the Central Flyway) since 1987. These changes were not statiscally significant.The Eastern Region population has declined 35.7 percent since 1968 andremains below the long-term average. The Central Region breeding populationhas been increasing at the rate of 1.0 percent per year since 1968; however,current populations are just slightly above the long-term average. A newmethod of analysis with superior statistical properties was initiated during1988. Mr. David Dolton, Mourning Dove Specialist, presented the status of the1988 mourning dove population. The report included information gatheredover the last 23 years. Trends were calculated for the most recent 2- and10-year intervals and for the entire 23-year period. Between 1987 and 1988,the number of doves heard per route showed a significant increase in allthree management units as follows: Eastern, 11.8 percent; Central, 6.5percent; and Western, 14.6 percent. Estimates indicated significant downwardtrends in the Western Unit for the 10- and 23-year periods. No significanttrend was found in the Eastern Unit for either timeframe. In the CentralUnit, a downward trend was indicated for the most recent 10 years, butno long-term trend was found. Trends for doves seen at the unit level overthe 23-year period agreed with trends for doves heard in all managementunits. Mr. Ronnie R. George, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, reported onthe status of white-winged and white-tipped doves in Texas. Whitewing populationsin 1988 declined 2 percent for 1987 and are still 14 percent below thelong-term average. White-tipped doves decreased 29 percent from the recordhigh in 1986, but all indications are that this population is healthy.He stated that populations are adequate to support relaxed hunting regulationsfor 1988. Specifically, the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department recommendsa season with a aggregated daily bag limit of 12 white-winged, mourning,and white-tipped doves, no more than 2 of which could be white-tipped doves.Mr. Roy Tomlinson, Southwest Dove Coordinator, conveyed information receivedfrom the Arizona Game and Fish Department about white-winged dove statusin Arizona. The 1987 harvest of 112,838 whitewings declined 41 percentfrom 1986 and 28 percent from the 7-year mean. The decrease in the 1987harvest is, in part, due to the reduced mourning dove season regulations(10 doves, no more than 6 whitewings during a 13 day season). Preliminary1988 call-count data indicated a small population decline from 1987.Mr. Tomlinson also summarized status and harvests of the two populationsof band-tailed pigeons. Harvest of the Four-Corners Population remain atlow levels and all indications are that this population is stable. ThePacific Coast population of bandtails has experienced a precipitous declinein status and harvest during the past 3 years. In February and March, 1988,the California Department of Fish and Game reported a die-off of bandtailsin northern California. Subsequent laboratory examination confirmed a positivediagnosis of trichomoniasis, a protozoan disease. The California Departmentof Fish and Game estimated that a minimum of 15,000 bandtails died of trichomoniasisin Mendocino, Monterey, and Sonoma counties during February-March. Becauseof the low productive potential of this species, the continued declinesin population and harvest of bandtails in Washington, Oregon, and Californiaare cause for concern.Mr. Skip Ladd, Central Flyway Representative, reported on the status ofsandhill cranes. The mid-continent Population may still be increasing.Preliminary estimates for 1988, uncorrected for visibility, indicated nearly400,000 cranes, the highest count since the current technique was initiatedin 1978. Approximately 5,200 hunters harvested about 12,700 cranes in theCental Flyway in the 1987-88 season, which is nearly the same as the previousyear. The Canadian harvest was about 5,200 and harvests in other areas(Alaska and Mexico) are believed to be less than 4,000. Collectively, totalharvests of mid-continent sandhill cranes are within guidelines establishedfor this population.The Rocky Mountain Population of greater sandhill cranes was estimatedto number about 19,100 birds in March 1988. This is not significantly differentfrom that during the last adequate survey, completed in 1985, and is withinthe objective range of 18,000-22,000. Special limited hunting seasons wereheld in 1987 in Arizona, Wyoming, and New Mexico where, collectively, theharvest of Rocky Mountain sandhill cranes was approximately 1,200, whichis within harvest guidelines established for this population. Hunts conductedin 1987 are proposed to be continued in 1988 and new experimental huntsare proposed in southwest New Mexico and Utah. All hunts will be in conformancewith the Rocky Mountain Sandhill Crane Management Plan. Mr. James Bartonek, Pacific Flyway Representative, reported on the statusof certain Alaska-nesting geese that have been under special scrutiny becauseof their declined status. The fall population of cackling Canada geesewas 7 percent above that for 1986; however, birds were both in Alaska andenroute at the time of the survey, the index of 54,800 underestimates theirtrue status. The 1987 fall index of the Pacific Flyway population of white-frontedgeese was 130,600 geese, a 22 percent increase over the 1986 index. Thewinter index of 138,600 Pacific brant was 8 percent above that of 1986when the last complete count was taken. The combined U.S. sport harveston these brant was estimated to be 1,729 birds and well below the predictedharvest. The 1988 spring survey of staging areas along the Alaska Peninsulatallied 53,800 emperor geese which was 4 percent above the 1987 index.The January 1988 index of dusky Canada geese was 12,200 and unchanged fromthe previous count in 1986. Harvest strategy continues to redirect harvestaway from dusky Canada geese towards more plentiful races, and during thepast hunting season only 163 duskies were taken in a harvest of 4,320 geesein western Oregon and southwestern Washington. The Aleutian Canada goose,classified as an endangered species, has dramatically increased from about800 in 1975 to more than 5,000 birds in 1988. Preliminary information onhabitat conditions in areas where these six populations nest suggest thatthis will be the second consecutive year of favorable conditions. Thereis no open season on Aleutian Canada geese. <ITAG tagnum="84">Comments Received at Public Hearing </ITAG>Thirteen individuals presented statements at the public hearing on proposedearly-season regulations. The comments are summarized below, and whereappropriate, the Service has provided a response. Mr. Leon Kirkland, representing the Atlantic Flyway Council, provided commentin support of Service action regarding migratory shore and upland gamebirds. He expressed concern over harvest of woodcock in February basedon preliminary data and asked the Service to begin evaluating possibleimpacts of February hunting on woodcock and advise the flyway councilsof the findings of the evaluation. He concurred with the action taken tocontinue the September duck season in Florida. He also expressed supportfor the Service action to protect blue-winged teal and reduce harvest butdisagreed with the means by which the Service proposes to accomplish thesereductions. He stated that teal seasons have been in effect for many yearsand to close the season would be too extreme an action. He suggested wecould accomplish a similar goal by reducing the season length and bag limitsrather than suspending the season. <T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes the request to evaluate impacts ofFebruary hunting of woodcock and will examine available data and reportback to the Flyway Council. The Service appreciates the support given theproposed action to protect blue-winged teal during the September duck seasons.Bluewings have been permitted in the harvest during these special seasonsin Florida, Kentucky, and Tennessee, since their initiation in 1981. However,due to their low population status throughout most of the 1980s, the Servicebelieves it unwise to continue providing additional harvest opportunitieson bluewings with these special seasons. Thus, the Service proposes tocontinue these September seasons with existing bag limits on wood ducksbut restrict the daily harvest of bluewings and other species to only 1bird. Response to Mr. Kirkland's comments about the September teal seasonincluded in the response to Mr. Bateman's comments. Mr. Lauren Schaaf, representing the Kentucky Department of Fish and WildlifeResources, commented on the proposals regarding September hunting seasons.He stated that Kentucky's experimental 5-day September duck season, whichhas been held since 1981, has been very popular there. The September harvestis comprised mainly of wood ducks. Although blue-winged teal are harvested,the Kentucky harvest is only a small part of the Mississippi Flyway blue-wingedteal harvest and has negligible impact on the population. He concurredwith the Service's proposal to continue the experimental season with primaryemphasis on wood ducks. He recognized the need for action to provide addedprotection for blue-winged teal, but felt that closure of the Septemberteal season should be used only as a last option, and that adequate harvestreduction could be accomplished by retaining the season and manipulatingseason length and bag limit. <T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes the concurrence with the proposedaction to continue Kentucky's experimental September duck season but limitthe blue-winged teal component of the harvest. The Service response toMr. Schaaf's comments about the September teal season is included in theresponse to Mr. Bateman's comments. Mr. Gary Norman, representing the Viriginia Department of Wildlife andInland Fisheries, requested that the Service allow Virginia to zone theState into East-West zones for woodcock. The State has reviewed seasontiming, woodcock migration, and the literature and feels that woodcockhunters across the State do not have equal opportunity to hunt woodcock.Mr. Norman stated that zoning would alow optimum woodcock hunting opportunitywithin the State without significantly increasing harvest. The State offeredto accept a 10-day penalty in each zone and to work with the Service toestablish information needs to evaluate the impacts of the proposed zoningexperiment. The Virginia Department also commended the Service for itsinitiative in releasing the draft North American Woodcock Management Planand also indicated that the Department has recently approved a researchstudy to investigate the habitat needs of woodcock on Virginia's EasternShore. <T3>Response. </T3>The Service recognizes Virginia's desire to providemore hunting opportunity for woodcock hunters across the State. However,in view of the significant long-term decline in Eastern Region woodcock,the Service believes that harvest opportunity should not be increased.Further, the Service notes the present option to split the hunting seasondates provides the State some opportunity to respond to differing seasonneeds in different parts of the State. Little is known about the impactsof zoning on woodcock, and the Service reiterates its concern about offeringthis option to Eastern Region States (see June 6, 1986, <T4>Federal Register</T4>, at 51 FR 20681). During 1988 the zoning issuewill be reviewed and discussed with the Atlantic Flyway Council's TechnicalSection. The Service appreciates the comment on the woodcock managementplan and looks forward to working with the State on implementing the plan.Mr. John Anderson, representing the National Audubon Society, was encouragedby recent increases in mourning dove populations but was concerned aboutthe long-term decline in the Western Management Unit where he recommendedcontinued restrictive frameworks. He supported the recommended frameworkson mourning doves, band-tailed pigeons, and white-winged doves, with theexception of the special white-winged dove season in south Texas for whichhe recommended daily bag limits of 12 white-winged doves and mourning doves,either singly or in the aggregate, citing past evidence that such a seasonwould not result in excessive harvests of either species. He said thatconsideration must be given to the effect that restrictions would haveon Texas' efforts to restore nesting habitat. He supported both the regularand special sandhill crane seasons, noting that he personally had viewedsuch hunts and believed that adequate protection was provided whoopingcranes and the overall harvests of sandhill cranes were within populationguidelines. He was supportive of the proposed experimental season in theHatch-Deming area in New Mexico, since it would occur when whooping craneswould not be expected. Mr. Anderson recommended that because the woodcockpopulations were still depressed that no new zoning be allowed and thatthe February season be discontinued until its impacts are better known.Because of poor habitat conditions and prospects for decreased populationsof ducks he recommended that there be no relaxation of special duck seasonsand that there be significant reductions but not elimination of the Septemberteal season, suggesting that that season be reduced from 9 to 3 days. Lastly,he recommended that the restrictive seasons on certain Alaska-nesting geesebe continued. <T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes Mr. Anderson's support for both theregular and special sandhill crane seasons in the Central Flyway, New Mexico,Arizona, Utah and Wyoming, including the proposed experimental season inthe Hatch-Deming area of New Mexico. The Service proposes to approve allof these hunts. With regard to Mr. Anderson's comments concerning the needfor continued restrictive frameworks for mourning doves in the WesternManagement Unit, refer to the response to Mr. Hunt that follows. Commentsconcerning recommendations to increase bag limits on white-winged dovesand mourning doves in the Texas special white-winged dove hunt are addressedin response to comments by Mr. Ron George. The Service notes Mr. Anderson'ssupport for Service-recommended frameworks on mourning doves, band-tailedpigeons, and white-winged doves. The Service has addressed issues concerningzoning and February hunting for woodcock in the responses to Messers. Normanand Kirkland. We note Mr. Anderson's concern about the poor status of waterfowland expected poor production and his recommendation for significant reductionsin, but not elimination of, the September teal season. This is addressedin the response to Mr. Bateman. The Service notes commentor's support forcontinued restrictive seasons on certain Alaska-nesting geese, which isconsistent with recommendations made in this proposed framework. Mr. Eldridge Hunt, representing the Pacific Flyway Council, said that theCouncil's written request for seasons had been sent to the Director earlier.He thanked the Service for the opportunity to observe the proceedings ofthe Service Regulations Committee on regulatory matters pertaining to speciesof migratory gamebirds other than waterfowl and participate as a consultanton matters pertaining to waterfowl. He urges the Service to provide opportunityin the future to consult on all regulatory issues pertaining to the earlyseasons. He asked the Service to reconsider its recommended frameworkson mourning dove seasons in Arizona and California. He stated the Council'srecommendation was more responsive in that it required the two States toselect the split season, thereby protecting most doves migrating from morenorthern States. The Council recommendation would provide additional recreationaldays with likely no increase in harvest over that which would occur duringa 30-day season opening on September 1. While agreeing with the Service'sintent to eliminate the canvasback harvest, he requested an exception forAlaska that would permit one ``mistake'' canvasback in the bag, reasoningthat (1) there was a precedence for not restricting the first year whenthe population was below threshold level, (2) the moult development ofducks during this early season in Alaska is such that most species wouldstill be ``brown'' or ``gray'', making identification difficult, (3) theharvest of about 300 birds annually is small and relatively unimportantin the total harvest, and (4) it would help prevent violations and improvehunter compliance with the changes in basic limits also being proposed.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes that the Pacific Flyway Council, theCentral Flyway Council and others have repeatedly requested participationin the early-season process by providing consultants to the Service RegulationsCommittee on matters pertaining to all migratory game birds, includingwaterfowl, shorebirds, and upland birds. While there is agreement amongStates within those 2 Councils that Flyway Councils are the appropriatebodies for providing consultants, there is not similar agreement amongeastern States where it has been suggested consultants come from threeRegional Fish and Game Associations. Until these differences are resolvedconsultation in most years will remain limited to matters pertaining towaterfowl during the late-season process. The Service notes that the mourning dove population in the Western ManagementUnit has experienced a substantial long-term downward trend. In 1987, restrictivehunting regulations were initiated, to be continued for a 3-year period(1987-89). Incomplete harvest information (no data from California or Oregon)indicates the restrictions partially achieved harvest objectives. A relaxationin hunting by increasing the split-season option from 45 days to the requested60 days is considered unwarranted until the 3-year period has concludedand results evaluated. Further, the Service's proposed frameworks wouldnot preclude either Arizona or California taking the 45-day split seasonoption which would probably result in a greater reduction in harvest ofmore northern-nesting doves than would occur with the 30-day option. While information on breeding duck populations is preliminary and dataare still being edited, indices for canvasback nonetheless will be significantlybelow those for which hunting would be allowed. The Service had previouslynoted that the decline in the Western Population and the likelihood ofa season closure this year. Admittedly, Alaska's harvest of canvasbacksis small and occurs at a time when identification of sex (but not species)is more difficult than during later seasons; however, there are other Statesthat shoot fewer canvasbacks than Alaska that have had season closures.It is also noted that hunters elsewhere must identify duck species, includingsuch less distinctively colored ducks as hen canvasbacks, before shooting.The Service will work with Alaska to provide visual material to huntersthat will help them in identifying canvasback. Mr. Gary Myers, representing the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency, statedthat exciting opportunities exist with regard to new waterfowl managementprograms through the North American Waterfowl Management Plan. Concentratedinternational and interagency programs will provide a basis for preservingkey waterfowl habitats and rebuilding waterfowl populations in both Canadaand the United States. Unfortunately, funds are limited, waterfowl breedinghabitat is in very poor condition and duck populations are low. There islittle likelihood of significant production this year. He noted the needto maintain strong support from hunters and to give adequate protectionto existing breeding stocks. Mr. Myers supported the Service recommendationto reduce the harvest of blue-winged teal during the early September duckseason in Tennessee. He indicated further that now is the time when theresource must come first and he urged the various States and Flyway Councilsto join with the Service in achieving this objective.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes Mr. Myers' support of the North AmericanWaterfowl Management Plan and the Service proposal to reduce the harvestof blue-winged teal during the September duck season in Tennessee.Mr. Ronnie R. George, representing the Central Flyway Council and the TexasParks and Wildlife Department, expressed support and endorsement of thefollowing recommendations:1. Modification of the aggregate daily bag limit for the special 4-daywhite-winged dove season in Texas to include 12 white-winged, mourning,and white-tipped doves, no more than 2 of which could be white-tipped doves.2. Continuation of the experimental sandhill crane seasons in the MiddleRio Grande Valley of New Mexico in accordance with the Pacific and CentralFlyway Management Plans for the Rocky Mountain Population of greater sandhillcranes. This would be the third and final year of the experimental hunt.3. Revision of framework dates in the Pacific and Central Flyway plansfor Rocky Mountain Sandhill Cranes to read: ``between September 1 and November30, except that in Sierra, Luna and Dona Ana Counties of New Mexico, theseason framework dates will be between September 1 and January 31.''4. Adoption of operational status for the sandhill crane season in theHatch-Deming area of New Mexico to reduce depredations and allow increasedhunting opportunity. 5. Expansion of the framework dates for hunting American coot so that theywould coincide with all other duck seasons, including teal and other specialduck seasons.6. Adoption of the proposed basic framework for webless and waterfowl speciesnot addressed in recommendation numbers 1 through 5.Mr. George then presented a series of slides to support the Texas Parksand Wildlife Department's request for a change in the special 4-day white-wingeddove season bag limits. Texas believes that the present frameworks aretoo restrictive, that harvest of whitewings and mourning doves, has beenunduly restricted, that such restrictions encourage hunters to hunt inMexico (where regulations are more liberal), which has reduced income fromthe Texas white-winged dove stamp and threatens such habitat acquisitionprograms. Further, Mr. George notes that September hunting of mourningdoves has recently been shown not to be detrimental to mourning dove populationsand that call-count data indicate that dove populations in Texas were notadversely affected during years of more liberal regulations. He pointedout that prior to 1984, the limits had been 12 mourning doves and 10 whitewings,and that its current proposal is far more restrictive than the pre-1984limits. Mr. George also commented that the absence of the Flyway CouncilConsultants for the early-seasons regulations process prevented Texas fromadequately presenting and explaining their data to the Service RegulationsCommittee.<T3>Response. </T3>The white-winged dove population in Texas declined substantiallyafter the 1983 freeze that affected nesting habitat, and that populationshave not fully recovered. In addition, during the early 1980's when moreliberal regulations were permitted, the harvest of mourning doves increasedmarkedly during the early whitewing season (when a substantial segmentof the mourning dove population is still nesting in south Texas). For thesereasons, the Service feels that relaxation of the special white-wingeddove hunting regulations is not warranted at this time. The Service hasconcern also, with permitting a season designed primarily for one species,whitewings in this case, that results in a large proportion of the harvestbeing a different species.Mr. George's comments on consultants to the early-seasons regulations processare addressed previously in the response to Mr. Hunt.The Service concurs with recommendations to continue the experimental sandhillcrane hunt in the Middle Rio Grande Valley of New Mexico and extensionof the framework to January 31 for sandhill crane hunting in Sierra, Luna,and Dona Ana Counties of New Mexico. We also concur with a sandhill cranehunt in those counties but the Service proposes this hunt to be consideredexperimental for 3 years. Although a 3-year experimental hunt was heldduring 1982-85 in this area, that experiment involved hunting only oneweekend per month in November, December and January, whereas the proposedoperational hunt would involve 30 days, all of which would be during January.The substantial differences in the previous experimental hunt and the proposedhunt warrant experimental status.The Service disagrees with extending coot frameworks to include all duckseasons, rather than only regular seasons, because it believes that, inmost cases, special seasons are established to target specific speciesor populations and not as general duck seasons. In light of the directionreflected by the Service's recently published Supplemental EnvironmentalImpact Statement (Statement) on Issuance of Annual Regulations for SportHunting of Migratory Birds (June 1988), it is the intent of the Serviceto control extension and proliferation of special seasons and bag limitsdue to difficulties in evaluating the impact of such on target and non-targetpopulations. Thus, allowing coot hunting during all duck seasons, includingspecial seasons, would not be in keeping with the direction of the Statement.Further, with the suspension of September teal seasons proposed in theseframeworks, an extended framework would not be applicable in the CentralFlyway at this time since there are no other special seasons.The Service notes the Central Flyway Council's support for retention ofother previous frameworks for the early season regulations.Mr. Raymond Lee, representing the Arizona Game and Fish Department, commentedon the mourning dove status and hunting regulations in the Western ManagementUnit in relation to Arizona. Prior to 1987, Arizona traditionally set a70-day split dove season with about 21-28 days in September, with the balance(42-49 days) in November through December. The proportion of the dove harvestthat occurred during the late segment averaged 17.5 percent. In 1987, withrestrictive regulations, Arizona selected a season with 13 days in Septemberand 32 days in the late segment. The proportion of the harvest during thelate segment was 17.1 percent. The 1987 restricted season resulted in areduction of harvest of about 25 percent.The Arizona Game and Fish Department supports the Pacific Flyway Councilrecommendation of a 60-day season in Arizona and California to be splitbetween two periods, September 1-15 and November 1-January 15. The Council'srecommendation would result in 33 percent more hunting opportunity duringthe late segment but the maximum increase in harvest is estimated to beless than 5 percent in Arizona.<T3>Response. </T3>The request for a relaxation in mourning dove huntingseason frameworks for Arizona and California in the Western ManagementUnit is addressed in the response to comments by Mr. Hunt.Mr. Hugh Bateman, representing the Lower Region Regulations Committee ofthe Mississippi Flyway Council, commented in opposition to suspension ofthe September teal season. He indicated that the season has been operationalfor many years and is utilized by 8 Mississippi Flyway States. Additionally,2 more States harvest teal in September duck seasons which they cloosein lieu of the teal season. Overall, the September harvest of blue-wingedteal accounts for about one-third of the Flyway's total season harvestof bluewings. He stated that the Lower Region recognizes the potentialimpact on duck production of the existing severe drought affecting mostnorthern breeding grounds, but stressed that such drastic action as isproposed is ill-advised at this time because the regulations process has,in this instance, failed to allow for proper consideration of alternativesand the action is in conflict with the spirit of the North American WaterfowlManagement Plan. He urged the Service to reconsider its proposal, and recommendedas an alternative that the September teal season be retained and reducedfrom 9 to 3 days with a daily bag limit of 4 birds. He further recommendedthat the 5-day experimental September duck seasons in Kentucky and Tennesseecontinue with a 4-bird daily bag limit to include not more than 2 woodducks and 2 blue-winged teal. These actions would substantially reducethe September harvest of blue-winged teal. The proposed 3-day teal seasonwould provide only token hunting opportunity but would maintain hunterinterest, whereas suspending the season would erode public support forwetlands conservation programs now being developed under the North AmericanWaterfowl Management Plan. He indicated that the Lower Region would alsosupport developing a continentwide management plan for blue-winged teal,which would provide a more deliberate approach for addressing all factorsaffecting population declines in this species, not only hunting regulations.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service's proposed action to suspend the Septemberteal season and severely restrict the harvest of blue-winged teal duringexperimental September duck seasons is in response to the diminished statusof the species. Breeding populations have been substantially below thelong-term average since 1981. Production has been poor during that period,and the prospects for production in 1988 the worst yet due to severe droughtconditions in traditional nesting areas. Although the September teal seasonhas been in effect for many years, it and the inclusion of blue-wingedteal in other September seasons represent an additional harvest opportunityover and above the regular duck season. Declining age ratios in the killindicate that proportionately more adult birds have been taken in recentyears. While the reduced status of blue-winged teal is primarily a resultof the continuing drought and attendant habitat degradation on the breedinggrounds, the Service nevertheless believes the proposed action is necessaryto provide adequate protection to the species until populations can recover.Overall, the continuing poor conditions and little production are not acircumstance under which a separate harvest opportunity can be offered.The Service appreciates the Council's support for development of a managementplan for blue-winged teal and intends to work closely with the flyway councilstoward this end.Mr. Ken Babcock, representing the Upper Region Regulations Committee ofthe Mississippi Flyway Council, recognized the precarious status of NorthAmerican waterfowl and commended the Service for its leadership in addressingthis current problem. He indicated that the timing for these early-seasonsregulations deliberations precludes full input by the Mississippi FlywayCouncil and expressed concern for this lack of opportunity. He supportedstatements by other flyway councils in opposition to complete closure ofSeptember teal seasons. He asked the Service to take immediate action toinitiate discussions with Mexico concerning high harvest of waterfowl suchas teal and pintails, particularly at a time when their populations areextremely low.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service appreciates Mr. Babcock's support for itsefforts to address the current problems with waterfowl population statusand notes his concern for the lack of opportunity for full input from theMississippi Flyway Council in the development of early-season hunting regulations.Unfortunately, the timing of decisions about early hunting seasons, someof which open as early as September 1, is dictated on one hand by the needto establish the regulations and make them available to the public beforethe hunting seasons open, and on the other hand by the need for as muchinformation as possible about population status before decisions aboutappropriate hunting regulations are made. Because of these limitations,regulations for early hunting seasons must be established prior to theregular summer meetings of the flyway councils.With reference to Mexico, the Service has an ongoing cooperative programwith the Mexican Government, and will discuss the status of various waterfowlspecies with Mexican authorities in the near future.Mr. Dale Witt, representing the Central Flyway Council, expressed the Council'sconcern for the status of blue-winged teal but noted that the poor statusis due mainly to drought and habitat degradation and not to overharvest.He also noted that, although the blue-winged teal population is low, ithas been fairly stable during the past several years. He expressed theCouncil's opposition to a complete suspension of the September teal seasonin that such drastic action is not warranted. He recommended that, insteadof a complete closure, a 3-day season be allowed and that a realistic managementstrategy be developed in cooperation with the Flyway Councils prior tothe 1989 regulations process.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes the Central Flyway's concern aboutthe Service's proposed suspension of the September teal season, recommendationsfor a restricted rather than a closed season and the need to develop amanagement strategy for teal. Our response to these issues is addressedin the response for Mr. Bateman.Mr. Jim Phillips, a journalist, expressed his strong support to discontinueSeptember teal seasons. He presented his views of the political natureby which these seasons were first established and the illegal harvest associatedwith the very early years of teal seasons.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes Mr. Phillips' support for discontinuanceof the September teal season.Mr. Charles Kelley, first speaking as Chairman of the Migratory Bird Committeeof the Southeastern Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, complimentedthe Service on regulatory actions affecting southeastern States pertainingto migratory upland gamebirds and shorebirds. Then, speaking as Directorof the Alabama Division of Fish and Game, he recommended that there notbe a closure of the September teal seasons, noting the importance of thisseason to hunters and legislators in furthering waterfowl management andhabitat programs. He said that the Service Regulations Committee had notconcluded that hunting was a factor affecting the population of ducks,but should the Service not allow September teal seasons the message hewould take back to his duck hunters is that somebody in Washington, DC,believed the gun was the cause. Mr. Kelley called for reconsideration ofthe action to suspend the teal season and suggested a 3-day September tealseason as an alternative.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes Mr. Kelley's support for migratoryshore and upland game bird regulations. The response to Mr. Kelley's commentsabout the September teal season is included in the response to Mr. Bateman.<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments Received</ITAG>The supplemental proposed rulemaking which appeared in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> dated June 7, 1988 (53 FR 20874), summarized48 comments which had been received by May 9, 1988. Since then 36 commentson early-season proposals and 1,686 comments on swan hunting have beenreceived. They are summarized below and numbered in the order used in theMarch 9, 1988, <T4>Federal Register.</T4>6. September Teal SeasonsThe Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, the Illinois Departmentof Conservation, and four individuals recommended that the September tealseasons be closed in 1988. All cited the poor population status of tealand related information.<T3>Response.</T3> The Service proposes to not offer the September tealseason in 1988 due to the low populations of blue-winged teal and verypoor outlook for production this year. Thus, the comments received arein support of the Service's proposal. 11. Mergansers In a letter to the Service, the Concerned Coastal Sportsmen's Associationrequested that red-breasted and common mergansers be included in the seaduck season. They cite that mergansers are detrimental to recreationaland commercial fisheries activities and that numbers are sufficient tojustify this longer 107-day season and larger 7-bird limit. <T3>Response.</T3> Currently, States in the Atlantic and Mississippi Flywaysmay select a separate 5-daily bag limit of mergansers. However, littleinformation is available to support the contention that mergansers areharming coastal fisheries. Further available population status and productioninformation does not warrant a relaxation in bag limit regulations on thesespecies. 15. Tundra Swans As of June 22, 1988, the date of the Public Hearing, the Service had received1,686 postcards and letters, primarily from individuals urging that swansnot be hunted. Most requested ``Not to lift Federal restrictions on swanhunting'' following the wording in a flyer distributed by the NationalHumane Education Society (no address or date given). <T3>Response.</T3> The Service proposes to offer Alaska frameworks foran experimental swan season in Game Management Unit 22. This season wasinitially proposed in June 1986 by Kawerak, Inc. (a Native regional corporation)(see 51 FR 26713), approved by the Alaska Game Board and presented by theAlaska Department of Fish and Game for consideration by the Pacific FlywayCouncil, which in turn recommended it to the Service. Swans that wouldbe hunted belong to the Western Population of tundra swans which is experiencinga long-term increase in numbers. During the past 10 years (1979-88), thewinter population index averaged 63,600 swans, well above the populationobjective. The proposed hunt is within guidelines in the Western Populationof Tundra Swan Management Plan. Existing and proposed swan seasons in otherStates will be addressed in the late-season regulations cycle. 17. CootsThe Kansas Department of Wildlife and Parks favors an extension of theframeworks to allow coot hunting during all duck seasons rather than onlyduring regular duck seasons. Kansas cites as reasons the additional huntingopportunity afforded at a time when such opportunities for ducks are beingrestricted and the fact that no biological rationale can be given for notallowing an expanded framework. Additionally, in Kansas, the coot harvesthas decreased to a point of being insignificant due to the shifting ofregular duck seasons to later periods to take advantage of late-arrivingmallards that utilize recently developed reservoir habitats. <T3>Response.</T3> The Service disagrees with extending coot frameworksto include any duck season, rather than only regular seasons, because itbelieves that, in most cases, special seasons are established to targetspecific species or populations and not as general waterfowl seasons. Inlight of the direction reflected by the Service's recently published SupplementalEnvironmental Impact Statement (Statement) on Issuance of Annual Regulationsfor Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds (June 1988), it is the intent of theService to control extension and proliferation of special seasons and baglimits due to difficulties in evaluating the impact of such on target andnon-target populations. Thus, allowing coot hunting during all duck seasons,including special seasons, would not be in keeping with the direction ofthe Statement. Further, with the suspension of September teal seasons proposedin these frameworks, an extended framework would not be applicable in theCentral Flyway at this time since there are no other special duck seasons.21. WoodcockThe Pennsylvania Game Commission requested that the Service continue theEastern Region restrictive harvest regulations adopted during the 1985-86hunting seasons and discontinue February hunting of woodcock throughoutthe range of the woodcock. <T3>Response.</T3> The Service proposes to continue the Eastern Regionrestrictive regulations. The Service is aware of the concern about Februarywoodcock hunting. Since no documentation was presented concerning Februaryhunting of woodcock, the Service will review available data and discussthe issue with States and Flyway Councils. 22. Band-tailed PigeonsTwo letters were received from Washington State residents, one from a privatecitizen and the other from the Western Region, Washington State officeof the National Audubon Society. Both urged that hunting season frameworkson band-tailed pigeons be restricted in 1988 to reduce impacts on a decliningpigeon population and to initiate studies to investigate the factors contributingto the decline. The individual also recommended that mineral spring sitesbe closed to hunting and season length be reduced in California. <T3>Response.</T3> The Service concurs that bandtail populations have declinedand the situation is serious. In 1987 hunting restrictions, to continuefor a 3-year period, were imposed. Considering the continued populationdecline, the Service proposes to further restrict hunting season frameworksin 1988 by delaying the opening date from September 7 to September 15.This measure will provide further protection of band-tailed pigeons priorto and during migration. The delayed opening will result in significantlyfewer pigeons using mineral springs and, thereby, reduce harvests there.In California seasons occur later, when birds from all subpopulations havemixed and current season frameworks in California are considered appropriateat this time. 23. Mourning Doves An unsigned letter was received from the Humane Society of the United Statesand the World Society for the Protection of Animals expressing oppositionto the practice of permitting hunting of mourning doves in September, duringa time when this species is still nesting. The letter also urged the closureof the hunting season on all migratory birds in Puerto Rico to relievepressure on these species while studies are being conducted. The letterrecommended (1) that studies be expanded to determine if Category 2 speciesof waterfowl should be listed pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of1973, and (2) increased law enforcement effort in Puerto Rico to stem illegalshooting, particularly in relation to white-cheeked pintails. The lettersupported the Service's habitat acquisition efforts in Puerto Rico. <T3>Response.</T3> The Service's position concerning September huntingof mourning doves has been discussed in earlier<T4> Federal Register</T4> documents (51 FR 24418, July 3, 1986 and 52FR 25173, July 2, 1987). Continued September hunting of mourning dovesin most areas of the United States is viewed as a valid use of the resourceunder the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918. The Puerto Rico Departmentof Natural Resources, with assistance from the Service, continues to evaluatebreeding activities of waterfowl in Puerto Rico and believes this can beaccomplished under present hunting season frameworks. The Service continuesto support a strong law enforcement program to control illegal shootingand continues to promote habitat acquisition of key waterfowl areas. 24. White-winged DovesA letter from the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department requested a liberalizationin the regulations frameworks for the special 4-day white-winged dove huntingseason. Specifically, Texas requested a change from a 10-dove aggregatebag limit, no more than 2 of which could be mourning doves and 2 of whichcould be white-tipped doves, to a 12-dove aggregate bag limit, no morethan 2 of which could be white-tipped doves. Under the proposed 12-dovelimit, there would be no restrictions on mourning doves.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes that the white-winged dove populationin Texas declined substantially after the 1983 freeze that affected nestinghabitat, and that populations have not fully recovered. In addition, duringthe early 1980s when more liberal regulations were permitted, the harvestof mourning doves increased markedly during the early whitewing season(when a substantial segment of the mourning dove population is still nestingin south Texas). For these reasons, the Service feels that relaxation ofthe special white-winged dove hunting regulations is not warranted at thistime. The Service has concern, also, with permitting a season designedprimarily for one species, whitewings in this case, that results in a largeproportion of the harvest being a different species.25. Migratory Bird Hunting in AlaskaThe Alaska Department of Fish and Game in letters dated June 16 and 17,1988, recommended changes in brant seasons and continuation of duck seasonframeworks. Alaska requested that the season on brant be reinstated byincreasing it from 50 to 107 days and, thereby, eliminate an unnecessaryand complicating restriction without increasing the harvest. Alaska notedin detail the nature of the U.S. sport harvest, that it was well withinharvest objectives, that cooperative efforts with Native groups have beeneffective in reducing all harvests of brant, and there is support fromNative groups for continuation of the sport seasons on brant. Acknowledgingthe probability of a depressed population of ducks, Alaska requested retentionof frameworks offered in the past because: (1) Their harvests of about400 canvasbacks and 14,000 pintails are relatively inconsequential in comparisonto the continental harvests of these species, (2) because the effectivehunting season in much of Alaska is from 15 to 40 days, and (3) becausethe average seasonal harvest by Alaska hunters is about 5 compared to 8among hunters in the Pacific Flyway. If retention of existing frameworkswere not possible and numbers of canvasbacks dropped below threshold levelsfor hunting, Alaska offered as an alternative that the daily bag limitson ducks include no more than 3 pintails and 3 canvasbacks, statewide.They note that the usual species-specific restrictions required in otherStates are largely precluded in Alaska because most ducks are in drab eclipseplumages during the season and hunter identification of species and sexesis difficult at best. Restrictive regulations in areas of light harvestare largely tokenism, create public resentment, and undermine credibilityof waterfowl managers.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service appreciates Alaska's willingness and leadershiprole in taking restrictive measures to protect those populations of Alaska-nestinggeese that have undergone declines. What was perceived to be a potentialproblem by an expansion of areas in which brant would be hunted did notmaterialize. The combined U.S. sport harvest of Pacific brant was estimatedat 1,729, less than forecasted, and about 1.2 percent of the winteringpopulation. The Service concurs with Alaska and proposes to reinstate thebrant season length to 107 days.Only preliminary information on duck populations was available to Alaskawhen they made their proposal. Since then, additional information on ducks,but particularly about pintails and canvasback, which are of considerableimportance in the Alaska breeding population, indicate major declines.The Service believes that restrictive measures are warranted and shouldbe more restrictive than those proposed by Alaska. Therefore, the Serviceproposes that the basic daily bag limits be reduced by 2 ducks, includenot more than 2 pintails and the season on canvasback not be opened.27. Migratory Game Birds Seasons for FalconersEight individuals and two falconers associations submitted comments insupport of the proposal to extend the falconry season frameworks.<T3>Response. </T3>The Service notes these comments and proposes to extendthe falconry season frameworks.<ITAG tagnum="84">Public Comment Invited</ITAG>Based on the results of migratory game bird studies now in progress andhaving due consideration for any data or views submitted by interestedparties, the possible amendments resulting from this supplemental rulemakingwill specify open seasons, shooting hours and bag and possession limitsfor designated migratory game birds in the United States. The Director intends that finally adopted rules be as responsive as possibleto all concerned interests. He therefore desires to obtain the commentsand suggestions of the public, other concerned governmental agencies andprivate interests on these proposals and will take into consideration thecomments received. Such comments, and any additional information received,may lead the Director to adopt final regulations differing from these proposals.Special circumstances are involved in the establishment of these regulationswhich limit the amount of time which the Service can allow for public comment.Specifically, two considerations compress the time in which the rulemakingprocess must operate: the need, on the one hand, to establish final rulesat a point early enough in the summer to allow affected State agenciesto appropriately adjust their licensing and regulatory mechanisms, and,on the other hand, the unavailability before mid-June of specific, reliabledata on this year's status of some waterfowl, and migratory shore and uplandgame bird populations. Therefore, the Service believes that to allow commentperiods past the dates specified earlier is contrary to the public interest.<ITAG tagnum="84">Comment Procedure</ITAG>It is the policy of the Department of the Interior, whenever practical,to afford the public an opportunity to participate in the rulemaking process.Accordingly, interested persons may participate by submitting written commentsto the Director (FWS/MBMO), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Departmentof the Interior, Matomic Building_Room 536, Washington, DC 20240. Commentsreceived will be available for public inspection during normal businesshours at the Service's office in Room 536, Matomic Building, 1717 H StreetNW., Washington, DC.All relevant comments on these early-season proposals received no laterthan July 20, 1988, and on late-season proposals received by August 29,1988, will be considered. The Service will attempt to acknowledge receivedcomments, but substantive response to individual comments may not be provided.<ITAG tagnum="84">NEPA Consideration</ITAG>The ``Final Environmental Statement for the Issuance of Annual RegulationsPermitting the Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds (FES-75-54)'' was filedwith the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) on June 6, 1975, and noticeof availability was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on June 13, 1975 (40 FR 25241). A supplementto the FES, ``Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement: Issuanceof Annual Regulations Permitting the Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds (FSES88-14)'', was filed with CEQ on June 9, 1988, and Notice of Availabilitywas published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of June 16, 1988 (53 FR 22582), and June 17,1988 (53 FR 22727).<ITAG tagnum="84">Endangered Species Act Consideration</ITAG>Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act provides that, ``The Secretaryshall review other programs administered by him and utilize such programsin furtherance of the purposes of this Act'' [and shall] ``insure thatany action authorized, funded, or carried out * * * is not likely to jeopardizethe continued existence of such endangered or threatened species or resultin the destruction or modification of [critical) habitat * * * '' The Servicetherefore initiated section 7 consultation under the Endangered SpeciesAct for the proposed hunting season frameworks.On June 17, 1988, the Office of Endangered Species gave a biological opinionthat the proposed action is not likely to jeopardize the continued existenceof listed species or result in the destruction or adverse modificationof their critical habitats.As in the past, hunting regulations this year are designed, among otherthings, to remove or alleviate chances of conflict between seasons formigratory game birds and the protection and conservation of endangeredand threatened species and their habitats. Examples of such considerationinclude areas in Alaska and the Pacific Flyway closed to Canada goose huntingfor protection of the endangered Aleutian Canada goose, and closed areasin Puerto Rico for protection of the Plain pigeon and Puerto Rican parrot.The Service's biological opinion resulting from its consultation undersection 7 is considered a public document and is available for inspectionin the Office of Endangered Species and the Office of Migratory Bird Management,U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, Washington,DC 20240.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act, Executive Order 12291 and the PaperworkReduction Act</ITAG>In the <T4>Federal Register </T4>dated March 9, 1988 (53 FR 7702), the Servicereported measures it had undertaken to comply with requirements of theRegulatory Flexibility Act and the Executive Order. These included preparinga Determination of Effects and an updated Final Regulatory Impact Analysis,and publication of a summary of the latter. These regulations have beendetermined to be major under Executive Order 12291 and they have a significanteconomic impact on substantial numbers of small entities under the RegulatoryFlexibility Act. This determination is detailed in the aforementioned documentswhich are available upon request from the Office of Migratory Bird Management,U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Matomic Building_Room 536, Department ofthe Interior, Washington, DC 20240. As noted in the early <T4>Federal Register </T4>publication, the Service plans to issue its memorandumof Law for migratory bird hunting regulations at the same time the firstof the annual hunting rules is completed. These regulations contain noinformation collections subject to Office of Management and Budget reviewunder the Paperwork Reduction Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">Authorship</ITAG>The primary author of this proposed rulemaking is Morton M. Smith, Officeof Migratory Bird Management, working under the direction of Rollin D.Sparrowe, Chief.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 20</ITAG>Exports, Hunting, Imports, Transportation, Wildlife.The rules that eventually will be promulgated for the 1988-89 hunting seasonare authorized under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of July 3, 1918 (40Stat. 755; 16 U.S.C. 701-708h); the Fish and Wildlife Improvement Act of1978 (92 Stat. 3112; 16 U.S.C. 712); and the Alaska Game Act of 1925 (43Stat. 739, as amended, 54 Stat. 1103-04).<ITAG tagnum="85">Proposed Regulations Frameworks for 1988-89 Early Hunting Seasonson Certain Migratory Birds</ITAG>Pursuant to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, the Secretary of Interior hasapproved proposed frameworks which prescribe season lengths, bag limits,shooting hours and outside dates within which States may select seasonsfor mourning doves, white-winged doves, white-tipped doves, band-tailedpigeons, rails, woodcock, snipe, moorhens and gallinules; experimentalSeptember duck seasons in Florida, Tennessee and Kentucky; sea ducks (scoter,eider, and oldsquaw) in certain defined areas of the Atlantic Flyway; experimentalSeptember Canada goose seasons in Michigan, Minnesota, and Illinois; sandhillcranes; special Canada Goose season in Wyoming; and extended falconry seasons.<ITAG tagnum="84">NOTICE</ITAG>Any State desiring its hunting seasons for mourning doves, white-wingeddoves, white-tipped doves, band-tailed pigeons, rails, woodcock, commonsnipe, common moorhens and purple gallinules, sandhill cranes or extendedfalconry seasons to open in September must make its selection no laterthan August 10, 1988. States desiring these seasons to open after September30 may make their selections at the time they select regular waterfowlseasons. Season selections for the six States offered experimental Septemberwaterfowl seasons and Wyoming's special Canada goose season must also bemade by August 10, 1988.Atlantic Flyway coastal States desiring their seasons on sea ducks in certaindefined areas to open in September must make their selection no later thanAugust 10, 1988. Those desiring this season to open after September maymake their selections when they select their regular waterfowl seasons.Outside Dates: All dates noted are inclusive.Shooting Hours: Between 1/2 hour before sunrise and sunset daily for allspecies except as noted below. The hours noted here and elsewhere alsoapply to hawking (taking by falconry).Mourning DovesOutside Dates: Between September 1, 1988, and January 15, 1989, exceptas otherwise provided, States may select hunting seasons and bag limitsas follows:<ITAG tagnum="81">Eastern Management Unit</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(All States east of the Mississippi River and Louisiana)</ITAG>Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits:Not more than 70 days with bag and possession limits of 12 and 24, respectively;<T3>or</T3> not more than 60 days with bag and posssession limits of 15and 30, respectively.Hunting seasons may be split into not more than 3 periods under eitheroption.Shooting Hours: Between 1/2 hour before sunrise and sunset daily.Zoning: <T3>Alabama, Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana </T3>and <T3>Mississippi, </T3>may elect to zone their States as follows:A. Two zones per State having the following descriptions or division lines:<T3>Alabama</T3>_South Zone: Mobile, Baldwin, Escambia, Covington, Coffee,Geneva, Dale, Houston and Henry Counties. North Zone: Remainder of theState.<T3>Georgia_</T3>The Northern Zone shall be that portion of the State lyingnorth of a line running west to east along U.S. Highway 280 from Columbusto Wilcox County, thence southward along the western border of Wilcox County,thence east along the southern border of Wilcox County to the OcmulgeeRiver, thence north along the Ocmulgee River to Highway 280, thence eastalong Highway 280 to the Little Ocmulgee River; thence southward alongthe Little Ocmulgee River to the Ocmulgee River; thence southwesterly alongthe Ocmulgee River to the western border of Jeff Davis County; thence southalong the western border of Jeff Davis County; thence east along the southernborder of Jeff Davis and Appling Counties; thence north along the easternborder of Appling County to the Altamaha River; thence east to the easternborder of Tattnall County; thence north along the eastern border of TattnallCounty; thence north along the western border of Evans to Candler County;thence east along the northern border of Evans to Bulloch County; thencenorth along the western border of Bulloch County to Highway 301; thencenortheast along Highway 301 to the South Carolina line.<T3>Illinois</T3>_U.S. Highway 36.<T3>Louisiana</T3>_Interstate Highway 10 from the Texas State line to BatonRouge, Interstate Highway 12 from Baton Rouge to Slidell and InterstateHighway 10 from Slidell to the Mississippi State line.<T3>Mississippi</T3>_U.S. Highway 84.B. Within each zone, these States may select hunting seasons of not morethan 70 days (or 60 under the alternative) which may be split into notmore than 3 periods.C. The hunting seasons in the South Zones of Alabama, Georgia, Louisianaand Mississippi may commence no earlier than September 20, 1988.D. Regulations for bag and possession limits, season length and shootinghours must be uniform within specific hunting zones.<ITAG tagnum="81">Central Management Unit</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska,New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas and Wyoming)</ITAG>Hunting Seasons and Daily Bag and Possession Limits:Not more than 70 days with bag and possession limits of 12 and 24, respectively;<T3>or </T3>not more than 60 days with bag and possession limits of 15and 30, respectively. Hunting seasons may be split into not more than 3 periods under eitheroption.Texas Zoning_As an alternative to the basic frameworks, Texas may selecthunting seasons for each of 3 zones described below.North Zone_The portion of the State north of a line beginning at the InternationalBridge south of Fort Hancock; north along FM 1088 to State Highway 20;west along State Highway 20 to State Highway 148; north along State Highway148 to Interstate Highway 10 at Fort Hancock; east along Interstate Highway10 to Interstate Highway 20; northeast along Interstate Highway 20 to InterstateHighway 30 at Fort Worth; northeast along Interstate Highway 30 to theTexas-Arkansas State line.South Zone_That portion of the State south and west of a line beginningat the International Bridge south of Fort Hancock; north along FM 1088to State Highway 20; west along State Highway 20 to State Highway 148;north along State Highway 148 to Interstate Highway 10 at Fort Hancock;east along Interstate Highway 10 to Van Horn, south and east on U.S. 90to San Antonio; then east on Interstate 10 to Orange, Texas.Special White-Winged Dove Area in the South Zone_That portion of the Statesouth and west of a line beginning at the International Bridge south ofFort Hancock; north along FM 1088 to State Highway 20; west along StateHighway 20 to State Highway 148; north along State Highway 148 to InterstateHighway 10 at Fort Hancock; east along Interstate Highway 10 to Van Horn,south and east on U.S. Highway 90 to Uvalde, south on U.S. Highway 83 toState Highway 44; east along State Highway 44 to State Highway 16 at Freer;south along State Highway 16 to State Highway 285 at Hebbronville; eastalong State Highway 285 to FM 1017; southeast along FM 1017 to State Highway186 at Linn; east along State Highway 186 to the Mansfield Channel at PortMansfield; east along the Mansfield Channel to the Gulf of Mexico.Central Zone_That portion of the State lying between the North and SouthZones.Hunting seasons in these zones are subject to the following conditions:A. The hunting season may be split into not more than 2 periods, exceptthat, in that portion of Texas where the special 4-day white-winged doveseason is allowed, a limited mourning dove season may be held concurrentlywith the white-winged dove season and with shooting hours coinciding withthose for white-winged doves (see white-winged dove frameworks).B. Each zone may have a season of not more than 70 days (or 60 under thealternative). The North and Central zones may select a season between September1, 1988 and January 25, 1989; the South zone between September 20, 1988and January 25, 1989.C. Except during the special 4-day white-winged dove season in the SouthZone, each zone may have an aggregate daily bag limit of 12 doves (or 15under the alternative), no more than 2 of which may be white-winged dovesand no more than 2 of which may be white-tipped doves. The possession limitis double the daily bag limit.D. Regulations for bag and possession limits, season length, and shootinghours must be uniform within each hunting zone. <ITAG tagnum="81">Western Management Unit </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah and Washington)</ITAG>Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Not more than 30 consecutive days between September 1, 1988 and January15, 1989; <T3>or </T3>not more than 45 days to be split between two periods, September1-15, 1988, and November 1, 1988-January 15, 1989.In all States, the bag and possession limits are 10 and 20, respectively.White-winged DovesOutside Dates: <T3>Arizona, California, Nevada, New Mexico, </T3>and <T3>Texas </T3>(except as shown below) may select hunting seasons betweenSeptember 1 and December 31, 1988. <T3>Florida </T3>may select its hunting season between September 1, 1988and January 15, 1989. <T3>Arizona </T3>may select a hunting season of not more than 30 consecutivedays running concurrently with the mourning dove season. The daily baglimit may not exceed 10 mourning and white-winged doves in the aggregate,no more than 6 of which may be white-winged doves, and a possession limittwice the daily bag limit after the opening day. In the <T3>Nevada </T3>counties of Clark and Nye, and in the <T3>California </T3>counties of Imperial Riverside and San Bernardino,the aggregate daily bag and possession limits of mourning and white-wingeddoves may not exceed 10 and 20, respectively, and run concurrently withthe season on mourning doves. <T3>New Mexico </T3>may select a hunting season with daily bag and possessionlimits not to exceed 12 and 24 (or 15 and 30 if the 60-day option for mourningdoves is selected) white-winged and mourning doves, respectively, singlyor in the aggregate of the 2 species. Dates, limits, and hours are to conformwith those for mourning doves. <T3>Texas </T3>may select a hunting season of not more than 4 days forthe special white-winged dove area of the South Zone. The daily bag limitmay not exceed 10 white-winged, mourning, and white-tipped doves in theaggregate including no more than 2 mourning doves and 2 white-tipped dovesper day; and the possession limit may not exceed 20 white-winged, mourningand white-tipped doves in the aggregate including no more than 4 mourningdoves and four white-tipped doves in possession. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>and </T3>In addition, <T3>Texas</T3> may also select a white-winged dove season of not more than70 days (or 60 under the alternative for mourning doves) to be held betweenSeptember 1, 1988, and January 25, 1989, and coinciding with the mourningdove season. The daily bag limit may not exceed 12 white-winged, mourningand white-tipped doves (or 15 under the alternative) in the aggregate,of which not more than 2 may be white-winged doves and not more than 2of which may be white-tipped doves. The possession limit may not exceed24 white-winged, mourning and white-tipped doves (or 30 under the alternative)in the aggregate, of which not more than 4 may be white-winged doves andnot more than 4 of which may be white-tipped doves. <T3>Florida </T3>may select a white-winged dove season of not more than70 days (or 60 under the alternative for mourning doves) to be held betweenSeptember 1, 1988, and January 15, 1989, and coinciding with the mourningdove season. The aggregate daily bag and possession limits of mourningand white-winged doves may not exceed 12 and 24 (or 15 and 30 if the 60-dayoption for mourning doves is selected); however, for either option, thebag and possession limits of white-winged doves may not exceed 4 and 8,respectively. Band-tailed Pigeons <T3>Pacific Coast States and Nevada:</T3> California, Oregon, Washingtonand the Nevada counties of Carson City, Douglas, Lyon, Washoe, Humboldt,Pershing, Churchill, Mineral and Storey. Outside Dates: Between September 15, 1988, and January 1, 1989. Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Not more than 16consecutive days, with a bag and possession limit of 4. Zoning: <T3>California </T3>may select hunting seasons of 16 consecutive days ineach of the following two zones: 1. In the counties of Alpine, Butte, Del Norte, Glenn, Humboldt, Lassen,Mendocino, Modoc, Plumas, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Tehama and Trinity;and 2. The remainder of the State. <T3>Four-Corners States:</T3> Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah. Outside Dates: Between September 1 and November 30, 1988. Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Not more than 30consecutive days, with bag and possession limits of 5 and 10, respectively.Areas: These seasons shall be open only in the areas delineated by therespective States in their hunting regulations. Zoning: <T3>New Mexico </T3>may be divided into North and South Zones along a linefollowing U.S. Highway 60 from the Arizona State line east to InterstateHighway 25 at Socorro and south along Interstate Highway 25 from Socorroto the Texas State line. Hunting seasons not to exceed 20 consecutive daysmay be selected between September 1 and November 30, 1988, in the NorthZone and October 1 and November 30, 1988, in the South Zone. Rails <ITAG tagnum="20">(Clapper, King, Sora and Virginia) </ITAG>Outside Dates: States included herein may select seasons betwen September1, 1988, and January 20, 1989, on clapper, king, sora and Virginia railsas follows: Hunting Seasons: The season may not exceed 70 days. Any State may splitits season into two segments. <ITAG tagnum="81">Clapper and King Rails </ITAG>Daily Bag and Possession Limits: In <T3>Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Jersey, Delaware, </T3>and <T3>Maryland, </T3>10 and 20 respectively, singly or in the aggregate ofthese two species. In <T3>Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina,North Carolina, </T3>and <T3>Virginia, </T3>15 and 30, respectively, singly or in the aggregateof the two species. <ITAG tagnum="81">Sora and Virginia Rails </ITAG>Daily Bag and Possession Limits: In the Atlantic, Mississippi and Central\1\<NOTE/> Flyways and portions of Colorado, Montana, New Mexico andWyoming in the Pacific Flyway,\2\<NOTE/> 25 daily and 25 in possession, singly or in the aggregateof the two species. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The Central Flyway is defined as follows: Colorado (eastof the Continental Divide), Kansas, Montana (east of Hill, Chouteau, Cascade,Meagher, and Park Counties), Nebraska, New Mexico (east of the ContinentalDivide but outside the Jicarilla Apache Indian Reservation), North Dakota,Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas and Wyoming (east of the Continental Divide).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The Pacific Flyway is defined as follows: Arizona, California,Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and Washington; those portions of Coloradoand Wyoming lying west of the Continental Divide; New Mexico west of theContinental Divide plus the entire Jicarilla Apache Indian Reservation;and in Montana, the counties of Hill, Chouteau, Cascade, Meagher and Park,and all counties west thereof. WoodcockOutside Dates: States in the Atlantic Flyway may select hunting seasonsbetween October 1, 1988, and January 31, 1989. States in the Central andMississippi Flyways may select hunting seasons between September 1, 1988,and February 28, 1989.Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits: In the Atlantic Flyway,seasons may not exceed 45 days, with bag and possession limits of 3 and6, respectively; in the Central and Mississippi Flyways, seasons may notexceed 65 days, with bag and possession limits of 5 and 10, respectively.Seasons may be split into two segments. Zoning: <T3>New Jersey </T3>may select seasons by north and south zones dividedby State Highway 70. The season in each zone may not exceed 35 days.Common Snipe Outside Dates: Between September 1, 1988, and February 28, 1989. In <T3>Maine</T3>, <T3>Vermont</T3>, <T3>New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland </T3>and <T3>Virginia </T3>the season must end no later than January 31.Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Seasons may not exceed107 days in the Atlantic, Mississippi and Central Flyways and 93 days inPacific Flyway portions of Montana, Wyoming, Colorado and New Mexico. Inthe remainder of the Pacific Flyway the season shall coincide with theduck seasons. Seasons may be split into two segments. Bag and possessionlimits are 8 and 16, respectively.Common Moorhens and Purple GallinulesOutside Dates: September 1, 1988, through January 20, 1989, in the Atlanticand Mississippi Flyways and September 1, 1988, through January 22, 1989,in the Central Flyway. States in the Pacific Flyway must select their huntingseasons to coincide with their duck seasons.Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Seasons may not exceed70 days in the Atlantic, Mississippi and Central Flyways; in the PacificFlyway seasons must be the same as the duck seasons. Seasons may be split.Bag and possession limits are 15 and 30 common moorhens and purple gallinules,singly or in the aggregate of the two species, respectively; except thedaily bag and possession limits in the Pacific Flyway may not exceed 25coots and common moorhens, singly or in the aggregate of the two species.Sandhill Cranes<ITAG tagnum="81">Regular Seasons in the Central Flyway:</ITAG>Seasons not to exceed 58 days between September 1, 1988, and February 28,1989, may be selected in the following States: <T3>Colorado </T3>(the Central Flyway portion except the San Luis Valley);<T3>Kansas</T3>; <T3>Montana </T3>(the Central Flyway portion except that area south ofI-90 and west of the Bighorn River); <T3>North Dakota </T3>(west of U.S. 281); <T3>South Dakota</T3>; and <T3>Wyoming </T3>(in the counties of Campbell, Converse, Crook, Goshen,Laramie, Niobrara, Platte and Weston). For the remainder of the flyway, seasons not to exceed 93 days betweenSeptember 1, 1988 and February 28, 1989, may be selected in the followingStates: <T3>New Mexico </T3>(the counties of Chaves, Curry, DeBaca, Eddy, Lea,Quay and Roosevelt); <T3>Oklahoma </T3>(that portion west of I-35); and <T3>Texas </T3>(that portion west of a line from Brownsville along U.S.77 to Victoria; U.S. 87 to Placedo; Farm Road 616 to Blessing; State 35to Alvin; State 6 to U.S. 290; U.S. 290 to Sonora; U.S. 277 to Abilene;Texas 351 to Albany; U.S. 283 to Vernon; and U.S. 183 to the Texas-Oklahomaboundary).Bag and Possession Limits: 3 and 6, respectively. Permits: Each person participating in the regular sandhill crane seasonsmust obtain and have in his possession while hunting a valid Federal sandhillcrane hunting permit.<ITAG tagnum="81">Special Seasons in the Central and Pacific Flyways:</ITAG>Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming may selectseasons for hunting sandhill cranes within the range of the Rocky MountainPopulation (as described in a management plan approved March 22, 1982 (revisedJuly 28, 1987), by the Central and Pacific Flyway Councils) subject tothe following conditions: 1. Outside dates are September 1-November 30, 1988 except September 1,1988-January 31, 1989, in the Hatch-Deming Area (Zone) in New New Mexico(Sierra, Luna, and Dona Ana Counties).2. Season(s) in any State or zone may not exceed 30 days.3. Daily bag limits may not exceed 3 and season limits may not exceed 9.4. Participants must have in their possession while hunting a valid permitissued by the appropriate State.5. Numbers of permits, areas open and season dates, protection plans forother species, and other provisions of seasons are consistent with themanagement plan and approved by the Central and Pacific Flyway Councils.6. Seasons in the Middle Rio Grande Valley zone and the Hatch-Deming Zonein New Mexico and in Utah will be experimental.Scoter, Eider, and Oldsquaw Ducks (Atlantic Flyway)Outside Dates: Between September 15, 1988, and January 20, 1989.Hunting Seasons, and Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Not to exceed 107days, with bag and possession limits of 7 and 14, respectively, singlyor in the aggregate of these species.Bag and Possession Limits During Regular Duck Season: Within the specialsea duck areas, during the regular duck season in the Atlantic Flyway,States may set, in addition to the limits applying to other ducks duringthe regular duck season, a daily limit of 7 and a possession limit of 14scoter, eider and oldsquaw ducks, singly or in the aggregate of these species.Areas: In all coastal waters and all waters of rivers and streams seawardfrom the first upstream bridge in <T3>Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut </T3>and<T3>New York</T3>; in any waters of the Atlantic Ocean and in any tidalwaters of any bay which are separated by at least 1 mile of open waterfrom any shore, island and emergent vegetation in <T3>New Jersey, South Carolina, </T3>and <T3>Georgia</T3>; and in any waters of the Atlantic Ocean and in any tidalwaters of any bay which are separated by at least 800 yards of open waterfrom any shore, island and emergent vegetation in <T3>Delaware, Maryland, North Carolina </T3>and <T3>Virginia</T3>; and provided that any such areas have been described,delineated and designated as special sea duck hunting areas under the huntingregulations adopted by the respective States. In all other areas of theseStates and in all other States in the Atlantic Flyway, sea ducks may betaken only during the regular open season for ducks and they must be includedin the regular duck season conventional or point-system daily bag and possessionlimits. Deferred Selection: Any State desiring its sea duck season to open in Septembermust make its selection no later than August 10, 1988. Any State desiringits sea duck season to open after September may make its selection at thetime it selects its waterfowl season.Special September Duck SeasonsFlorida September Duck Season: An experimental 5-consecutive-day duck seasonmay be selected in September. The daily bag limit will be 4 ducks, no morethan one of which may be a species other than wood duck, and the possessionlimit will be double the daily bag limit.Tennessee and Kentucky September Duck Seasons: Experimental 5-consecutive-dayduck seasons may be selected in September by <T3>Tennessee </T3>and <T3>Kentucky</T3>. The daily bag limit will be 2 ducks, no more than 1of which may be a species other than wood duck. The possession limit willbe double the daily bag limit.Special Early-September Canada Goose SeasonsExperimental Canada goose seasons of up to 10 consecutive days may be selectedin September by <T3>Michigan, Illinois, </T3>and <T3>Minnesota </T3>subject to the following conditions:1. Outside dates for the season are September 1-10, 1988.2. The daily bag and possession limits will be no more than 5 and 10 Canadageese, respectively.3. Areas open to the hunting of Canada geese are as follows:Michigan:Lower Peninsula_all areas except the Shiawassee River, Allegan, Lapeerand Muskegon State Game Areas (SGA), the Shiawassee National Wildlife Refuge,that portion of the Maple River SGA east of State Road, that portion ofthe Pointe Mouillee SGA south of the Huron River, Muskegon County WastewaterArea, and the Fish Point and Nayanquing Point Wildlife Areas.Upper Peninsula_that area bounded by a line beginning at the Michigan/Wisconsinborder in Green Bay and extending north through the center of Little BayDe Noc and the center of White Fish River to U.S. Highway 2, east alongU.S. Highway 2 to Interstate Highway 75, north along Interstate Highway75 to State Highway 28, west along State Highway 28 to State Highway 221,then north along State Highway 221 to Brimley, then north to the Michigan/Ontarioborder. <T3>Illinois</T3>: McHenry, Lake, Kane, DuPage, Cook, Kendall, Grundy,Will, and Kankakee Counties.<T3>Minnesota</T3>: All or portions of Anoka, Washington, Ramsey, Hennepin,Carver, Scott and Dakota Counties.4. Areas open to hunting must be described, delineated and designated assuch in each State's hunting regulations.Wyoming may select a September season for Canada geese subject to the followingconditions:1. The season must be concurrent with the September Sandhill crane season.2. Outside dates for the season(s) are September 1-22, 1988.3. Hunting will be by State permit.4. No more than 60 permits may be issued for the Salt River (Star Valley)area in Lincoln County. Each permittee may take 2 Canada geese per season.5. No more than 75 permits may be issued in the Eden-Farson AgriculturalProject in Sweetwater and Sublette Counties, each permittee may take nomore than 1 goose per season, and the season may not exceed 14 days.Special Falconry RegulationsExtended Seasons: Falconry is a permitted means of taking migratory gamebirds in any State meeting Federal falconry standards in 50 CFR 21.29(k).These States may select an extended season not exceeding 107 days for takingmigratory game birds in accordance with the following:Framework Dates: Seasons must fall between September 1, 1988 and March10, 1989.Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Falconry daily bag and possession limitsfor all permitted migratory game birds shall not exceed 3 and 6 birds,respectively, singly or in the aggregate, during both regular hunting seasonsand extended falconry seasons.Regulations Publication: Each State selecting the special season must informthe Service of the season dates and publish said regulations.Regular Seasons: General hunting regulations, including seasons, hours,and limits, apply to falconry in each State listed in 50 CFR 21.29(k) whichdoes not select an extended falconry season.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>In no instance shall the total number of days in any combinationof duck seasons (regular duck season, sea duck season, September seasons,special scaup season, special scaup and goldeneye season or falconry season)exceed 107 days for a species in one geographical area. The extension ofthis framework to include the period September 1, 1988-March 10, 1989,is considered tentative, and will be evaluated in cooperation with Statesoffering such extensions after a period of several years.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="85">Final Frameworks for Selecting Open Season Dates for Hunting MigratoryBirds in Alaska, 1988-1989</ITAG>Outside Dates: Between September 1, 1988, and January 26, 1989, Alaskamay select seasons on waterfowl, snipe, cranes, and tundra swans subjectto the following limitations:Shooting hours: One-half hour before sunrise to sunset daily.Hunting seasons:Ducks, geese and brant_107 consecutive days for ducks, geese, and brantin each of the following: North Zone (State Game Management Units 11-13and 17-26); Gulf Coast Zone (State Game Management Units 5-7, 9, 14-16,and 10_Unimak Island only); Southeast Zone (State Game Management Units1-4); Pribilof and Aleutian Islands Zone (State Game Management Unit 10_exceptUnimak Island); Kodiak Zone (State Game Management Unit 8). The seasonmay be split without penalty in the Kodiak Zone. <T3>Exceptions:</T3> The season is closed on Canada geese from Unimak Passwestward in the Aleutian Island chain. Throughout the State there is noopen hunting season for Aleutian Canada geese, cackling Canada geese andemperor geese.Snipe and sandhill cranes_An open season concurrent with the duck season.Daily Bag and Possession Limits:Ducks_Except as noted, a basic daily bag limit of 5 and a possession limitof 15 ducks. Daily bag and possession limits in the North Zone are 8 and24, and in the Gulf Coast Zone they are 6 and 18, respectively. The basiclimits may not include more than 2 pintails daily and 6 pintails in possession.There is no open season on canvasback. In addition to the basic limit,there is a daily bag limit of 15 and a possession limit of 30 scoter, eider,oldsquaw, harlequin, and common and red-breasted mergansers, singly orin the aggregate of these species.Geese_A basic daily bag limit of 6 and a possession limit of 12, of whichnot more than 4 daily and 8 in possession may be greater white-frontedor Canada geese, singly or in the aggregate of these species. Brant_A daily bag limit of 2 and a possession limit of 4.Common snipe_A daily bag limit of 8 and a possession limit of 16.Sandhill cranes_A daily bag limit of 3 and a possession limit of 6.Tundra swans_In Game Management Unit 22 an experimental open season fortundra swans may be selected subject to the following conditions:1. No more than 300 permits may be issued, authorizing each permittee totake 1 tundra swan. 2. The season must be concurrent with the duck season.3. The appropriate State agency must issue permits, obtain harvest andhunter participation data, and report the results of this hunt to the Serviceby June 1, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="85">Final Frameworks for Selecting Open Season Dates for Hunting MigratoryBirds in Puerto Rico, 1988-89</ITAG>Shooting hours: Between one-half hour before sunrise and sunset daily.Doves and Pigeons:Outside Dates: Puerto Rico may select hunting seasons between September1, 1988, and January 15, 1989, as follows:Hunting Seasons: Not more than 60 days for Zenaida, mourning, and white-wingeddoves, and scaly-naped pigeons.Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Not to exceed 10 doves of the speciesnamed herein, singly or in the aggregate, and not to exceed 5 scaly-napedpigeons.Closed Areas:<T3>Municipality of Culebra and Desecheo Island</T3>_closed under Commonwealthregulations.<T3>Mona Island</T3>_closed in order to protect the reduced populationof white-crowned pigeon <T3>(Columba leucocephala), </T3>known locally as ``Paloma cabeciblanca.''<T3>El Verde Closure Area</T3>_consisting of those areas of the municipalitiesof Rio Grande and Loiza delineated as follows: (1) all lands between Routes956 on the west and 186 on the east, from Route 3 on the north to the junctureof Routes 956 and 186 (Km 13.2) in the south; (2) all lands between Routes186 and 966 from the juncture on 186 and 966 on the north, to the CaribbeanNational Forest Boundary on the south; (3) all lands lying west of Route186 for one kilometer from the juncture of routes 186 and 956 south toKM 6 on Route 186; (4) all lands within Km 14 and Km 6 on the west andthe Caribbean National Forest Boundary on the east; and (5) all lands withinthe Caribbean National Forest Boundary whether private or public. The purposeof this closure is to afford protection to the Puerto Rican parrot (<T3>Amazona vittata</T3>) presently listed as an endangered species underthe Endangered Species Act of 1973.<T3>Cidra Municipality and Adjacent Areas </T3>consisting of all of CidraMunicipality and portions of Aguas Buenas, Caguas, Cayer, and Comerio Municipalitiesas encompassed within the following boundary: beginning on Highway 172as it leaves the Municipality of Cidra on the west edge, north to Highway156, east on Highway 156 to Highway 1, south on Highway 1 to Highway 765,south on Highway 765 to Highway 763, south on Highway 763 to the Rio Guavate,west along Rio Guavate to Highway 1, southwest on Highway 1 to Highway14, west on Highway 14 to Highway 729, north on Highway 729 to Cidra Municipality,and westerly, northerly, and easterly along the Cidra Municipality boundaryto the point of beginning. The purpose of this closure is to protect thePlain pigeon (<T3>Columba inornata wetmorei</T3>), locally known as ``Paloma Sabanera,''which is present in the above locale in small numbers and is presentlylisted as an endangered species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.Ducks, Coots, Moorhens, Gallinules and SnipeOutside Dates: Between November 5, 1988, and February 28, 1989, PuertoRico may select hunting seasons as follows.Hunting Seasons: Not more than 55 days may be selected for hunting ducks,common moorhens, and common snipe. The season may be split into two segments.Daily Bag and Possession Limits:Ducks_Not to exceed 3 daily and 6 in possession, except that the seasonis closed on the ruddy duck (<T3>Oxyura jamaicensis</T3>); the White-cheeked pintail (<T3>Anas bahamensis</T3>); West Indian whistling (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna arborea</T3>); fulvous whistling (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna bicolor</T3>), and the masked duck (<T3>Oxyura dominica</T3>), which are protected by the Commonwealth of PuertoRico.Common moorhens_Not to exceed 6 daily and 12 in possession; the seasonis closed on purple gallinules (<T3>Porphyrula martinica</T3>).Common snipe_Not to exceed 6 daily and 12 in possession.Coots_There is no open season on coots, i.e. common coots (<T3>Fulica americana</T3>) and Caribbean coots (<T3>Fulica caribaea</T3>).Closed Areas: No open season for ducks, common moorhens, and common snipeis prescribed in the Municipality of Culebra and on Desecheo Island.<ITAG tagnum="85">Final Frameworks for Selecting Open Season Dates for Hunting MigratoryBirds in the Virgin Islands, 1988-89</ITAG>Shooting Hours: Between one-half hour before sunrise and sunset daily.Doves and Pigeons.Outside Dates: The Virgin Islands may select hunting seasons between September1, 1988, and January 15, 1989, as follows.Hunting Seasons: Not more than 60 days for Zenaida doves and scaly-napedpigeons throughout the Virgin Islands.Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Not to exceed 10 Zenaida doves and 5 scaly-napedpigeons.Closed Seasons: No Open season is prescribed for ground or quail doves,or other pigeons in the Virgin Islands.Local Names for Certain Birds.<ITAG tagnum="15">Zenaida dove (</ITAG><T3>Zenaida aurita</T3>)_mountain dove.<ITAG tagnum="15">Bridled quail dove (</ITAG><T3>Geotrygon mystacea</T3>)_Barbary dove, partridge (protected).<ITAG tagnum="15">Common Ground dove (</ITAG><T3>Columba passerina</T3>)_stone dove, tobacco dove, rola, tortolita (protected).<ITAG tagnum="15">Scaly-naped pigeon (</ITAG><T3>Columba squamosa</T3>)_red-necked pigeon, scaled pigeon.Ducks.Outside Dates: Between December 1, 1988, and January 31, 1989, the VirginIslands may select a duck hunting season as follows.Hunting Seasons: Not more than 55 consecutive days may be selected forhunting ducks.Daily Bag and Possession Limits: Not to exceed 3 daily and 6 inpossession,except that the season is closed on the ruddy duck (<T3>Oxyura jamaicensis</T3>); the White-cheeked pintail (<T3>Anas bahamensis</T3>); West Indian whistling (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna arborea</T3>); fulvous whislting (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna bicolor</T3>), and the masked duck (<T3>Oxyura dominica</T3>).<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: July 6, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Susan Recce,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-15453 Filed 7-7-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-55-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>