<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88121-0034 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-21-88.f2.A1033</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 13 / Thursday, January 21, 1988/ Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Occupational Safety and Health Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">29 CFR Part 1910 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. H-200B]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Occupational Exposure to Ethylene Oxide</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule and notice of hearing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>By this notice, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA) is proposing to amend its existing standard that regulates occupationalexposure to ethylene oxide (29 CFR 1910.1047) to include an excursion limitfor ethylene oxide (EtO) of 5 parts of EtO per million parts of air (5ppm) averaged over a maximum sampling period of 15 minutes.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ OSHA is adopting the term ``excursion limit'' to referto the short term permissible exposure limit adopted here. The term ``STEL'',previously used by OSHA, is used by the American Conference of GovernmentalIndustrial Hygienists (ACGIH) to refer to a short term limit dictated byspecific toxicologic or hazard data (ACGIH Threshold Limit Values and BiologicalExposure Indices for 1986-1987, 3). <ITAG tagnum="28">Because OSHA is not basing the short term permissible limit for EtOon such data, OSHA instead is using the distinctive term, ``excursion limit''.OSHA notes that ACGIH also uses the term ``excursion limit'' to refer toa limitation on short term exposures which are called for by industrialhygiene considerations, where toxicological data are unavailable (</ITAG><T3>Id </T3>at 4-5). This preamble, in some places, uses the terms ``STEL''and ``excursion limit'' interchangeably, mostly in quoting from previousdiscussions where the distinction had not been made.OSHA requests comment on whether an excursion limit is feasible and wouldreduce the significant risk faced by workers at the current 8-hour time-weightedaverage (TWA) permissible exposure limit for ethylene oxide. Where the excursion limit is exceeded, employers would be obligated toreduce exposure through implementation of feasible engineering controlsand work practices, supplemented by the use of respirators where necessary.In addition, employers would be required to establish and implement a writtencompliance program to achieve the excursion limit, establish exposure monitoringand training programs for employees subjected to EtO exposure above theexcursion limit and identify as regulated areas any locations where airborneconcentrations of EtO exceed the excursion limit. This proposal is issued in response to the decision of the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the District of Columbia circuit (Ex. 202) in <T3>Public Citizen Health Research Group </T3>v. <T3>Tyson, </T3>796 F. 2d 1479, which remanded the EtO standard to theAgency for further proceedings on the need for a short-term exposure limit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments in response to this notice, hearing requests,and notices of intention to appear at the tentatively scheduled informalrulemaking hearing on the proposal must be postmarked by February 22, 1988.Documentary evidence and witness statements for the hearing must also bereceived by February 22, 1988. The public hearing on the proposed standard,if convened in response to request from the public, will commence on March3, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments on the proposed standard should be submittedin quadruplicate to the Docket Officer, Docket No. H-200, Room N-3670,U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC20210. Notices of intention to appear at the hearing and testimony anddocumentary evidence which will be introduced into the hearing record mustbe submitted in quadruplicate to Mr. Tom Hall, Occupational Safety andHealth Administration, Division of Consumer Affairs, Room N3649, 200 ConstitutionAvenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210; (202) 523-8615. The hearing will beheld in Washington, DC beginning March 3, 1988 at 10:00 a.m. in the auditoriumof the Frances Perkins Department of Labor Building, 200 Constitution Avenue,NW., Washington, DC 20210.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2><T3>Proposal: </T3>Mr. James F. Foster, Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, Office of Public Affairs, Room N-3649, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Telephone(202) 523-8151.<T3>Hearings: </T3>Mr. Tom Hall, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,Division of Consumer Affairs, Room N3649, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW.,Washington, DC 20210; (202)523-8615.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Events Leading to This Action</ITAG>On January 26, 1982, OSHA published an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking(47 FR 3566) announcing its intention to reevaluate its existing EtO standardof 50 ppm as an 8-hour TWA. In addition to a request for public commenton the adequacy of 50 ppm as a TWA, comment was also solicited on the questionof the necessity of a short-term limit as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21">Is a short-term or ceiling limit for EtO exposures necessary and why,and what would be the technological and economic feasibility of complyingwith that limit? (48 FR 3566) </ITAG>On April 21, 1983, OSHA published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for EtOthat proposed to reduce the permissible 8-hour TWA from 50 ppm to 1 ppm(48 FR 17284). Although a specific short-term limit for EtO was not includedin the proposed regulatory text, public comment on that issue was solicitedby the following questions: <ITAG tagnum="21">Is a short-term or ceiling exposure limit for EtO exposure necessaryfor the PEL or action level in view of recent information regarding increasedspontaneous abortions and chromosome changes in workers exposed to EtO?What monitoring methods and control technology are available to meet sucha short-term limit and what would be the economic burdens, if any, of sucha limit? (48 FR 17284) I20and,   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">What are the most suitable methods for determining compliance withEtO permissible exposure limits (PEL's) of 0.5 and 1 ppm as 8-hour time-weightedaverages and for ceilings ranging from 5 to 50 ppm for 30 minutes or less?What are the problems associated with such monitoring methods? Do theyrequire special training or experience? Are there serious limitations asto the accuracy or precision of the available sampling techniques? (48FR 17284) </ITAG>Numerous comments and data were received by OSHA in response to the short-termlimit questions set forth in the ANPR and NPRM (Ex. 168). However, thefinal EtO rule published on June 22, 1984, which lowered the permissible8-hour TWA from 50 ppm to 1 ppm (49 FR 25734) reserved decision on thequestion of whether the standard should contain a short-term limit (Ex.167A). In the June 22, 1984 final rule, OSHA stated that upon its reviewof comments submitted by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) pursuantto Executive Order 12291 (Ex. 162), OSHA determined that certain issuesrelating to a short-term limit were important and merited further consideration.To develop the fullest possible administrative record, all exhibits inthe docket relating to the short-term limit (compiled as Ex. 168), weresubmitted to a number of scientifically qualified peer reviewers for comment,analysis, and criticism. The peer reviewers filed statements that wereplaced in the public docket. Public comments on the statements filed bythe peer reviewers on the issues raised by OMB on the June 14, 1984 draftstandard were solicited by a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice published September 19, 1984 (49 FR 36659).   After a review of the rulemaking record pertaining to the short-term limit,OSHA published a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice on January 3, 1985 (50 FR 64) announcingits determination that the available health data did not necessitate theestablishment of a short-term limit to supplement the 8-hour TWA of 1 ppm.OSHA's decision not to issue a short-term limit for EtO centered on threefindings: First, the available health data did not demonstrate the risksfrom EtO exposure to be dose rate-dependent. In other words, the studiesdid not indicate that the risk from exposure to a given dose of EtO aregreater when that dose is distributed at high concentrations over a shortperiod of exposure during a workday rather than at a lower concentrationduring a longer period of time. Second, since the effects of EtO are assumedto be <T3>dose </T3>dependent rather than dose-<T3>rate </T3>dependent, OSHA concluded that reduction of the total dosewas the critical factor in dealing with the significant risks of EtO exposure.Therefore, the Agency believed that the 1 ppm TWA was sufficient to minimizesignificant risk, within the bounds of feasibility. Third, in terms ofindustrial hygiene and methods of controlling EtO, it was felt that compliancewith the TWA would in itself necessitate the control of short-term exposures,particularly for employees whose exposure consists primarily of short-termbursts.   Petition for review of OSHA's decision not to adopt a short-term limitfor EtO subsequently was filed by the Public Citizen Health Research Group,pursuant to section 6(f) of the OSH Act (29 U.S.C. 655(f)). In its decisionin <T3>Public Citizen Health Research Group </T3>v. <T3>Tyson </T3>(796 F. 2d 1479), the United States Court of Appeals forthe District of Columbia determined that OSHA had not demonstrated substantialevidence to support its decision not to adopt a short-term limit, and remandedthe case to OSHA for further proceedings on the short-term limit issue.The opinion of the Court leading to the remand is discussed below.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. The Court Decision </ITAG>On July 25, 1986, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of ColumbiaCircuit issued a decision on the ethylene oxide standard (<T3>Public Citizen Health Research Group </T3>v. <T3>Tyson, </T3>796 F. 2d 1479). In that decision, the Court upheld OSHA'spermissible exposure limit of 1 ppm as an 8-hour time-weighted average,finding that OSHA had ``complied with the relevant legal standards in promulgatingthe 1 ppm PEL.'' 796 F. 2d at 1503. In addition, the Court upheld OSHA'sdetermination that the evidence in the rulemaking record did not establishthe existence of a dose-rate relationship for the health effects of EtO.However, the Court rejected OSHA's argument that the lack of such an establisheddose-rate effect rendered it unnecessary for the Agency to promulgate ashort-term limit for EtO. The Court noted:<ITAG tagnum="21">The agency recognized that EtO exposures at 1 ppm still allowed asignificant health risk * * * If in fact a STEL would further reduce asignificant health risk and is feasible to implement, then the OSH Act<T3>compels </T3>the agency to adopt it (barring alternative avenues tothe same result). 796 F. 2d at 1505.</ITAG>Therefore, the Court said, in order for OSHA to avoid issuing a short-termlimit for EtO, the Agency must find either that a short-term limit wouldhave no effect on the significant risk which is still present at 1 ppmTWA, or that a short-term limit is not feasible. If the Agency cannot makeeither of these two findings, then a short-term limit must be issued. TheCourt proceeded to remand the EtO standard to the Agency for further proceedingson these issues, specifically directing OSHA to ``either adopt a short-termlimit or explain why empirical or expert evidence on exposure patternsmakes a short-term limit irrelevant to controlling long-term exposures''.796 F. 2d at 1507.\2\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\While OSHA believes that a short-term limit is relevantto controlling long-term EtO exposures, adding an excursion limit may notalways be effective in reducing average long-term exposures, depending,for example, on the patterns of background. It has been suggested thatmandating short-term exposures may result in the shifting of resourcesfrom controls on background exposures to controls on short-term exposures.Thus, while exposure peaks may be reduced, background exposure could increasein a way that may, depending on the pattern of exposures, adversely affectaverage long-term exposures. OSHA does not believe that this possibilitypertains to the proposed EtO excursion limit. The present proceeding on the need for an excursion limit for EtO doesnot reopen the various other issues which were resolved by the Court inupholding the PEL of 1 ppm. In particular, the Agency's risk assessmentis not at issue in this proceeding. The only matters open for considerationin this rulemaking are those which center on the efficacy and feasibilityof an excursion limit, on the interrelationship of the PEL and the excursionlimit in reducing the health risks of EtO, and on the appropriateness ofthe proposed new requirements pertaining to the excursion limit such asexposure monitoring and training. OSHA's argument that a short-term limit was not ``reasonably necessary''centered on two basic findings: first, the lack of an established ``dose-rate''for EtO; second, the efficacy of the PEL alone at reducing short-term exposures.The Court upheld the former determination, but rejected the latter as notbeing supported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole. Neitherof the two findings by OSHA involved an analysis of whether a short-termlimit would be ``feasible.'' Because OSHA determined as a threshold findingthat a short-term limit was not ``reasonably necessary,'' there was noneed at that time to determine whether implementation of a short-term limitwould have been ``feasible.'' The Court recognized that OSHA made no findingson the feasibility of a short-term limit as part of its determination notto issue one. The Court did assume ``that a 10 ppm short-term limit isfeasible because no party has contested the issue at this point.'' 796F. 2d at 1506. However, this constituted neither an explicit finding offeasibility, nor a rejection of any findings of infeasibility by the Agency,because no such feasibility findings were made for the establishment ofa short-term limit. With the Court's rejection of OSHA's stated rationale for not promulgatinga short-term limit, in addition to determining whether an excursion limitwill be effective in reducing significant risks below those remaining ata 1 ppm TWA, the feasibility of an excursion limit will need to be addressedat this stage of the EtO rulemaking; if an excursion limit is determinedto have an effect on the significant risk that persists at a 1 ppm PEL,the Agency will then need to determine that the given limit is feasible.Further, the Court decision does not foreclose the Agency from determiningthat a short-term limit will not affect the risk, or that a short-termlimit is not feasible, based on substantial evidence on the record. On July 21, 1987 the Court of Appeals for the district of Columbia Circuitissued a further decision on the ethylene oxide rulemaking, in <T3>Public Citizen Health Research Group </T3>v. <T3>Brock, </T3>823 F. 2d 626. In that decision, the Court clarified itsmandate to OSHA by ordering that ``OSHA's final decision on the EtO short-termexposure limit is to issue no later than March 1988.'' 823 F. 2d at 629.The comment period and hearing schedule established in this proposal havebeen developed to enable the Agency to comply with the Court's mandate.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Pertinent Legal Authority </ITAG>Authority for this action is found primarily in sections 6(b), 8(c), and8(g)(2) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (the Act), 29U.S.C. 655(b), 657(c), and 657(g)(2). Section 6(b)(5) governs the issuanceof occupational safety and health standards dealing with toxic materialsor harmful physical agents. Section 3(8) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. 652(8),defines an occupational safety and health standard as:<ITAG tagnum="21">(A) standard which requires conditions, or the adoption or use ofone or more practices, means, methods, operations, or processes, reasonablynecessary or appropriate to provide a safe or healthful employment andplaces of employment.</ITAG>The Supreme Court has said that section 3(8) applies to all permanent standardspromulgated under the Act and requires the Secretary, before issuing anystandard to determine that it is reasonably necessary and appropriate toremedy a significant risk of material health impairment. <T3>Industrial Union Department </T3>v. <T3>American Petroleum Institute, </T3>448 U.S. 607 (1980). After OSHA has determined that a significant risk exists and that suchrisk can be reduced or eliminated by the proposed regulatory action, itmust set the standard ``which most adequately assures, to the extent feasibleon the basis of the best available evidence, that no employees will suffermaterial impairment of health * * *'' (Section 6(b)(5) of the Act). TheSupreme Court has interpreted this section to mean that OSHA must enactthe most protective standard possible to eliminate a significant risk ofmaterial health impairment, subject to the constraints of technologicaland economic feasibility. <T3>American Textile Manufacturers Institute, Inc. </T3>v. <T3>Donovan, </T3>452 U.S. 490 (1981). <T3> </T3>Authority for this action is also found in section 8(c)(3) ofthe Act. In general, this section empowers the Secretary to require employersto make, keep, and preserve records regarding activities related to theAct. In particular, section 8(c)(3) gives the Secretary authority to requireemployers to ``maintain accurate records of employees exposure to potentiallytoxic materials or harmful physical agents which are required to be monitoredor measured under section 6.'' Provisions of OSHA standards which requirethe making and maintenance of records of medical examinations, exposuremonitoring, and the like are issued pursuant to section 8(c) of the Act.The Secretary's authority to issue this proposed amendment is further supportedby the general rulemaking authority granted in section 8(g)(2) of the Act.This section empowers the Secretary ``to prescribe such rules and regulationsas he may deem necessary to carry out (his) responsibilities under theAct''_in this case as part of or ancillary to, a section 6(b) standard.The Secretary's responsibilities under the Act are defined largely by itsenumerated purposes, which include:<ITAG tagnum="21">Encouraging employers and employees in their efforts to reduce thenumber of occupational safety and health hazards at their places of employment,and to stimulate employers and employees to institute new and to perfectexisting programs for providing safe and healthful working conditions (29U.S.C. 651(b)(1); </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Authorizing the Secretary of Labor to set mandatory occupational safetyand health standards applicable to business affecting interstate commerce(29 U.S.C. 651(b)(3); </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Building upon advance already made through employer and employee initiativefor providing safe and health working conditions (29 U.S.C. 651(b)(4));</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Providing for the development and promulgation of occupational safetyand health standards; (29 U.S.C. 651(b)(9)); </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Providing for appropriate reporting procedures with respect to occupationalsafety and health which procedures will help achieve the objectives ofthis Act and accurately describe the nature of the occupational safetyand health problem (29 U.S.C. 651(b)(12)); </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Exploring ways to discover latent diseases, establishing causal connectionsbetween diseases and work in environmental conditions * * * (29 U.S.C.651(b)(6)); </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Encouraging joint labor-management efforts to reduce injuries anddiseases arising out of employment (29 U.S.C. 651(b)(13)), and </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Developing innovative methods, techniques, and approaches for dealingwith occupational safety and health problems (29 U.S.C. 651(b)(5)).</ITAG>Because this amendment to the ethylene oxide standard is reasonably relatedto these statutory goals, the Secretary finds that this proposed actionis necessary to carry out his responsibilities under the Act. In addition, section 4(b)(2) of the Act provides that standards issuedunder OSHA apply to construction and maritime employment where the secretarydetermines these standards to be more effective than existing standardswhich otherwise apply to that employment. (As set forth in 29 CFR 1910.19(h),the current EtO standard applies to construction and maritime employment,in addition to its coverage of general industry). <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Justification for the Proposed Adoption of an Excursion Limit</ITAG>Section 6(b)(5) of the OSH Act requires the Agency to set health standardswhich most adequately assure protection against significant risk of materialhealth impairment, to the extent feasible. OSHA established its 8-hourTWA of 1 ppm for EtO (49 FR 25734) based upon considerations of feasibility,and determined that significant cancer risk would persist even below thatlevel. As discussed above, the U.S. Court of Appeals has directed thatOSHA reconsider further means of reducing that risk and ``either adopta STEL or explain why empirical or expert evidence on exposure patternsmakes a STEL irrelevant to controlling long-term average exposures.'' 796F. 2d at 1507. The Agency believes that additional protection against continuingsignificant risk could be provided by a limitation on short-term exposuresof 5 ppm over a maximum 15 minute period. This additional protection isbelieved to be feasible in the affected industries (see discussion under``Regulatory Flexibility and Impact Analysis''). For industry sectors whoseexposure patterns involve periods of intermittent, burst-type exposuresto EtO, the excursion limit may result in TWA exposures well below 1 ppm.For example, a single daily exposure at the proposed excursion limit of5 ppm, with no other exposures during the day, would result in an 8-hourTWA of 0.16 ppm. Since an employee would likely have other background andresidual exposures as well, the actual exposure would likely be higherthan 0.16 ppm as an 8-hour TWA. In this regard, the use of an excursionlimit will supplement the 1 ppm TWA in controlling significant risks, asmandated by Section 6(b)(5). OSHA previously concluded that a short-term limit was not needed since``the compliance program designed to maintain exposure at or below the1 ppm * * * limit * * * will also substantially reduce the magnitude ofshort-term exposures'' (50 FR 64). The Agency also argued to the Courtin <T3>Public Citizen,</T3> that ``the record clearly indicates that for anumber of reasons the benefits that would be achieved by a short-term limitwill be almost entirely achieved by the PEL''. Respondents brief at 55.The Court disagreed with these assertions. In the opinion of the Court,the Agency's conclusions were not supportable since it had not been demonstratedthat ``in attempting to meet the 1 ppm PEL, employers will <T3>in every case</T3> reduce short-term exposures * * *'' 796 F. 2d at1505. The Court concluded that:<ITAG tagnum="21">The evidence in this record * * * does not demonstrate that employerswill necessarily reduce short-term exposures below 10 ppm in order to meetthe PEL. For example, an employer might measure a very low background levelof EtO exposure, a level significantly below the 1 ppm PEL. Conceivably,such an employer could allow short-term exposures to exceed 10 ppm overa fifteen-minute period but still have cumulative exposure fall below the1 ppm PEL, which is an eight-hour average. 796 F. 2d at 1505.</ITAG>The 8-hour TWA for EtO of 1 ppm was established because OSHA believed thatthis new exposure limit would substantially reduce the significant riskassociated with EtO exposures at the previous TWA of 50 ppm, and that the1 ppm level would be feasible for most operations in most workplaces thatuse EtO. However, as OSHA's quantitative risk assessment shows, an excessEtO-related cancer mortality risk of 12 to 23 deaths per 10,000 workerspersists even at the 1 ppm 8-hour TWA level. Congress has mandated thatreducing significant occupational health risks to the lowest feasible levelclearly lies within OSHA's authority under the Act. The Court of Appealsremand on this issue in the EtO context further supports this position.If an excursion limit would, in fact, supplement the current 8-hour TWAto further reduce average long-term employee exposures to below the existingsignificant risk. OSHA believes that promulgation of a 5 ppm excursionlimit for EtO would be consonant with the intent of the Act. The available data on current exposure patterns and control measures indicatethat compliance with a 5 ppm, 15-minute excursion limit may indeed augmentthe employee protection provided by the 8-hour TWA in many cases. For example,in the unlikely but theoretically simple situation where an employee isexposed to 24 ppm of EtO for a single 15-minute interval and to absolutelyno other EtO for the remainder of the working day, that employee's 8-hourTWA exposure would be 0.75 ppm. As noted above, a 15-minute excursion limitof 5 ppm would reduce this 8-hour TWA to 0.16 ppm. The Agency's risk assessmentindicates that the excess cancer risk associated with this EtO dosage wouldbe 2 to 4 cases per 10,000 workers, substantially below the significantrisk posed by a 1 ppm PEL. Since the likehihood of encountering a zerobackground level of EtO in any EtO-using, handling, or storing workplaceis essentially nil, and since many workers are exposed to more than oneepisode of EtO exposure during the working day, it is possible that anemployee's daily dose of EtO, and, therefore, that employee's cancer risk,will be generally higher than calculated using the short-term total dosealone. In more typical workplaces, where short-term peak exposures are the majorsources of exposures, two or more exposure episodes per day are common.Examples of operations associated with exposures of this type are cylinderchanging, unloading of small sterilizers, and moving sterilized productsto aeration rooms. The written and oral comments of several expert witnesses that were madeduring OSHA's previous rulemaking on EtO suggest that the 8-hour TWA and15-minute excursion limit may well work hand-in-hand to achieve effectivecontrol over exposures of this nature. [Exs. 11-68, 11-83, 11-113, 11-142,78, Tr. 216]. Based on the current record, OSHA believes that the excursionlimit/TWA combination will act to minimize both the number and the magnitudeof excursions occurring during the working day in many EtO workplaces,resulting in a reduction in risk that persists with the TWA alone. It is important to draw a distinction between reducing short term exposuresto reach the mandatory 1 ppm TWA (the issue addressed by OSHA in its decisionwith regard to the need for an EtO STEL), and reducing short term exposuresto reduce average exposures below the TWA (the issue raised by the Courtin its decision).There is no question that many employers have sought to reduce total doseby reducing short-term exposures, as discussed earlier. This strategy isclearly an easy and cost-effective way to reduce average exposures. Thereport by Meridian Research Inc., as well as other evidence in the record(Exs. 11-68, 11-83, 11-142, 78, 112, TR. 216) support this strategy. Thereis as yet no evidence in the record to the contrary. OSHA, therefore, isinviting comments and specific data on which an excursion limit would failto further reduce total dose and therefore the risk that would persistat the 1 ppm TWA. OSHA would also like to know if there are specific situationsin which the incorporation of an excursion limit would result in work practiceswhich would be counterproductive in reducing residual risk.A second issue is the reduction in risk which would be achieved by controllingshort-term exposures where employees are exposed to short bursts, i.e.when and excursion limit would be most likely to reduce total dose. TheCourt cited a hypothetical case in which a very low background exposurewould allow short-term exposures to exceed 10 ppm over a 15-minute period``but still have a cummulative exposure fall below the 1 ppm TWA, whichis an eight-hour average.'' A once-per-day exposure at the proposed excursionlimit of 5 ppm would result in an 8-hour TWA of 0.16 ppm. The Court's exampleillustrates what may be generally true: an excursion limit will reduceaverage exposures further in situations where employees are exposed toburst exposures and where average exposures are already below the TWA.In its final rule on EtO, OSHA concluded that a significant risk remainedat the 1 ppm TWA. The extent to which this significant risk would be reducedby an excursion limit is an issue on which OSHA request comment.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Regulatory Flexibility and Impact Analysis</ITAG>IntroductionExecutive Order 12291 (46 FR 13197, February 19, 1981) requires that aregulatory analysis be conducted for any rule having major economic consequenceson the national economy, individual industries, geographical regions, orlevels of government. The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq.</T3>) similarly requires OSHA to consider the impact of theproposed regulation on small entities.The Secretary has determined that this action would not be ``major'' asdefined by section 1(b) of Executive Order 12291. The Secretary also certifiesthat this action would not have a significant impact on a substantial numberof small entities as defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act. This determinationis based upon cost and feasibility data provided to OSHA in a report preparedby Meridian Research, Inc. (Ex. 204, <T3>Assessment of Short-Term Exposures to Ethylene Oxide</T3>).On March 31, 1983, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) publisheda new 5 CFR Part 1320, implementing the information collection provisionsof the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3> (48 FR 13666). Part 1320, which became effective on April30, 1983, sets forth procedures for agencies to follow in obtaining OMBclearance for collection of information requirements in proposed and finalrules. In particular, andSection; 1320.13 requires agencies to submit informationrequirements contained in proposed rules to OMB not later than the dateof publication of the proposal in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> It also requires agencies to include a statementin the notice of proposed rulemaking, indicating that such informationrequirements have been submitted to OMB for review under section 3504(h)of the Paperwork Reduction Act.In accordance with the above mentioned provisions of both the PaperworkReduction Act and the regulations issued pursuant thereto, OSHA certifiesthat it has submitted the information collection requirements containedin its proposed rule on occupational exposure to ethylene oxide to OMBfor review under section 3504(h) of that Act. Comments on these informationcollection requirements may be submitted by interested persons to the Officeof Information and Regulatory Affairs of OMB, Attention: Desk Officer forOSHA; 726 Jackson Place, NW., Washington, DC 20503. OSHA requests thatcopies of such comments also be submitted to the OSHA Docket Office, aspart of the record of this rulemaking.Summary of Exposure, Technological Feasibility, and Cost DataIn response to the Court's remand discussed above, OSHA has evaluated short-termemployee exposures to EtO in the sectors which would principally be affectedby promulgation of an excursion limit, assessed the technological feasibilityof achieving compliance with the excursion limit alternatives under consideration,and developed cost-of-compliance data for firms in the affected sectors.In particular, OSHA has made a preliminary determination as to the portionof an employee's full-shift exposure that is accounted for by short-termpeaks.For this effort, OSHA contracted with Meridian Research, Inc., to gatherthe information specified above and to conduct a total of nine site visitsto selected facilities in four industry sectors: EtO producers, EtO ethoxylators(i.e., facilities using EtO as a chemical feedstock), hospitals, and firmsthat use EtO to sterilize medical and other products and devices. Meridianwas unable to arrange a site visit to a facility in the fifth potentiallyaffected sector, spice manufacturing, because no spice manufacturing firmwas willing to permit a site visit. Meridian's final report appears inthe docket as Exhibit 204. For the purposes of this analysis, OSHA consideredtwo regulatory alternatives: A 10 ppm excurison limit (15 minutes) anda 5 ppm excursion limit (15 minutes). OSHA's principal findings are discussedbelow.The five sectors listed above were identified for further study by OSHAbased on the information available in the rulemaking record (see the RegulatoryImpact Assessment for the final rule for ethylene oxide, Ex. 164, and thereport entitled <T3>Economic and Environmental Impact Study of Ethylene Oxide,</T3> writtenby JRB Associates, 1984, Ex. 6-22). In two of these sectors_chemical productionand ethoxylation_a total of approximately 50 U.S. firms produce or useEtO as a chemical feedstock in closed systems in an outdoor environment.In the three other sectors_hospitals, spice manufacturing, and medicalproducts sterilizing_EtO is used as a sterilant gas to sterilize medicalequipment and devices, paper and other products, and spices. OSHA estimated(49 FR 25767, June 22, 1984) that there were as many as 6,300 hospitals,125 medical products sterilizers, and fewer than 30 spice manufacturersin the United States. Medical and other product sterilization firms canbe divided into two groups of companies: Those that have a sterlizationdepartment within a larger facility that produces the medical devices orother products to be sterilized, and small firms that provide sterilizationservices exclusively, generally on a contract basis. At the time of the1984 rulemaking, OSHA estimated that a total of 71,196 directly exposedemployees and 69,175 incidentally exposed employees were exposed to EtOin these five sectors (49 FR 25767, June 22, 1984).Short-term Exposure DataOn the site visits conducted in connection with this analysis, Meridiantook 8-hour TWA personal samples on all potentially exposed employees ateight of the sites visited. Using passive dosimeters, these long-term breathingzone samples were taken over the full shift of the employees sampled. Inaddition, whenever these employees initiated an activity having the potentialfor a short-term peak exposure, Meridian's Certified Industrial Hygienisttook short-term (15-minute) breathing zone samples using hydrogen-bromine-treatedcharcoal tubes, as specified by OSHA's Method 50. Short-term samples weretaken during all activities during the working day that were associatedwith episodic exposures. The specific activities characterized by suchshort-term peaks varied according to sector. For example, in productionand ethoxylation facilities, peaks were associated with activities suchas quality control sampling and railcar unloading, while high, short-durationexposures occurred in the sectors that use EtO as a sterilant during suchactivities as sterilizer loading and unloading and removal of biologicalindicators from freshly sterilized goods. Meridian believes that the sitesvisited represent the ``better'' firms in their respective sectors (i.e.,firms that have active safety and health programs and/or have expendedconsiderable time and effort to attempt to achieve the 1 ppm PEL).OSHA's employee sampling results showed that implementation of engineeringand work practice controls have reduced employee exposure to below thatanticipated by OSHA when promulgating the final standard in June, 1984.In addition, almost without exception, where employers had achieved compliancewith the final rule's 1 ppm 8-hour permissible exposure limit (PEL), controllingshort-term employee exposures to either 10 ppm or 5 ppm would neither bedifficult nor expensive. OSHA therefore believes that a 5 ppm excursionlimit is feasible.The results of OSHA's data gathering on short-term exposures were as follows:in the EtO-producing sector, 8-hour employee exposures ranged from 0.21to 0.78 (TWA), while 15-minute short-term exposures did not exceed 2.2ppm. (In this sector, no samples were taken by OSHA because of inclementweather during the site visit; these results were given to OSHA by theEtO-producing company itself). In the ethoxylator sector, 8-hour TWAs werenondetectable, while 15-minute short-term exposures ranged from nondetectableto 1.07 ppm.In the sterilant-using sectors, short-term exposures tend to be higherbecause of the episodic exposure pattern characteristic of these sectors.Samples taken by Meridian at three hospitals showed that the 8-hour TWAexposures of sterilizer operators in these facilities ranged from 0.14to 0.34 ppm, while their 15-minute short-term exposures never exceeded0.95 ppm. The hospitals selected for this analysis included a large, private-sectorfacility, a small rural hospital, and a large public-sector institution.EtO exposures in the medical products sterilization sector appear to bestrikingly dependent on the size of the facility in question. In largesterilization facilities owned by firms that manufacture medical productsand sterilize them before shipping them off site, employee exposures inthe facilities studied by Meridian have been reduced to levels well belowthe 1 ppm TWA, and short-term exposures are correspondingly low. The full-shirtsamples taken at two large facilities in this sector ranged from 0.08 to0.36 ppm, and the 15-minute short-term exposures at these plants rangedfrom 0.24 to 4.1 ppm. At two small sterilization facilities in this sector,however, full-shift exposure levels were measured that were considerablyabove the 1 ppm PEL promulgated in the final rule. At one of these smallfacilities, the sterilizer operator had an 8-hour TWA of 3.97 ppm, andat the other small contract-sterilization plant, the sterilizer's full-shiftexposure was 2.84 ppm, while that of the laboratory technician was 2.27ppm. The short-term exposures of these employees were correspondingly high.At the first small facility, the short-term exposures (approximately 15minutes) of the sterilizer operator ranged from 2.15 to 7.89 ppm, whilethe sterilizer operator's short-term exposures at the second facility rangedas high as 32.2 ppm (15 minutes) and those of the laboratory technicianwere as high as 7.21 ppm.As stated earlier, no spice manufacturing firm was willing to permit Meridianto visit a spice facility; consequently, OSHA was unable to obtain anycurrent data on short-term exposures of employees in this sector. However,information obtained during the rulemaking for the final EtO standard showsthat the sterilization technology used in the spice manufacturing industryis similar to the technologies used in the sterilization of medical products(JRB Associates, Ex. 6-22). Short-term exposures in the spice sterilizationoperation may occur during the unloading of sterilized spices from thesterilizer, the handling of newly sterilized product, and the changingof EtO cylinders. OSHA has no data to suggest that short-term exposuresin the spice manufacturing industry are substantially different from thosein other EtO sterilant-using industry sectors. Therefore, by analogy tothe exposure data obtained from medical product sterilizer facilities,OSHA believes that it will be possible to control the short-term exposuresof employees in the spice manufacturing sector at or below 5 ppm.The pattern that emerged at all the sites visited was thus consistent acrosssectors: where employers have achieved compliance with the 1 ppm PEL, theirfacilities would already be in compliance with either a 5- or a 10-ppmshort-term limit or could feasibly achieve these levels with minor changesin work practices. There was only a single exception to this finding amongall sites visited by Meridian: at one facility, the evening-shift sterilizeroperator's short-term (approximately 15 minutes) exposures were 3.56, 10.97,8.49, and 0.39 ppm; no full-shift measurement was taken on this operator,and thus it is possible that his 8-hour TWA exceeded 1 ppm. However, because87 percent of the 8-hour TWA exposure level of the day-shift operator atthe same facility was accounted for by his four short-term exposures, OSHAconsiders it unlikely that the evening shift operator's 8-hour TWA actuallyexceeded 1 ppm. (As described below, OSHA believes that this employee'sshort-term exposure could be reduced to 5 ppm by a modification in workpractices). OSHA therefore believes that firms that have achieved compliancewith the 1 ppm TWA promulgated in the final rule in 1984 should be ableto lower employee exposures to a 10- or 5-ppm short-term level, at minimalcost.Technological FeasibilitySite visit observations, exposure data, and reports from the trade literaturehave shown that, in the producer, ethoxylator, hospital, and medical productsterilizer sectors (and, by analogy, the spice manufacturing sector), achievingcompliance with a 5 or 10 ppm STEL is feasible with the use of the sameengineering and work practice controls determined by OSHA at the time ofthe final rule to be feasible to achieve the 1 ppm PEL. The engineeringcontrols implemented by those employers who had achieved compliance withthe 1 ppm PEL were standard and widely available controls: local exhaustand general dilution ventilation, the use of closed-loop sampling devices,vapor recovery systems at railcar loading racks, and enclosure/ventilationof aeration and Guarantine areas. In addition, at least one spice manufacturingfirm is planning to adopt a substitute for EtO, thus eliminating employeeexposures (Meridian Research personal communication, spice company representative,November 21, 1986). OSHA believes it likely that other spice manufacturerswill also be able to use a substitute sterilant.Work practice controls used by employers at the sites visited to reduceexposures include: Opening (``cracking'') sterilizer doors for 15 minutesbefore unloading the sterilizer, pulling rather than pushing carts containingoffgassing goods, and performing manual leak detection.The use of respiratory protection was observed during a few short-termactivities: During railcar loading at the EtO producer facility and whenentering walk-in sterilizers at medical product sterilization facilities.In addition to exposure data obtained from site visits, a number of submissionsto the EtO docket (Exs. 4-13, 11-132, 139, 179, 198A) indicate that a 5ppm excursion limit can be achieved during operation of EtO sterilizersin hospitals. Several articles submitted by T. Joel Loving of the Universityof Virginia's Environmental Health and Safety Office show that the useof vacuum purge systems and exhaust hoods can reduce the 8-hour TWA toor below 1 ppm and the short-term limit to or below 5 ppm for 15 minutes.OSHA's findings thus demonstrate that it is likely to be feasible to complywith either a 5 ppm or 10 ppm excursion limit. The major engineering controlsin use at the sites visited to achieve the excursion limits, are the samecontrols that OSHA determined in the Regulatory Impact Assessment (Ex.163) and JRB Associates' report (Ex. 6-22) to be necessary to achieve compliancewith the current 1 ppm PEL. OSHA's analysis shows that, in some instances,employers may need to implement additional work practice controls, suchas extending the period of offgassing in the sterilizer, to achieve compliancewith a 5 ppm excursion limit. OSHA requests comment on this analysis andon the feasibility of meeting a 10 ppm or 5 ppm excursion limit.Summary of CostsTo assess the magnitude of the costs that might be incurred by employersto comply with a short-term limit, OSHA estimated the costs potentiallyassociated with achieving a 10 ppm or 5 ppm short-term limit at each ofthe nine facilities visited by Meridian Research. OSHA's analysis showsthat both the 10 ppm and 5 ppm short-term limit, were already being achievedat the EtO producer site, the ethoxylator site, one large medical productsterilizer facility, and three hospital sites. Therefore, no additionalcosts would be incurred at any of these sites to comply with a 10 ppm or5 ppm excursion limit.At the remaining large medical product sterilizer site visited by Meridian,exposure data collected on the day-shift sterilizer operator show thatboth the 10 ppm and 5 ppm short-term limits, were achieved. However, samplestaken on the night-shift operator at this site showed that his 15 minuteshort-term exposures exceeded 5 and 10 ppm. OSHA believes that this operator'sshort-term exposure could be reduced by allowing the sterilizer load tooffgas inside the sterilizer for four hours before sterilized product isremoved by the operator. This practice would not interfere with the workschedule currently being used at this site and would thus be unlikely toresult in an increase in costs. If allowing the load to offgas for 4 hoursdid not reduce this operator's short-term exposures to below 5 ppm, OSHAbelieves that the sterilization unit's work schedule could be adjustedso that the load could offgas for 8 hours before the operator unloadedthe sterilizer.Neither of the two small medical product sterilizer facilities was currentlyachieving the 5 ppm excursion limit, and one short-term sample taken atone site (Company F, Ex. 204) exceeded 10 ppm for a sterilizer operator.However, at both of these sites, sterilizer operators and a laboratorytechnician also had 8-hour TWA exposures that exceeded the current 1 ppmPEL. Area samples taken at these sites indicate that high ambient levelsof EtO were present as a result of the offgassing of sterilized product.OSHA believes that installing ventilated, enclosed quarantine areas andmodifying existing ventilation systems are necessary in order to complywith the existing 1 ppm PEL and that these changes would substantiallyaid in achieving compliance with a 5 ppm excursion limit. Therefore, OSHAbelieves that employers at these sites will incur no (or at most nominal)additional costs over those of the current standard to comply with eithera 10 ppm or 5 ppm excursion limit.OSHA's findings thus demonstrate that employers are not likely to incursignificant costs to comply with an excursion limit. These findings reflectsite visit observations and evidence in the record (Ex. 11-132) that theengineering controls that are necessary to achieve the 1 ppm 8-hour TWAalso can be implemented to reduce short-term exposures to 5 ppm, althoughsome minor work practice changes may be necessary in some activities.The proposed excursion limit will be associated with an increased costburden primarily in connection with the provision dealing with exposuremonitoring. The requirement for the monitoring of excursion levels willincrease the burden of affected employers because the type of samplingrequired to evaluate short-term exposures is different from the type ofmonitoring required to monitor the final standard's 8-hour TWA PEL or theaction level. Because methods for monitoring short-term exposures to EtOhave only recently been developed and become commercially available, OSHAassumes that employers in the affected sectors will not have been ableto perform short-term employee monitoring and thus, that all affected firmswill need to perform initial STEL monitoring. This assumption is a worst-caseanalysis, in that some firms in the principally affected sectors are likelyto be performing some short-term sampling. Because the method for evaluatingshort-term exposures requires some specialized training and equipment,OSHA has based the cost estimate for initial monitoring on the assumptionthat each firm will retain the services of an industrial hygiene consultantfor 8 hours, at a cost of $35.00 per hour, to collect the necessary short-termsamples. The effect of using this assumption is also to overstate costssomewhat, because many facilities have in-house industrial hygiene personneland laboratory facilities to collect and analyze their monitoring samples.The sectors principally affected by OSHA's EtO standard are: EtO producers:EtO ethoxylators (i.e., who use EtO as a feedstock chemical); sterilizersof heat-and moisture-sensitive medical products and devices; hospitals;and spice manufacturers. The number of short-term samples to be collectedwill depend on the number of activities occurring during the day that maycause elevated short-term exposures to EtO. The pattern of exposure variesfrom sector to sector; for example, sterilizer operators using EtO to sterilizemedical devices are generally exposed to elevated short-term exposuresfour or five times per shift, while the unit operator in an ethoxylationfacility performs activities having the potential for short-term exposurestwo or three times in a working day.    To estimate the average number of short-term samples that employers ineach of these sectors would collect to comply with an initial excursionlimit monitoring requirement, OSHA relied on the feasibility study conductedby Meridian Research, Inc. [Ex. 204]. While conducting sites visits tofacilities in the affected sectors, Meridian collected from 30 to 10 short-term(15 minute) samples at each facility. For the purpose of monitoring costestimation, OSHA therefore assumes that employers at each facility willneed to collect an average of six short-term samples to fulfill his orher initial excursion limit monitoring obligation.OSHA estimates that, under a worst-case scenario, employers in the fiveprincipally affected EtO sectors will incur a total cost of $3,161,480to comply with the proposed initial excursion limit monitoring. Individualsector cost are: $6,370 for EtO producers; $24,500 for ethoxylators, $61,250for medical products sterilizers; $3,056,130 for hospitals; and $13,230for spice manufacturers.Economic Impact and Regulatory Flexibility AnalysesBased on the preceding cost analysis, OSHA has determined that the additionalcosts of complying with the proposed 5 ppm excursion limit are likely tobe negligible for employers that are in compliance with the existing 1ppm PEL. Thus the promulgation of a 5 ppm excursion limit is not likelyto have a significant economic impact on typical firms in each sector orcause adverse differential impacts on small entities in each sector. Commentis requested on this issue.Relationship Between Short-Term and 8-Hour TWA Exposures to EtOTo address the Court's request that OSHA examine the impact of controllingshort-term employee exposures on the residual health risks that remainat the 1 ppm TWA PEL, OSHA assessed the contribution of employees' short-termexposures to their 8-hour TWA exposures. To accomplish this analysis, Meridianobtained concurrent personal 8-hour TWA and short-term air samples duringvisits to sites in several sectors. Meridian then calculated each employee'stotal EtO exposure from short-term activities (in ppm-minutes) and eachemployee's total full-shift exposure in ppm-minutes (determined from the8-hour TWA). This analysis permitted OSHA to determine the extent to whichan employee's 8-hour TWA would be reduced by controlling that employee'sshort-term exposures. While some employers have chosen to control short-termexposures to meet the 1 ppm TWA, OSHA seeks comment on the extent to whichaverage long-term exposures would be reduced below the TWA by an excursionlimit.For example, exposure data were obtained at one ethoxylator facility. Thetop operator had a non-detectable 8-hour TWA exposure and a single 15-minuteexposure of 1.07 ppm that occurred while the operator was collecting aquality control sample from a railcar. Even assuming that this employee's8-hour TWA was 0.05 ppm (i.e., the limit of detection), the exposure toEtO that occurred during railcar sampling contributed 67 percent of theoperator's total exposure for the day. These results show that controllingthe operator's 15-minute exposure during this activity (i.e. close loopsampling system) had a significant impact on reducing the employee's 8-hourTWA to well below 1 ppm (see Site Visit Report for Company A, Ex. 204).In addition, short-term and 8-hour TWA exposure data collected at threemedical product sterilizer facilities show that reducing the short-termexposures of sterilizer operators and forklift drivers contributed significantlyto reducing their 8-hour TWA exposures to below 1 ppm (see Site Visit Reportsfor Companies C, D, and F, Ex. 204).This analysis of the contribution of exposures experienced during short-duration,high-exposure activities has shown that controlling short-term exposureshas had a substantial impact on reducing employees' 8-hour exposures toEtO. Although most of the sites visited by Meridian will not need to implementadditional controls to achieve compliance with an excursion limit of 5ppm, one site may need to change its work schedule to extend the amountof offgassing time before removal of the load from the sterilizer or ofbiological indicators from sterilized product. OSHA believes other firmsin the affected sectors may also need to implement additional work practicesor alter their work schedules to accommodate longer offgassing times.Summary of BenefitsTo the extent an excursion limit reduces average long-term exposures, thenthe cancer deaths prevented by adoption of an excursion limit representthe primary benefit derived from this action. As discussed previously inthis preamble, it is not possible to quantify the number of deaths preventedby compliance with the excursion limit since data do not reveal the preciseincremental EtO dose reduction that will result from limiting 15-minuteshort-term exposures to 5 ppm. However, OSHA has estimated the risk froma lifetime exposure, assuming exposure only once a day to a 5 ppm short-termlimit, with no other exposure or background levels of EtO, to be approximately2 to 4 excess deaths per 10,000 workers. The calculated risks, 2 per 10,000to 4 per 10,000 are probably low estimates, because it has been establishedthat short-term exposures often occur more than once per day and that backgroundEtO concentration during the day is above zero, additionally contributingto worker exposure. Thus, OSHA believes that the risk at 5 ppm will notbe insignificant (<T3>See Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO</T3> v. <T3>American Petroleum Institute</T3>, 448 U.S. 607 (1980)).    OSHA believes that implementation of this proposed amendment will act toreduce the number of EtO-related cancer cases, although the number of additionallives saved cannot be quantified.Environmental Assessment-Finding of No Significant ImpactDuring OSHA's previous rulemaking on EtO, information was solicited fromthe public on a variety of issues including possible environmental impactsof a revised standard which might contain both a TWA and short-term limit.The information and comments submitted have been reviewed in accordancewith the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321, et seq), the regulations of the Council on EnvironmentalQuality (40 CFR Part 1500), and OSHA's DOL NEPA Procedures (29 CFR Part11). As a result of this review, the Assistant Secretary has determinedthat this proposed action will not have a significant impact on the externalenvironment.EtO is used primarily as an intermediate in the production of several industrialproducts, such as antifreeze, polyester fibers, films, and bottles. EtOis also used as a pesticide, fumigant, and antimicrobial sterilant formedical products and spices, and in limited applications for items suchas cosmetics, books, railcars, etc.Adoption of an excursion limit is not anticipated to affect the externalenvironment because: (1) The process equipment containing EtO generallyconsists of tightly closed and highly automated system: (2) any emissionsthat occur to the external atmosphere would dissipate and disperse rapidly;and (3) no solid waste is directly associated what EtO fumigation and sterilization.Although the removal of increased amounts of EtO from the workplace airmight seem to contribute to the pollution of ambient air surrounding EtOoperations and applications, this is not anticipated because direct exhaustto the external environment is regulated under EPA air quality standards.In cases where worker exposure is reduced by the use of improved controlmethods such as chamber ventilation and purge systems, atmospheric emissionsof EtO would remain constant, having an insignificant impact on the externalenvironment.Only minimal amounts of EtO are released from manufacturing processes aswastewater effluents. Treatment of EtO containing wastes usually involvesdegradation in water (producing ethylene glycol). Wastewater treatmentmust comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act of 1977, and underthis standard, conventional biological wastewater treatment would effectivelyremove EtO from water effluents.In cases where liquid EtO is transported or stored, there may be some potentialfor spills or leaks. Because of the nature of EtO, however, such occurrencesare not anticipated to impact on the environment, since EtO quickly volatilizesand dissipates. Although instances of waste disposal have not been presentedto the record, such disposal would be covered by EPA regulations and transportationwould be regulated by the Department of Transportation. The requirementsof the proposed standard will not alter present methods for waste disposalor transportation of EtO.Based on this discussion, OSHA concludes that there will be no significantimpact on the general quality of the human environment outside the workplace,particularly in terms of ambient air quality, water quality, or solid wastedisposal. OSHA, of course, reserves the right to perform additional environmentalanalyses based on the information and comments received in response tothis Notice.<ITAG tagnum="85">VI. Summary and Explanation of the Proposed Requirements </ITAG>The proposed requirements set forth in this notice are those which, basedon currently available data, OSHA believes are necessary and appropriateto provide additional protection to employees who are now exposed to airborneconcentrations of EtO at levels that pose a significant risk of materialimpairment to their health. OSHA has considered all data and recommendationson the short-term limit issue contained in the EtO docket (H-200), as wellas reference works, journal articles and other data accumulated by OSHAsince initiation of this rulemaking. OSHA believes that compliance obligations with respect to the excursionlimit may need to be set forth in several paragraphs of the present EtOstandard in order for the maximum benefit to be derived from adoption ofthis limit. Proposed requirements pertaining to adoption of the excursionlimit are set forth in the following paragraphs of section 1910.1047: Scopeand application (a)(2); Permissible exposure limit, (c) (2); Exposure monitoring,(d)(1)(i), (d)(1)(ii), (d)(2)(iii), (d)(3), (d)(4), and (d)(7)(ii); Regulatedareas, (e)(1); Methods of compliance, (f)(1)(i), (f)(1)(ii), (f)(2)(i),and (f)(2)(iv); Respiratory protection and personal protective equipment,(g)(1)(iii); Communication of EtO hazards to employees, (j)(1)(ii), (j)(3)(i);and Dates, (m)(1)(i) and (m)(2)(iii). The following discussion describeshow the proposed requirements in each of these paragraphs would modifyemployers current obligations under the EtO standard. Scope and Application, Paragraph (a)(2) This paragraph specifies that the EtO standard does not apply to productscontaining EtO where data demonstrate that the product is not capable ofreleasing EtO in airborne concentrations at or above the 8-hour TWA actionlevel of 0.5 ppm. OSHA believes that it would be appropriate to requirethe employer to demonstrate that the product is also not capable of releasingEtO concentrations above the excursion limit in order for that productto be exempt. The Agency proposes this modification based on its conclusionthat risk can be reduced by additionally specifying that product exemptionis acceptable only if exposures also will not exceed the excursion limit.To illustrate this proposition, it can be calculated that under the presentstandard a product is exempt if emitted dose remains below 240 ppm/minutes(0.5 ppmandmultiply;480 minutes). Thus, for products which may by natureinitially emit relatively high EtO concentrations over a short time span,the current standard would exempt such products only if they are not capableof releasing 16 ppm EtO over a 15 minute period (16 ppmandmultiply;15 min=240ppm-minutes). Imposition of the excursion limit would not allow exemptionin this example (e.g. for product exemption emitted dose could not exceed75 ppm-minutes [5 ppmandmultiply;15 minutes], rather than 240 ppm-minutes).Thus, imposition of the STEL, under worst case exposure conditions, wouldtheoretically reduce the allowable release of EtO for products to be exemptedfrom the standard. Permissible Exposure Limit Paragraph (c)(2) Proposed paragraph (c)(2) would establish the excursion limit as follows:``The employer shall ensure that no employee is exposed to an airborneconcentration of EtO in excess of 5 parts of EtO per million parts of air(5 ppm) as determined over a maximum sampling period of fifteen (15) minutes.''OSHA has determined that exposure to EtO under the present standard stillpresents a significant risk of material impairment to employees. Basedon the current record, OSHA believes that compliance with the excursionlimit as set-forth in this paragraph will further reduce such significantrisk. As noted earlier, OSHA must also give consideration to the economic andtechnological feasibility of the proposed excursion limit in this phaseof the EtO rulemaking. In order to obtain the information necessary toallow the Agency to perform such a feasibility analysis, OSHA contractedfor the services of Meridian Research, Inc. of Silver Spring, Maryland,to perform site visits and exposure monitoring in representative EtO-usingfacilities (Ex. 204). Based on these data, and data previously providedto the EtO record, OSHA believes that compliance with the excursion limitis likely to be both technologically and economically feasible (see ``RegulatoryFlexibility and Impact Analysis'' section). Exposure Monitoring, Paragraphs (d)(1)(i), (d)(i)(ii), (d)(2)(ii), (d)(3)(iv),(d)(4)(iii), (d)(4)(iv), and (d)(7)(ii) The proposed amendment to paragraph (d)(1)(i) would require that the employerperform breathing zone sampling that is representative of the 15-minuteshort-term exposure of each employee. Paragraph (d)(1)(ii), as amended,would require that representative 15-minute short-term employee exposuresbe determined on the basis of one or more samples representing 15-minuteexposures associated with operations that are most likely to produce exposuresabove the excursion limit for each shift for each job classification ineach work area.While these exposure monitoring provisions would require that the employerdetermine the short-term exposure for each employee exposed to EtO, itdoes not necessarily require separate measurements for each employee. Ifa number of employees perform essentially the same job under the same conditions,it may be sufficient to monitor a fraction of such employees. Representativepersonal sampling for employees engaged in similar work and exposed tosimilar short-term EtO levels can be achieved by measuring the exposureof that member of the exposed group who can reasonably be expected to havethe highest exposure. This result would then be attributed to the remainingemployees of the group. In many specific work situations, the representative monitoring approachcan be more cost-effective in identifying the exposures of affected employees.However, employers may use any monitoring strategy that correctly identifiesthe extent to which their employees are exposed. Existing paragraph (d)(2)(i) would apply to the excursion limit, and wouldrequire employers to perform initial monitoring to determine accuratelythe short-term airborne concentrations of EtO to which employees are exposed.However, proposed paragraph (d)(2)(iii) contains a provision designed toeliminate unnecessary and redundant exposure monitoring. It would permitemployers who have monitored short-term employee exposures to EtO withina one-year period immediately preceding publication of a final rule inthe <T4>Federal Register </T4>to forego the initial monitoring required byparagraph (d)(2)(i) if the results of monitoring within this period haveshown that their employees are not exposed to EtO levels above the excursionlimit. This provision makes clear that OSHA does not intend to require employerswho have voluntarily performed employee monitoring to repeat such monitoringif they have reliable and objective data showing that their employees arenot exposed to EtO above the excursion limit. Thus, OSHA believes thatproposed paragraph (d)(2)(iii) will enhance the cost effectiveness of thestandard's monitoring requirements without compromising employee protection.The frequency of monitoring and termination of monitoring requirementsregarding the excursion limit are found in proposed paragraphs (d)(3)(iv),(d)(4)(iii) and (d)(4)(iv). The excursion limit itself would not changethe current frequency and termination of monitoring provisions as theyapply to the TWA. With the adoption of an excursion limit the final rule would contain aTWA, a excursion limit, and an action level. The interrelationship amongthese three exposure levels would determine the frequency at which employersare obligated to monitor employee exposures. There would be six possibleexposure scenarios, or combinations of TWA and short-term exposures, thatwould determine the frequency of required monitoring if an excursion limitwere promulgated. The table below lists these six exposure scenarios, alongwith the monitoring frequency for each. As indicated previously, the frequencyprovisions dictated by the action level and TWA would not be changed byadoption of the excursion limit. However, these levels are included inthe Table below to clarify what the overall monitoring obligations wouldbe if all three triggering levels existed. (Note: ``EL'' means ``excursionlimit'' in the table below). <ITAG tagnum="110"><C/> <H1>Exposure scenario</H1><H1>Required monitoring activity</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">_Below the action level and at or below the EL<D>No monitoring required.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">_Below the action level and above the EL<D>No TWA monitoring required; monitor short-term exposures 2 times peryear.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">_At or above the action level, at or below the TWA, and at or belowthe EL<D>Monitor TWA exposures 2 times per year.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">_At or above the action level, at or below the TWA, and above the EL<D>Monitor TWA exposures 2 times per year and monitor short-term exposures2 times per year</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">_Above the TWA and at or below the EL<D>Monitoring TWA exposures 4 times per year</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">_Above the TWA and above the EL<D>Monitor TWA exposures 4 times per year; monitor excursion limit exposures2 times per year.</D></ITAG></ITAG>As is shown by the table above, the action level trigger largely determineswhether employers must monitor employee exposure to EtO; the only exceptionwould be the scenario in which 8-hour TWA exposures are below the actionlevel and short-term exposures are above the excursion limit. In this particularcase, the existence of an excursion limit would obligate employers to monitorshort-term exposures two times per year at those job locations where theexcursion limit is exceeded, but employers would not be obligated to monitor8-hour TWA exposures at those job locations. Although OSHA has proposedthat excursion limit monitoring be performed semiannually where overexposureis found, comment is solicited on the adequacy of this monitoring frequency.The Agency considered requiring quarterly or even more frequent periodicmonitoring where the excursion limit is exceeded due to the potential variabilityin burst type exposure levels from day to day, week to week, or month tomonth. Comment is sought on whether semiannual monitoring of employeeswho are likely to receive short-term exposures above the excursion limitis sufficiently representative of expected exposures throughout the year.Paragraph (d)(4)(iii), would permit termination of excursion limit monitoringwhere initial monitoring required under paragraph (d)(2)(i) reveals employeeexposure to be at or below the excursion limit. Likewise, paragraph (d)(4)(iv)would permit termination of the proposed periodic excursion limit monitoringunder paragraph (d)(3), if at least two consecutive excursion limit measurementstaken at least 7 days apart, are at or below the excursion limit. Theseare the same termination of monitoring requirements applicable to the existingaction level (i.e. TWA monitoring not required where exposures are belowthe action level). OSHA believes that incorporating some monitoring terminationmechanisms with respect to the excursion limit, is reasonable and may beappropriate as proposed. Comment is requested on these proposed amendments.Based on the nature of the occurrence of short-term EtO exposures, however,comment is particularly requested on the degree of confidence that canbe placed in assuming that short-term exposures will remain below the excursionlimit, if initial monitoring or two specific periodic measurements indicatesuch. The Agency is seeking data on whether short-term EtO exposures inindustry today can be expected to consistently remain below a given limit,or whether the magnitude of short-term exposures fluctuates so frequentlyand widely that more stringent demonstration of short-term exposure stabilizationis necessary, prior to permitting the termination of excursion limit monitoring.Existing paragraph (d)(5) or OSHA's EtO standard requires additional monitoringfor TWA exposures whenever there has been a change in production, process,control equipment, personnel or work practices that may result in new oradditional EtO exposures. If an excursion limit is adopted, the currentrequirement would also require additional excursion limit monitoring wherethe employer suspects that workplace changes also may increase short-termexposures. The Agency requests comments both on the appropriateness ofrequiring such additional excursion limit monitoring as described aboveand on specific workplace changes and situations that might result in anincrease in short-term exposures.Paragraphs (d)(6) of the current EtO standard requires that monitoringmethods be accurate to within plus or minus 25% for EtO concentrationsat the 1 ppm TWA, and plus or minus 35% at the action level of 0.5 ppm.These accuracy specifications were based on data in the record that showedthat several EtO measurement methods and devices were available to employerson a widespread basis that could meet the specified accuracy requirementsfor compliance determinations. OSHA believes that a number of measurementmethods and devices are also available to employers that can accuratelydetermine compliance with the EtO excursion limit. These include the Qazi-Ketchammethod (Ex. 11-133), direct reading instruments such as infrared detectionunits, photoionization detection units and gas chromatographs, and therecently developed OSHA method 50 (Ex. 203). Other devices, such as passivedosimeters, may also prove to be suitable in determining short-term exposures.Presently available data indicate, however, that dosimeters may not yetbe capable of accurately measuring short-term EtO levels. The Agency isaware that dosimeter manufacturers are attempting to develop their productsfor this purpose. Because of the wide range of methods and the developmentalwork currently being conducted, OSHA is not proposing specific accuracylimitations with respect to STEL monitoring. The Agency may incorporateaccuracy requirements in the final standard but believes that additionaldata will result in a more appropriate determination on this issue.OSHA requests the submission of data identifying available STEL monitoringmethods, levels that can be measured, accuracy, availability for use bythe EtO industry, degree of expertise needed to perform excursion limitmonitoring, and costs.Paragraph (d)(7), as amended, would require that employers notify employeesof the results of excursion limit, monitoring performed pursuant to thestandard, and inform employees of corrective action being taken by theemployer to reduce exposure to or below the excursion limit where the excursionlimit has been exceeded. These notification requirements have been determinedto be appropriate where TWA monitoring is performed, and are also believedto be appropriate where excursion limit monitoring is performed.Regulated areas, paragraph (e)(1)This paragraph, as amended, would require employers to identify as regulatedareas any locations in their workplaces where there may be occupationalexposures to airborne concentrations of EtO above either the excursionlimit or as is specified currently, above the TWA.OSHA believes that additionally designating areas where the excursion limitis exceeded as regulated areas will further reduce EtO exposure to employeescurrently permitted in these areas. For example, regulated areas need notbe established for EtO dosages below 480 ppm-minutes (1 ppm x 480 minutes).This permits an exposure of up to 32 ppm over 15-minutes prior to the needfor regulated area designation. Adoption of the excursion limit will alsorequire regulated area designation for areas in which EtO levels exceed5 ppm for 15-minutes, or a dose of 75 ppm-minutes.Methods of Compliance, Paragraphs (f)(1)(i), (f)(1)(ii), (f)(2)(i) and(f)(2)(ii)As discussed previously (see section on Summary of Regulatory Flexibilityand Impact Analysis) OSHA believes that compliance with the proposed excursionlimit can be accomplished by the majority of the EtO industry through implementationof feasible engineering and work practice controls. OSHA, therefore, proposesto require in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of the existing EtO standard, that theemployer institute engineering and work practice controls to reduce andmaintain employee exposure to or below the excursion limit except to theextent that such controls are not feasible. OSHA further proposes, in paragraph(f)(1)(ii), to require that wherever feasible engineering controls andwork practices that can be instituted are not sufficient to reduce employerexposure to or below the excursion limit the employer shall use them toreduce exposure to the lower levels achievable by those controls, and shallsupplement them by the use of respirators. Based on available evidence,OSHA believes that the use of engineering and work practices controls willreduce employer exposure to or below the excursion limit for practicallyall situations. OSHA recognizes in paragraph (f)(1)(iii) of the existingstandard, however, that there are some situations where engineering controlsare not generally feasible, especially as they pertain to control of short-termexposures. These EtO activities include: collection of quality assurancesamples from sterlized materials; removal of biological indicators fromsterilized materials; loading and unloading of tank cars; changing of EtOtanks on sterilizers; and vessel cleaning. These operations generally resultin short-term high exposures. Thus, considering that the existing standardpermits the use of respirators during these difficult to control activities,OSHA has greater confidence that it is feasible to control virtually allother short-term exposure activities through implementation of engineeringand work practice controls. Nevertheless, OSHA seeks comments on whetheremployers should be permitted to use respirators to achieve compliancewith the excursion limit in any situation where the TWA is being compliedwith.Amended paragraph (f)(2)(i) would require, where the excursion limit, isexceeded, that the employer establish and implement a written program toreduce employer exposure to or below the excursion limit, by means of engineeringand work practice controls, and by the use of respirators when permitted.OSHA believes that the written plan for achieving the excusion limit, isas essential as the written plan requirement adopted for achieving theTWA, in ensuring that the employer implement the necessary controls toreduce exposure. The plan also provides the information that would allowOSHA, the employer, and employees to examine the excursion limit controlmethods chosen and to evaluate the extent to which these planned controlsare being implemented. As with the TWA written plan, the excursion limitcompliance plan will be accessible to individuals designated in paragraph(f)(2)(ii) for inspection and copying.Paragraph (f)(2)(iv), as amended, would prohibit employee rotation as ameans of compliance with the excursion limit for the same reasons thatemployee rotation is not permitted for compliance with the TWA. This prohibitionis consistent with OSHA's view that this control strategy is not appropriatein occupational environments involving exposure to potential carcinogens.It results in exposure of a larger number of employees to levels of EtOwhich still present a significant risk.Respiratory Protection and Personal Protective Equipment, Paragraph (g)(1)(iii)The final standard, with adoption of an excursion limit would provide thatrespirators be used to limit short-term employee exposure to EtO in thefollowing circumstances: <ITAG tagnum="21">(i) During the interval necessary to install or implement feasibleengineering and work practice controls to achieve the excursion limit;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(ii) In-work operations such as maintenance and repair activitiesor vessel cleaning or other activities for which the employer establishesthat engineering and work practice controls are not feasible to achievethe excursion limit; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(iii) In work situations where feasible engineering and work practicecontrols are not yet sufficient to reduce exposure to or below the excursionlimit.</ITAG>These same requirements apply under the current standard with respect torespirator use in complying with the TWA, and are based on OSHA's establishedpolicy on compliance methodology (see preample discussion in the currentEtO standard, 49 FR 25734).Other requirements under this paragraph (g) dealing with ``Respirator selection''and ``Respirator program'', would remain unchanged and would apply whererespirators are used to achieve the excursion limit.Communication of EtO Hazards to Employees, Paragraphs (j)(1)(ii), (j)(3)(i)The existing EtO standard requires, in paragraph (j)(1)(ii), that employersensure that precautionary labels are affixed to all containers of EtO whosecontents are capable of causing employee exposure at or above the actionlevel. OSHA also proposes to include in this paragraph a requirement forlabeling of containers of EtO whose contents are capable of causing employeeexposure above the excursion limit.Existing paragraph (j)(3)(i) requires that information and training onEtO be provided to employees exposed above the action level. OSHA alsoproposes to include in this paragraph a requirement that information andtraining on EtO be provided to employees exposed above the excursion limit.The basis for these proposed actions is that regulation of short-term exposureswill act to reduce further the significant risk of excess death to EtOemployees that persists under the current rule. Additionally, informingemployees through labeling and training that high levels of hazardous materialscan be released into the workplace may better enable affected employeesto take precautionary measures to protect themselves.Effective Date, Paragraph (m)As proposed, the final amendments to the EtO standard would become effectivethirty (30) days following publication in the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>In order to establish appropriate start-up datesfrom the effective date, OSHA requests comment on the length of time employersbelieve will be required in order to achieve compliance with the proposedexcursion limit, and the time necessary to establish additional exposuremonitoring, respirator, and training programs that would be required byadoption of an excursion limit for EtO.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. References</ITAG>The studies and other data referred to in this document represent the primarysources upon which this proposed action is based. A complete set of thereferences is available for examination and copying at the OSHA DocketOffice, Room N-3670, U.S Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW.,Washington, DC 20210, between 8:30 am and 4:30 pm, Monday through Friday,legal holidays excepted.<ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Public Participation</ITAG>Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and argumentson this proposed amendment. These comments must be postmarked on or beforeFebruary 22, 1988 and submitted in quadruplicate to the Docket Officer,Docket No. H-200, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Room N-3670, Washington, DC20210, (202)523-7894. Written submissions must clearly identify the provisionsof the proposal which are addressed, and the position taken on each issue.The data, views, and arguments that are submitted will be available forpublic inspection and copying at the above address. All timely submissionswill be part of the record of the proceeding.Public HearingOSHA has tentatively scheduled an informal public hearing to begin at 10:00a.m. on Thursday, March 3, 1988, depending on whether any hearing requestsare received by the Agency. The hearing will be held in the Auditorium,Francis Perkins Building, U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution AvenueNW., Washington, DC. Interested persons who wish to request a hearing mustfile such request by February 22, 1988. Requests for Hearings Under section 6(b)(3) of the OSH Act and 29 CFR 1911.11 interested personswho desire that OSHA hold an oral hearing on the proposal may file objectionsto the proposal and request an informal hearing. The objections and hearingrequests should be submitted in quadruplicate and must comply with thefollowing conditions: 1. The objection must include the name and address of the objector; 2. The objections must specify with particularity the provisions of theproposed rule to which objection is taken and must state the grounds therefor;3. Each objection must be separately stated and numbered; and 4. The objections must be accompanied by a detailed summary of the evidenceproposed to be introduced at the requested hearing. Interested persons who have objections to various provisions or have changesto recommend may of course, make those objections or recommendations intheir comments and OSHA will fully consider them. There is only need tofile formal ``objections'' if the interested persons desire to requestan oral hearing. Requests for a hearing should be submitted in quadruplicate, postmarkedon or before February 22, 1988 and addressed to Mr. Tom Hall, OSHA Divisionof Consumer Affairs, Docket No. H-200B, Room N-3637, U.S. Department ofLabor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210, (202) 523-8615.Notice of Intention to Appear Persons desiring to participate at the hearing, including the right toquestion witnesses, must file a notice of intention to appear postmarkedby February 22, 1988. The notice of intention to appear must contain thefollowing: 1. The name, address, and telephone number of each person to appear; 2. The capacity in which the person will appear; 3. The approximate amount of time required for the presentation; 4. The specific issues that will be addressed; 5. A detailed statement of the position that will be taken with respectto each issue addressed; 6. A statement as to whether the party intends to submit documentary evidence,and if so, a detailed summary of the evidence. This notice of intention to appear is to be sent to Mr. Tom Hall, OccupationalSafety and Health Administration, Division of Consumer Affairs, Room N-3649,200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Filing of Testimony and Evidence Before the Hearing Any party requesting more than 10 minutes for presentation at the hearingor who will present documentary evidence, must provide in quadruplicate,the complete text of its testimony, including all documentary evidenceto be presented at the hearing. These materials must be postmarked no laterthan February 22, 1988 and sent to Mr. Tom Hall, OSHA Division of ConsumerAffairs, at the address just specified. Each submission will be reviewed in light of the amount of time requestedin the notice of intention to appear. In instances where the informationcontained in the submission does not justify the amount of time requested,a more appropriate amount of time will be allocated and the participantwill be notified of that fact. Any party who has not substantially compliedwith the above requirements, may be limited to a 10 minute presentationand may be requested to return for questioning at a later time. Notices of intention to appear, testimony and evidence, will be availablefor inspection and copying at the Docket Office, Docket H-200, U.S. Departmentof Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Room N-3670, 200Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210; (202) 523-7894. The hearing is scheduled to commence at 10:00 a.m. on March 3, 1988 inWashington, DC. The hearing will be presided over by an AdministrativeLaw Judge who will have the powers necessary or appropriate to conducta full and fair informal hearing as provided in 29 CFR Part 1911, includingthe powers:1. To regulate the course of the proceedings; 2. To dispose of procedural requests, objections and comparable matters;3. To confine the presentation to the matters pertinent to the issues raised;4. To regulate the conduct of those present at the hearing by appropriatemeans; 5. To limit the time for questioning; and 6. In the Judge's discretion, to keep the record open for a reasonablestated time to receive written information and additional data, views,and arguments from any person who has participated in the oral proceedings.Following the close of the hearing, the presiding Administrative Law Judgewill certify the record of the hearing to the Assistant Secretary of Laborfor Occupational Safety and Health. The Administrative Law Judge does notmake or recommend any decisions as to the content of a final standard.If no hearing requests are submitted by interested persons by the deadlinesset forth above, no hearing will be held. OSHA will then publish a noticein the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, indicating that there will be no hearing. TheAgency will also contact all persons who submitted comments in responseto this proposal, to inform them of this fact. The proposal will be reviewed in light of the comments received, additionalcomments and testimony received and all other relevant material in therecord. Decisions on the provisions of a final standard will be made bythe Assistant Secretary based on the entire record of the proceeding. <ITAG tagnum="84">IX. Authority </ITAG>This document was prepared under the direction of John A. Pendergrass,Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Pursuant to sections 4, 6(b), 8(c) and 8(g)(2) of the Occupational Safetyand Health Act (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657), it is hereby proposed to amend29 CFR 1910.1047 as set forth below. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 1910 </ITAG>Ethylene oxide, Occupational Safety and Health, Chemicals, Cancer, Health,Risk assessment.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 19th day of January.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John A. Pendergrass,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary of Labor. </ITAG>Part 1910 of Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations is proposed tobe amended as set forth below. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1910_[AMENDED] </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Subpart Z of 29 CFR Part 1910 would continueto, in pertinent part, read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 6 and 8, Occupational Safety and Health Act,29 U.S.C. 655, 657, Secretary of Labor's Orders Nos. 12-71 (36 FR 8754),8-76 (41 FR 25059), or 9-83 (48 FR 35736), as applicable; and 29 CFR Part1911. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Section 1910.1045 and 1910.1047 also issued under 29 U.S.C. 653. </ITAG>2. Paragraphs (a)(2), (c), (d)(1)(i), (d)(1)(ii), (d)(2)(ii), (d)(4), (d)(7)(ii),(e)(1), (f)(1)(i), (f)(1)(ii), (f)(2)(i), (f)(2)(iv), (g)(1)(iii), (j)(1)(ii)introductory text, and (j)(3)(i) of andSection; 1910.1047 would be revised,(m)(1) is redesignated AS (m)(1)(i), and new paragraphs (d)(3)(iv), (m)(1)(ii),and (m)(2)(iii) would be added to andSection; 1910.1047 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1910.1047</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Ethylene oxide </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">(a) * * * </ITAG>(2) This section does not apply to the processing, use, or handling ofproducts containing EtO where objective data are reasonably relied uponthat demonstrate that the product is not capable of releasing EtO in airborneconcentrations at or above the action level, or in excess of the excursionlimit, under the expected conditions of processing, use, or handling thatwill cause the greatest possible release. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) <T3>Permissible exposure limits_</T3>(1) <T3>8-hour time weighted average (TWA). </T3>The employer shall ensurethat no employee is exposed to an airborne concentration of EtO in excessof one (1) part EtO per million parts of air (1ppm) as an 8-hour time-weightedaverage (8-hour TWA). (2) <T3>Excursion limit. </T3>The employer shall ensure that no employee isexposed to an airborne concentration of EtO in excess of 5 parts of EtOper million parts of air (5 ppm) as determined over a maximum samplingperiod of fifteen (15) minutes. (d) * * * (1) * * * (i) Determinations of employee exposure shall be made from breathing zoneair samples that are representative of the 8-hour TWA and maximum 15-minuteshort-term exposures of each employee. (ii) Representative 8-hour TWA employee exposure shall be determined onthe basis of one or more samples representing full-shift exposure for eachshift for each job classification in each work area. Representative 15-minuteshort-term employee exposures shall be determined on the basis of one ormore samples representing 15-minutes exposures associated with operationsthat are most likely to produce exposures above the excursion limit foreach shift for each job classification in each work area. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(2) * * * (ii) Where the employer has monitored for the excursion limit after (insertdate one-year prior to final FR notice) and the monitoring satisfies allother requirements of this section, the employer may rely on such earliermonitoring results to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (d)(2)(i) ofthis section. (3) * * * (iv) If the monitoring required by paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this sectionreveals employee exposure above the 15-minute excursion limit, the employershall repeat such monitoring for each such employee at least every 6 months.(4) <T3>Termination of monitoring. </T3>(i) If the initial monitoring requiredby paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section reveals employee exposure to bebelow the action level, the employer may dscontinue TWA monitoring forthose employees whose exposures are represented by the initial monitoring.(ii) If the periodic monitoring required by paragraph (d)(3) of this sectionreveals that employee exposures, as indicated by at least two consecutivemeasurements taken at least 7 days apart, are below the action level theemployer may discontinue TWA monitoring for those employee whose exposuresare represented by such monitoring. (iii) If the initial monitoring required by paragraph (d)(2)(1) of thisaction reveals employee exposure to be at or below the excursion limit,the employer may discontinue excursion limit monitoring for those employeeswhose exposures are represented by the initial monitoring. (iv) If the periodic monitoring required by paragraph (d)(3) of this sectionreveals that employee exposures, as indicated by at least two consecutivemeasurements taken at least 7 days apart, are at or below the excursionlimit, the employer may discontinue excursion limit monitoring for thoseemployees whose exposures are represented by such monitoring. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(7) * * * (i) * * * (ii) The written notification required by paragraph (d)(7)(i) of this sectionshall contain the corrective action being taken by the employer to reduceemployee exposure to or below the TWA and/or excursion limit, wherevermonitoring results indicated that the TWA and/or excursion limit has beenexceeded. (e) <T3>Regulated areas.</T3> (1) The employer shall establish a regulatedarea wherever occupational exposure to airborne concentrations of EtO mayexceed the TWA or excursion limit. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(f) * * * (1) * * * (i) The employer shall institute engineering controls and work practicesto reduce and maintain employee exposure to or below the TWA and to orbelow the excursion limit, except to the extent that such controls arenot feasible. (ii) Wherever the feasible engineering controls and work practices thatcan be instituted are not sufficient to reduce employee exposure to orbelow the TWA and to or below the excursion limit, the employer shall usethem to reduce employee exposure to the lowest levels achievable by thesecontrols and shall supplement them by the use of respiratory protectionthat complies with the requirements of paragraph (g) of this section. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(2) <T3>Compliance program.</T3> (i) Where the TWA or excursion limit is exceeded,the employer shall establish and implement a written program to reduceexposure to or below the TWA and to or below the excursion limit by meansof engineering and work practice controls, as required by paragraph (f)(1)of this section, and by the use of respiratory protection where requiredor permitted under this section. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(iv) The employer shall not implement a schedule of employee rotation asa means of compliance with the TWA or excursion limit. (g) * * * (1) * * * (iii) In work situations where feasible engineering and work practice controlsare not yet sufficient to reduce exposure to or below the TWA or excursionlimit; and <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(j) * * * (1) * * * (ii) The employer shall ensure that precautionary labels are affixed toall containers of EtO whose contents are capable of causing employee exposureat or above the action level or above the excursion limit, and that thelabels remain affixed when the containers of EtO leave the workplace. Forthe purpose of this paragraph, reaction vessels, storage tanks, and pipesor piping systems are not considered to be containers. The labels shallcomply with the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.1200(f) of OSHA's Hazard Communicationstandard, and shall include the following legend: <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(3) * * * (i) The employer shall provide employees who are potentially exposed toEtO at or above the action level or above the excursion limit with informationand training on EtO at the time of initial assignment and at least annuallythereafter. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(m) * * * (1) * * * (ii) The requirements in the amended paragraphs in this section which pertainonly to or are triggered by the excursion limit shall become effectivethirty (30) days from the date of publication in the<T4> Federal Register.</T4> (2) * * * (iii) The start-up dates for compliance with the excursion limit requirementsin this section shall be (period to be determined). <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-1238 Filed 1-19-88; 12:15 pm] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-26-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>