<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88516-0093 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-16-88.f2.A1092</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Privacy Act of 1974; Publication of Systems of Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency: </T2>National Labor Relations Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action: </T2>Revised publication of Notices of Systems of Records.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary: </T2>The purpose of this publication is to comply with therequirement of 5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4) to announce the intention to establishor revise a notice of the existence and character of a system of records.This document contains a complete and current listing of the National LaborRelations Board's 16 Notices of Systems of Records identified as NLRB-1through NLRB-16 and Appendix listing the NLRB offices. The last completelisting of NLRB systems of records was issued in 47 FR 42043. One notice,NLRB-7, was altered, and one notice, NLRB-15, was added as published in51 FR 12947. Another notice, NLRB-16, was added as published in 51 FR 31382.All persons are advised that in the absence of submitted comments, views,or arguments considered by the Agency as warranting modification of theroutine uses of the systems as published herein, it is the Agency's intentionthat the notices as herewith published shall become effective upon expirationof the comment period without further action by the Agency. Pending adoptionof the proposed changes described in this publication, the Agency's recordswill be covered by its previous complete notice issued in 47 FR 42043 (September23, 1982), the revision of NLRB-7 and the addition of NLRB-15 issued in51 FR 12947 (April 16, 1986), and NLRB-16 issued in 51 FR 31382 (September3, 1986).All persons who desire to do so may submit written comments, views, orarguments for consideration by the Agency in connection with the proposedchanges to the notices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>date: </T2>Written comments, views, or arguments must be submittedno later than July 15, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>addresses: </T2>Written responses should be sent to the Executive Secretary,National Labor Relations Board, Room 701, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue NW.,Washington, DC 20570. Copies of such communications will be available forexamination by interested persons during normal business hours (8:30 a.m.to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding Federal holidays), in the Officeof the Executive Secretary, Room 701, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20570.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:  </T2>John C. Truesdale, ExecutiveSecretary, National Labor Relations Board, Room 701, 1717 PennsylvaniaAvenue NW., Washington, DC 20570. Telephone (202) 254-9430.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information: </T2>The following changes have been madeto the NLRB Notices of Systems of Records:1. Two routine uses have been added to NLRB-1 through 6 and NLRB-8 through14 to provide for disclosure to the Department of Justice for use in litigation,and for Agency disclosure in a proceeding before a court or other adjudicativebody. Also, new language has been added to these two routine uses in NLRB-16so that they are consistent with the language used in other Agency notices.2. One routine use has been added to NLRB-13, Time and Attendance Records_NLRB,to provide for disclosure to the U.S. Treasury Department for payroll purposes.3. New System Managers and locations are shown for NLRB-4, Claim Records,and NLRB-9, Occupational Injury and Illness Records, to reflect administrativechanges.4. System safeguards have been changed for NLRB-1, Accounting Records_Financial;NLRB-4, Claim Records; NLRB-9, Occupational Injury and Illness Records;and NLRB-11, Payroll_Finance Records, to reflect changes in operating procedures.5. Changes have been made to notice NLRB-14, Equal Employment OpportunityManagement System, to include the EEO office as a second system location,and to include organizational unit as a category of records in the systemand a category by which records can be retrieved.6. The records retention and disposal information has been changed forall notices except NLRB-3, NLRB-7, NLRB-10, and NLRB-15. These changeswere made so that the instructions contained in the notices would conformwith current Agency procedures.7. New paragraphs on Security Classification, Authority for Maintenanceof the System, Purpose, and Disclosure to Consumer Reporting Agencies havebeen added to NLRB-1 through 15.8. The system location and manager in NLRB-3 has been changed from theOffice of the Executive Secretary to the Division of Information.9. The title of the Data Systems Branch in NLRB-11 in the System Managerand Address paragraph and in NLRB-14 in the System Location paragraph.10. References to 29 CFR 102.117 have been added to the paragraphs on NotificationProcedure, Records Access Procedures, and Contesting Record Proceduresin NLRB-1 through 15, where details on these procedures may be found.11. The Appendix has been completely updated to show all current NLRB officelistings.A listing of all NLRB Notices of Systems and Records and their completetexts appear below. Copies of these notices were forwarded to Congressand the Office of Management and Budget on April 14, 1988, as requiredby 5 U.S.C. 552a(o).<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: Washington, D.C. May 11, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By direction of the Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John C. Truesdale,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Executive Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-1 Accounting Records_Financial</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-2 Applicant Files for Attorney and Field Examiner Positions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-3 Biographical Data File_Presidential Appointees</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-4 Claim Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-5 Employment and Performance Records, Attorneys and Field Examiners</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-6 Employment and Performance Records, Nonprofessionals and NonlegalProfessionals</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-7 Grievances, Appeals, Complaints, and Related Litigation Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-8 Health Maintenance Program Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-9 Occupational Injury and Illness Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-10 Pay Records_Retirement</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-11 Payroll_Finance Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-12 Prefiling Communications</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-13 Time and Attendance Records_NLRB</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-14 Equal Employment Opportunity Program Management System</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-15 Employee Counseling Services Program Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">NLRB-16 Investigative Services Case Files</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Appendix</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-1 </ITAG>System name: Accounting Records_Financial. Security Classification: None. system location: Current records are maintained in: Financial Management Branch, NLRB, 1717Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570. Each Washington and FieldOffice is authorized to maintain copies of records relating to reimbursementsto employees of that office and other individuals covered within the system.See the attached appendix for addresses of these offices. Inactive recordsare stored at the appropriate Federal records center in accordance withregulations issued by the National Archives and Records Administration(36 CFR 1228.152). categories of individuals covered by the system: Individuals reimbursed for expenses in connection with the official functionsof the NLRB: i.e., travel on official business, witness fees and transportationexpenses, and miscellaneous expenses. categories of records in the system: Records may include name; home or office address; organizational unit number;purpose, duration, and cost for travel assignment of Agency employees;purpose, duration, points of travel, and cost for witnesses used by theAgency; purpose, category, and cost of miscellaneous expenses incurredby Agency employees. authority for maintenance of the system: 5 U.S.C. 5701 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153, 155, 159, 160, and 161(4). Purpose: These records document financial transactions regarding reimbursement ofexpenses in connection with official NLRB functions. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to: 1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information:a. In the processing of claims for reimbursements. b. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the functionfor which the records are collected and maintained, or for related personnelmanagement functions or manpower studies. 2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals). 3. Individuals who need the information in connection with the processingof an appeal, grievance, or complaint. Wherever feasible, such informationshall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personal identifiers.4. The U.S. General Accounting Office for audit purposes or determinationof validity of claims. 5. The U.S. Department of Treasury for issuance of checks. 6. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility. 7. Another agency, whether Federal, State, or local, or private organizationwhere reimbursable arrangements exist between this Agency and such otheragency or private organization. 8. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual. 9. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers. 10. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected. 11. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.Disclosure to consumer reporting agencies: None. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system: storage: Maintained on original source documents except travel summary cards, someof which are also maintained on microfilm. retrievability: Chronologically by year, and within each year alphabetically by name. safeguards: Original source documents are maintained in file cabinets within the FinanceSection offices. Microfilm is maintained in locked cabinets within FinanceSection offices. During duty hours cabinets are under surveillance of personnelcharged with custody of the records, and after duty hours are behind lockeddoors. Access is limited to personnel who have a need for access in orderto perform their official functions. retention and disposal: Maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of applicableGeneral Records Schedules issued by the National Archives and Records Administration.system manager(s) and address:Finance Officer, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C.20570.See the attached appendix for the titles and addresses of officials atother locations responsible for this system at their locations.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).record access procedure:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).contesting record procedures:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).record source categories:Travel vouchers, witness vouchers, and lodging and miscellaneous receiptssubmitted by the individual; travel orders submitted by Agency officials;subpoenas; claims for reimbursements; and miscellaneous correspondenceand information related thereto.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-2</ITAG>System name:Applicant Files for Attorney and Filed Examiner Positions.Security classification:None.system locations:Office of Executive Assistant, Division of Operations Management; BoardMembers' Offices; Office of Representation Appeals; Office of the Solicitor,NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.Washington and Field Offices are authorized to maintain the records orcopies of the records in connection with processing of applications foremployment in the Agency. See the attached appendix for addresses of theWashington and Field Offices.categories of individuals covered by the system:Applicants for Attorney or Field Examiner positions in offices under thegeneral supervision of the General Counsel; applicants for Attorney positionson Board Members' staffs, in the Office of the Solicitor, and in the Officeof Representation Appeals.categories of records in the system:Records may include copies of employment applications, educational transcripts,resumes, employment interview reports, and other information related toemployment.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 3301 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153(d), 154, 159, and 160.purpose:These records document the skills and background of applicants for attorneyand field examiner positions within the NLRB.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information:a. To process applications and evaluate applicants.b. As a data source for management information for production of summarystatistics and analytical studies in support of the function for whichthe records are collected and maintained, or for related personnel managementfunctions or manpower studies.2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).3. Individuals who need the information in connection with the processingof a grievance, appeal, or complaint. Wherever feasible, such informationshall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personal identifiers.4. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.5. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers.6. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.7. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.8. To a court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, or (b)any employee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, or (c) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agencyhas agreed to represent the employee, or (d) the United States where theAgency determines that litigation is likely to affect the Agency or anyof its components, is a party to litigation or has an interest in suchlitigation, and the Agency determines that disclosure of the records toa court or other adjudicative body is compatible with the purpose for whichthe records were collected.disclosure to consumer reporting agencies:None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on paper including forms, letters, and memoranda.retrievability:Alphabetically by name.safeguards:Maintained in file cabinets. During duty hours cabinets are under surveillanceof personnel charged with custody of the records and after duty hours arebehind locked doors. Access to the cabinets is limited to personnel havinga need for access to perform their official functions.retention and disposal:Employment applications not resulting in appointment are destroyed when2 years old.system manager(s) and address:1. To those applicants for positions under supervision of the General Counsel_ExecutiveAssistant, Division of Operations Management, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue,NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.2. To those applicants for positions under supervision of a Board Member_ChiefCounsel to that Board Member, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington,D.C. 20570.3. Attorneys under supervision of the Director, Office of RepresentationAppeals_Director, Office of Representation Appeals, NLRB, 1717 PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.4. To those applicants for positions under supervision of the Solicitor_Solicitor,NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.See the attached appendix for titles and addresses of officials at otherlocations responsible for this system at their locations.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).record access procedure:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).contesting record procedures:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).record source categories:Applicants, educational institutions, interviewers, evaluators, personnelspecialists, references, previous employers.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-3</ITAG>System name:Biographical Data File_Presidential Appointeessecurity classification:None.system location:Division of Information, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington,D.C. 20570.categories of individuals covered by the system:Present and former Presidential appointees to NLRB positions.categories of records in the system:Records may include biolgraphical sketches; news releases, news articlesor speeches and other newsmaking activities; photographs, and materialincidental thereto.authority for maintenance of the system:29 U.S.C. 153 (a) and (d), 154(a); 44 U.S.C. 3101.purpose:These records document pertinent aspects of the personal and professionalhistory of NLRB's most senior officials.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or informationin the performance of their duties.2. The public upon demonstrated interest.3. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.4. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, (d) the United States where the Agency determines that litigationis likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, is a party tolitigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such recordsby the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency to be relevant andnecessary to the litigation, provided that in each case the Agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information contained in the records that is compatible with the purposefor which the records were collected.5. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.disclosure to consumer reporting agencies:None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on original sources or related papers in file folders.retrievability:Alphabetically by name.safeguards:Maintained in file cabinets within the Office of the Executive Secretary.During duty hours, cabinets are under the surveillance of office personnelcharged with custody of the records, and after duty hours are behind lockeddoors.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:  Permanently retained. SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:  Director, Division of Information, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW.,Washington, D.C. 20570. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:  An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e). RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:  An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f). CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:  An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h). RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:  Information in this system is submitted by the individual, written by Agencystaff and approved by the individual, and obtained from general news sources. <ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-4 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:  Claim Records. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION:  None. SYSTEM LOCATION:  Chief, Administrative Services Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue,NW., Washington, D.C. 20570. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:  Individuals filing claims under the Federal Tort Claims Act of 1946; theMilitary Personnel and Civilian Employees' Claims Act of 1964; claims filedunder 41 CFR 101-39.4, Interagency Fleet Management Systems, Accidentsand Claims; and claims under contracts with rental car companies. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:  Records may include reports of accidents or other events causing damageor loss; data bearing upon the scope of employment of motor vehicle operators;statements of witnesses; claims for damage or loss; investigations of claims,including doctors' reports, it any; police reports; rental agreements;repair estimates; records on disposition of claims; and information relatedto the above. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:  28 U.S.C. 2671 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153(d), 154(a) and (b); 31 U.S.C. 3701et seq. PURPOSE:  These records document the initiation, investigation and disposition ofclaims filed with the NLRB. ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:  These records, or information therefrom, ae disclosed to:  1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information: a. In processing claims against this Agency.  b. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the functionfor which the records are collected and maintained, or for related personnelmanagement functions or manpower studies.  2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).  3. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justie is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.  4. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected. 5. Investigators utilized by the Agency to obtain information relevantto a claim against the Agency.  6. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.  7. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.  8. Individuals who have a need for the information in connection with theprocessing of an appeal, grievance, or complaint. Wherever feasible, suchinformation shall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personalidentifiers.  9. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers. DISCLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES:  None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on forms, documents, and other papers.retrievability:Alphabetically by name.safeguards:Maintained in file safe within the office of the Chief, AdministrativeServices Branch. During duty hours file safe is under the surveillanceof personnel charged with the custody of the records, and after duty hoursis behind locked doors. Access is limited to personnel who have a needfor access to perform their official functions.retention and disposal:Claims reports involving pecuniary liability are destroyed 10 years afterthe close of the fiscal year in which final action was taken. All otherclaims reports are destroyed 3 years after the close of the fiscal yearin which final action was taken.system manager(s) and address:Chief, Administrative Services Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue,NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).record access procedures:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).contesting record procedures:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Manageris accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).record source categories:Claimants, investigators, and witnesses.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-5</ITAG>System name:Employment and Performance Records, Attorneys and Field Examiners.security classification:None.system locations:Office of Executive Assistant, Division of Operations Management; BoardMembers' Offices; Office of Representation Appeals; Office of the Solicitor,NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.Washington and Field Offices are authorized to maintain the records orcopies of the records for current and former NLRB employees of that office.See the attached appendix for addresses of the Washington and Field Offices.categories of individuals covered by the system:Current and former Attorneys and Field Examiners in offices under the generalsupervision of the General Counsel; current and former Attorneys employedon Board Members' Staffs, in the Office of the Solicitor, and in the Officeof Representation Appeals.categories of records in the system:Records may include copies of employment applications, copies of personnelrecords, educational transcripts, reandCx.174;1sumeandCx.174;1s, employmentinterview reports, evaluation reports, career development appraisals, recommendationsconcerning promotion, copies of the official personnel file, correspondence,memoranda, and other information relevant thereto.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 4301 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153(d), 154, 159, 160.purpose:These records document employee actions and performance appraisals.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:The records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information.2. Individuals who have a need for the information in connection with theprocessing of an appeal, grievance, or complaint. Wherever feasible, suchinformation shall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personalidentifiers.3. A congressional office in response to any inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.4. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers.5. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.6. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her individual capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herofficial capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.7. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.DISCLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES:None.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Maintained on paper including forms, letters, and memoranda, and on magneticdisks.RETRIEVABILITY:Alphabetically by name.SAFEGUARDS:Maintained in file cabinets. During duty hours cabinets are under the surveillanceof personnel charged with custody of the records, and after duty hoursare behind locked doors. Access is limited to personnel having a need foraccess to perform their official functions. Data captured on magnetic disksare limited to those with access codes and are stored in a locked roomduring and after duty hours. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Retained in accordance with applicable General Records Schedules issuedby the National Archives and Records Administration.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:1. Attorneys and field examiners under supervision of the General Counsel_ExecutiveAssistant, Division of Operations Management, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue,NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.2. Attorneys under supervision of a Board Member_Chief Counsel to thatBoard Member, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.3. Attorneys under supervision of the Director, Office of RepresentationAppeals_Director, Office of Representation Appeals, NLRB, 1717 PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.4. Attorneys under supervision of the Solicitor_Solicitor, NLRB, 1717 PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.See the attached appendix for titles and addresses of officials at otherlocations responsible for this system at their locations.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:The individual, the Personnel Branch, educational institutions, interviewers,evaluators, references, previous employers, and supervisors.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-6</ITAG>System name:Employment and Performance Records, Nonprofessionals and Nonlegal Professionals.security classification:None.system locations:Records are authorized to be maintained for current and former NLRB employeesin all Agency offices. See the attached appendix for the addresses of theseoffices.categories of individuals covered by the system:Current and former nonprofessional employees and nonlegal professionalemployees of the Agency.categories of records in the system:Records may include copies of employment applications, educational transcripts,resumes, employment interview reports, evaluation reports, career developmentappraisals, recommendations concerning promotion, copies of personnel records,correspondence, memoranda, and other information relevant thereto.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 4301 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153(d), 154, 159, 160.purpose:These records document employee actions and performance appraisals.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or informationto evaluate job performance, developmental needs, potential within theAgency, and readiness for promotion.2. Individuals who have a need for the information in connection with theprocessing of a grievance, appeal, or complaint. Wherever feasible, suchinformation shall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personalidentifiers.3. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.4. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers.5. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.6. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.7. A court or other adjudicative body before the Agency is authorized toappear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) any employeeof the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employee of theAgency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreed torepresent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.disclosure to consumer reporting agencies:None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on paper including forms, letters, and memoranda, and on magneticdisks.retrievability:Alphabetically by name:safeguards:Maintained in file cabinets. During duty hours cabinets are under the surveillanceof personnel charged with custody of the records, and after duty hoursare behind locked doors. Access is limited to personnel having a need foraccess to perform their official functions. Data captured on magnetic disksare limited to those with access codes and are stored in a locked roomduring and after duty hours.retention and disposal:Retained in accordance with applicable General Records Schedules issuedby the National Archives and Records Administration.system manager(s) and address:See the attached appendix for the titles and addresses of officials responsiblefor this system at their locations.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).record access procedures:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).contesting record procedures:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).record source categories:The individual, the Personnel Branch, professional employees, educationalinstitutions, interviewers, evaluators, references and previous employers.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-7</ITAG>System name:Grievances, Appeals, Complaints, and Related Litigation Records.security classification:None.System Location: Records are authorized to be maintained for current and former NLRB employeesin all Agency offices. See the attached appendix for the addresses of theseoffices.categories of individuals covered by the system:Current and former employees of the Agency.categories of records in the system:Records may include formal or informal grievances, appeals, and complaints,together with information and documents related thereto; letters or noticesto the individual; records of hearings when conducted; material placedin the file to support or contradict the decision or determination on suchgrievance, appeal, or compliant; affidavits or statements; testimoniesof witnesses; investigative reports; related correspondence and recommendations;and records on court proceedings, arbitration, or subsequent litigation.authority for maintenance of the system:5. U.S.C. 7101 et seq.; 5 U.S.C. 7501 et seq.; 5 U.S.C. 7701 et seq.; 29U.S.C. 153(d), 154.Purpose: These records document the employee grievance process within the NLRB,and also contain material gathered and used in representing the Agencyin other appeals, complaints, and litigation.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:The records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to: 1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or informationin the performance of their duties. 2. Individuals who have a need for the information in connection with theprocessing of a grievance, appeal, or complaint. Wherever feasible, suchinformation shall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personalidentifiers. 3. An arbitrator for use in arbitrating a grievance or complaint. 4. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected. 5. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.6. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers. 7. A congressional office from the record of an individual in responseto an inquiry from the congressional office made at the request of thesubject individual. 8. The appropriate Federal (including offices of Inspector General), State,or local government agency responsible for investigating, prosecuting,enforcing, or implementing a statute, rule, regulation, or order, wherethe Agency becomes aware of an indication of a violation or potential violationof civil or criminal law or regulation. 9. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).Disclosure to consumer reporting agencies: None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on forms, documents, letters, memoranda, and other similar papers.retrievability:Alphabetically by name of individual or party filing a grievance, claim,or complaint.safeguards:Access to and use of the records are limited to those persons whose officialduties require such access until the records are required to be made publicin support of an Agency action or position. These records are maintainedin file cabinets which during duty hours are under the surveillance ofpersonnel charged with custody of the records and after duty hours arebehind locked doors.retention and disposal:Placed in inactive file when case is closed. Destroyed 3 years after theend of the fiscal year in which the case is closed.system manager(s) and address:1. To those employees under supervision of the General Counsel_Deputy GeneralCounsel, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570. 2. To those employees under supervision of the Board_Deputy Executive Secretary,NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570. See the attached appendix for titles and addresses of officials responsiblefor this system at their locations.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Information in this system is obtained from the individual to whom therecord pertains; Agency officials; affidavits, statements, and record testimonyof individuals; and other documents and memoranda relating to the grievance,appeal, or complaint.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-8</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Health Maintenance Program RecordsSECURITY CLASSIFICATION:None.SYSTEM LOCATION:Personnel Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C.20570.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:Current NLRB employees participating in Agency-sponsored health maintenanceprograms, such as diabetes tests, glaucoma tests, vision tests, blood donorprogram, and similar programs.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Records may involve recorded information on individual's names and datesof participation in health maintenance programs, and the name of the screeningprogram in which participated. Also, for blood donor program, containssocial security number, sex, donor identification number, home addressand telephone, date of last donation, medications being taken, blood type,whether accepted or deferred as donor, and information relevant to theabove.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:5 U.S.C. 7901; 29 U.S.C. 153(a) and (d), 154.PURPOSE:These records document employee participation in the NLRB health maintenanceprograms such as screening and blood donor programs.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees working with the program who have a needfor the records or information:a. The administration of voluntary health maintenance programs.b. As a data source for production of summary descriptive statistics andanalytical studies in support of the function for which the records arecollected and maintained (without personal identification of individuals).2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).3. The American Red Cross insofar as the records or information pertainto the blood donor program.4. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in the administrationof public health service programs.5. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.6. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.7. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.DISCLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES:None.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Maintained on logs, forms, and other papers.RETRIEVABILITY:By program name and within each program alphabetically by name.SAFEGUARDS:Maintained in file safe within the office of the Personnel Branch. Filesafe remains locked except during access to records. During duty hours,file safe is under the surveillance of personnel charged with the custodyof the records, and after duty hours is behind locked doors. Combinationis known only to designated members of the Personnel Branch. Access islimited to personnel who have a need for access to perform their officialfunctions.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Retained for 6 years after last entry.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Chief, Special Programs and Services Unit, Personnel Branch, Room 533,NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.177(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Information submitted by individual; officials of the servicing healthunits; and American Red Cross.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-9</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Occupational Injury and Illness RecordsSECURITY CLASSIFICATION:None.SYSTEM LOCATION:Personnel Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C.20570. Each Washington and Field Office is authorized to maintain copiesof records in this system. See the attached appendix for addresses of theWashington and Field Offices.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:Current and former NLRB employees who have reported a work-related injuryor illness.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Records may include information pertaining to the complete history of theemployee's occupational injury or illness, including any doctors' or investigativereports submitted, and the disposition of claims for compensation filedunder the Federal Employees Compensation Act and information relative thereto.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:5 U.S.C. 7901; 5 U.S.C. 8101 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153(a) and (d),154.PURPOSE:These records document the processing of claims filed by NLRB employeesfor compensation based on an occupational injury or illness.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information:a. In processing reports of occupational injury or illness and claims forcompensation under the Federal Employees Compensation Act.b. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the functionfor which the records are collected and maintained, or for related personnelmanagement functions or manpower studies.2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).3. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.4. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.5. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in the administrationof public health service programs.6. Investigator utilized by the Agency to obtain information relevant toa claim arising under the Federal Employees Compensation Act.7. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.8. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.9. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers.10. Individuals who need the information in connection with the processingof an appeal, grievance or complaint. Whenever feasible such informationshall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personal identifiers.DISCLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES:None.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Maintained on forms and related correspondence.RETRIEVABILITY:Alphabetically by name.SAFEGUARDS:Maintained in locked filing cabinet within the Personnel Branch. Filingcabinet remains locked except during access. During duty hours filing cabinetis under surveillance of personnel charged with the custody of the records,and after duty hours is behind locked doors. Access is limited to personnelwho have a need for access to perform their official functions.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Retain and dispose of in accordance with the General Records Schedulesissued by the National Archives and Records Administration.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Chief, Special Programs and Services Unit, Personnel Branch, Room 533,NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Forms completed by the employee; witnesses; investigators; employee's supervisor;claims examiners of the U.S. Department of Labor; and doctors' statements,if any.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-10</ITAG>System name:Pay Records_Retirementsecurity classification:None.system location:Financial Management Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania, Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20570.categories of individuals covered by the system:Current NLRB employees under the Civil Service Retirement System.categories of records in the system:Records may include name, previous name if any; social security number;sex; birth date; entrance-on-duty date; employment history, including prolongedleave without pay; and monetary contributions to retirement fund made duringemployment, and information relevant thereto.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 8301 et set.; 29 U.S.C. 153(a) and (d), 154.purpose:These records document NLRB employee participation in the Civil ServiceRetirement System.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information:a. To administer the Civil Service Retirement System within the Agency.b. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the functionfor which the records are collected and maintained, or for related personnelmanagement functions or manpower studies.2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).3. The Office of Personnel Management for administering the Civil ServiceRetirement System.4. The U.S. General Accounting Office for audit purposes.5. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.6. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.7. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Whenever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers.8. Individuals who need the information in connection with the processingof an appeal, grievance, or complaint. Wherever feasible, such informationshall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personal identifiers.9. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.10. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.disclosure to consumer reporting agencies:None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on employment history cards and source documents.retrievability:By organizational unit and within each unit by employee name or socialsecurity number.safeguards:Maintained in file cabinets within the Payroll Unit. During duty hoursfile cabinets are under surveillance of personnel charged with custodyof the records, and after duty hours are behind locked doors. Access islimited to personnel who have a need for access to perform their officialfunctions.retention and disposal:Maintained only on current employees. Transferred to the Office of PersonnelManagement upon termination of service with the Agency.system manager(s) and address:Finance Officer, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20570.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Personnel Branch, timekeepers, and supervisors.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-11</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Payroll_Finance RecordsSYSTEM LOCATION:Current records are maintained in the Financial Management Branch, NLRB,1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20570.Inactive records are stored at the appropriate Federal records center inaccordance with applicable provisions of the General Records Schedulesissued by the National Archives and Records Administration.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:Current and former employees of the Agency.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Records may include each employee's name, date of birth, home address,payroll identification number, organizational unit number, block numberpay plan, grade and step, social security number, state identificationcode and name, leave earned and used, composite designator code and accountnumber, and for the current pay period quarterly and year-to-date hoursworked, base pay, overtime pay, premium pay, miscellaneous pay, gross earnings,net earnings, and all withholdings from pay including retirement, taxes(Federal, State, and local) FICA, exemptions (Federal, State, and local),life, group, and optional, insurance, bonds (authorization number and dateof issuance), and miscellaneous allotments and deductions. Employment historyis also maintained for retirement purposes.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:5 U.S.C. 5501 et seq.; 31 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153(a) and (d),154.PURPOSE:These records document the payroll process as it relates to NLRB employeesand are used to support various fiscal and personnel functions.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information:a. To compile payroll records.b. To maintain Agency salary and expense accounts.c. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the functionfor which the records are collected and maintained, or for related personnelmanagement functions or manpower studies.d. To transfer information from the records to the individual to whom therecord permits.e. To determine life insurance eligibility, costs, and types of coverageemployees shall receive.2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).3. Individuals who need the information in connection with the processingof an appeal, grievance, or complaint. Wherever feasible, such informationshall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personal identifiers.4. The U.S. Department of the Treasury for payroll purposes.5. The Office of Personnel Management concerning pay, benefits, retirementdeductions and other information necessary for the Office to carry outits Government-wide personnel management functions.6. State and local authorities for the purpose of verifying tax collections,unemployment compensation claims, and administering public assistance programs.7. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for the administrationof the social security program.8. The U.S. General Accounting Office for audit purposes.9. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.10. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.11. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Pub. L. 95-454, whenrelevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representation of NLRBemployees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent with responsibilitiesunder the Act, such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form,i.e., without personal identifiers.12. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.13. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.disclosure to consumer reporting agencies:None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on original source documents, computer printouts, and on a computerdisk file with two magnetic tape backups and microfiche.retrievability:Employee payroll file maintained chronologically by year, and within eachyear by organizational unit, and within each unit by social security numberor by employee name.safeguards:Use of the computer file for information printouts is restricted to designatedpersonnel and access is password protected. Original source documents andmicrofiche are maintained in file cabinets. During duty hours cabinetsare under surveillance of personnel charged with custody of the records,and after duty hours are behind locked doors. Access is limited to personnelhaving a need for access to perform their official functions.retention and disposal:Payroll records are retained and disposed of in accordance with the applicableGeneral Records Schedules issued by the National Archives and Records Administrationand with General Accounting Office approval. Microfilm, magnetic stripledgers, and microfiche and maintained for 56 years after the date of lastentry.system manager(s) and address:Finance Officer, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C.20570, and Chief, Management and Information Systems Branch, NLRB, 1717Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).record access procedure:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).contesting record procedures:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).record source categories:The individual, the Personnel Branch, timekeepers, and supervisors; Officeof Personnel Management bulletins; taxing authority notices; and withholdingauthorizations.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-12</ITAG>System name:Prefiling Communications.security classification:None.system location:Records are authoried to be maintained in all Field Offices of the Agency,at the address listed in the attached appendix, and Office of the GeneralCounsel, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.categories of individuals covered by the system:Persons who have sought assistance regarding possible institution of anunfair labor practice, representation, or other civil action or proceedingbefore the National Labor Relations Board.categories of records in the system:Records may include file memoranda detailing the substance of oral communications;letters of inquiry and responses thereto; information relating to an individual'semployment history, job performance, earnings, home address, telephonenumber, union activity; or other information relevant to a potential actionor proceeding before the National Labor Relations Board.authority for maintenance of the system:29 U.S.C. 158-169.purpose:These records document the processing of preliminary inquiries regardingpotential unfair labor practices, representation, or other civil actionor proceding before the NLRB, or representation case issues.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or informationin the processing of cases before the Agency.2. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, charged withthe responsibility of investigating or prosecuting a violation or chargedwith enforcing or implementing a statute, rule, regulation, or order issuedpursuant thereto, where there is an indication of a violation or potentialviolation of law, whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature.3. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made a request of the subject individual.4. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee or Agency in his or herofficial capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or her individualcapacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee,or (d) the United States where the Agency determines that litigation islikely to affect the Agency or any of its components, is a party to litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the Agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, provided that in each case the Agency determines thatdisclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use of theinformation contained in the records that is compatible with the purposefor which the records were collected.5. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.disclosure to consumer reporting agencies:None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on paper in file folders.retrievability:Alphabetically by name.safeguards:Maintained in file cabinets in the nonpublic area of the office under theimmediate control of the System Manager. During duty hours cabinets areunder surveillance of personnel charged with custody of the records andafter duty hours are behind locked doors.retention and disposal:In the event a civil action or proceeding is instituted prior to the recordbeing destroyed, the record is placed in the case file which is not indexedby the name of the individual. In the event no action or proceeding isinstituted, the records are destroyed when 1 year old.system manager(s) and address:General Counsel, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20570.See the attached appendix for titles and addresses of officials responsiblefor this system at their locations.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).record access procedures:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).contesting record procedures:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).record source categories:Individual who seeks assistance.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-13</ITAG>system name:Time and Attendance Records, NLRB.security classification:None.system location:Current records are maintained in:Financial Management Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20570. Each Washington and Field Office maintains a copy of time andattendance records for current employees in that office, and is authorizedto retain such records on former employees of that office. See the attachedappendix for addresses of these offices.Inactive records are stored at the appropriate Federal records center inaccordance with provisions of applicable General Records Schedules issuedby the General Service Administration.categories of individuals covered by the system:Current and former employees of the Agency.categories of records in the system:Records may include name; home address; organizational unit number, payrollidentification number; entrance-on-duty date; time worked, including regularhours, overtime, compensatory time, and premium pay status; leave earnedand used; absences without leave; and doctors' certificates, when required.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.; 5 U.S.C. 6301 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153 (a) and (d),154.purpose:These records document various pay and pesonnel functions, including thehours of work performed by employees.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:These records, or information therefrom, are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the records or information:a. In the compilation of biweekly payrolls.b. To maintain leave accounts.c. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the functionfor which the records are collected and maintained, or for related personnelmanagement functions or manpower studies.2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).3. Another Federal Government agency in connection with the transfer ofan NLRB employee to that agency.4. The Office of Personnel Management for administering the Civil ServiceRetirement System.5. The U.S. General Accounting Office for audit purposes.6. Another Government agency or private organization in connection withan agreement under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act.7. The U.S. Treasury Department for payroll purposes.8. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulations, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.9. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.10. Individuals who have a need for the information in connection withthe processing of an appeal, grievance, or complaint. Wherever feasible,such information shall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., withoutpersonal identifiers.11. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Public Law 95-454,when relevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representationof NLRB employees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent withresponsibilities under the Act, such information shall be furnished indepersonalized form, i.e., without personal identifiers.12. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.13. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.disclosure to consumer reporting agencies:None.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Maintained on Form TDF 10-11.H-1, H-2, and H-3 and related forms and papers,and on microfilm/microfiche.retrievability:Chronologically by year, and within each year by organizational unit, andwithin each unit by social security number or by employee name.safeguards:Original source documents or copies thereof are maintained in file cabinets.Microfilm/microfiche is maintained in locked fireproof metal cabinets.During duty hours, cabinets are under surveillance of personnel chargedwith custody of the records, and after duty hours are behind locked doors.Access is limited to personnel having a need for access to perform theirofficial functions.retention and disposal:Destroyed after GAO audit or when 3 years old, whichever is sooner.system manager(s) and address:Finance Officer, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20570.See the attached appendix for the titles and addresses of officials atother locations responsible for this system at their locations.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the appropriate System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the appropriate Manager in accordance withthe procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the appropriate SystemManager in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Individual to whom the record pertains, timekeeper or supervisor, doctors'statements.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-14</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Equal Employment Opportunity Program Management System.SECURITY CLASSIFICATION:None.SYSTEM LOCATION:Management and Information Systems Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue,NW., Washington, D.C. 20570. Office of Equal Employment Opportunity, NLRB,1717 Pennsylvania, Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:Current and former NLRB employees.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Records may include information such as employee name, social securitynumber, Minority Group Designator (MGD) Code, employment status, sex, dateof birth, payroll block and unit number, pay plan, grade and step, entrance-on-dutydate, and date of last promotion, date of last quality step increase, organizationalunit, employment class, and date of separation.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:29 CFR 1613; 29 U.S.C. 153(a) and (d), 154.PURPOSE:These records document the implementation of the NLRB Equal EmploymentOpportunity Program.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:These records, or information therefrom are disclosed to:1. Agency officials and employees who have a need for the record or information:a. In monitoring and evaluating the status and progress of minority/femaleemployment.b. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the Agency'sEEO Program (without personal identification of individuals).c. In connection with the investigation, processing, adjudication and/orsettlement of an EEO complaint or civil action.2. Individuals making general requests for statistical information (withoutpersonal identification of individuals).3. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from the congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual.4. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto, or toany agency in connection with its oversight review responsibility.5. Officials of labor organizations recognized under Public Law 95-454,when relevant and necessary to their duties of exclusive representationof NLRB employees under the Act. Wherever feasible and consistent withresponsibilities under the Act, such information shall be furnished indepersonalized form, i.e., without personal identifiers.6. Individuals who have a need for the information in connection with theprocessing of an appeal, grievance, or complaint. Wherever feasible, suchinformation shall be furnished in depersonalized form, i.e., without personalidentifiers.7. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capactiy where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justicee is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.8. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.DISLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES:None.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Maintained on computer disk file and magnetic tape backup.RETRIEVABILITY:By social security account number, alphabetically by name, or by employee'sorganizational unit or post of duty.SAFEGUARDS;All doors to the computer room have combination locks and during duty hoursthe computer and magnetic tape backup are under surveillance of Agencypersonnel charged with custody of the records. After duty hours the computerdisk file and magnetic tape backup are stored in a fireproof safe behindlocked doors. Access is limited to authorized personnel only. All formatprograms are password protected and use of the machines for informationprintouts is restricted to designated personnel.Information printouts are maintained in file cabinets. During duty hourscabinets are under surveillance of office personnel charged with custodyof the printouts and after duty hours are behind locked doors. Access tocabinets is limited to personnel having a need for access to perform theirofficial functions.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:The information in these records is updated as changes in the data elementsoccur. The files and information printouts are disposed of according toapplicable provisions of the General Records Schedules issued by the NationalArchives and Records Administration.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Director, Equal Employment Opportunity, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue,NW., Washington, D.C. 20570.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:Any individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Information in this system is obtained from the individual to whom therecord pertains, Agency officials, and from personnel records.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-15</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Employee Counseling Services Program Records.SECURITY CLASSIFICATION:None.SYSTEM LOCATION:Personnel Branch, NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20570.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:Current and former NLRB employees who have been counseled or otherwisetreated for alcohol or drug abuse or for personal or emotional health problems.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Records in this system include documentation of visits to employee counselors,psychologists, and physicians (Federal, State, local government, or private)and the assessment, diagnosis, recommended treatment, results of treatment,and other notes or records of discussions held with the employee, as wellas family members of the employee, which may be made by the counselor.Additionally, records in this system may include documentation of treatmentby a private therapist or a therapist at a Federal, State, local government,or private institution.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:5 U.S.C. 7901; 21 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.; 29 U.S.C. 153 (a) and (d), 154.PURPOSE:These records are used to ducument the nature of the individual's problemand progress and to record an individual's participation in and the resultsof community or private sector treatment or rehabilitation programs.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:These records and information in these records may be disclosed to:1. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency or any component thereof, or (b) any employee of the Agency in hisor her official capacity, or (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity where the Department of Justices has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.2. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency in his or her official capacity, (c) any employeeof the Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and theAgency determines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.3. Qualified personnel for the purpose of conducting scientific research,management audits, financial audits, or program evaluation, but such personnelmay not identify, directly or indirectly, any individual patient identitiesin any manner (when such records are provided to qualified researchersemployed or contracted by the Agency, all patient identifying informationshall be removed).<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Disclosure of these records beyond officials of the Agencyhaving a bona fide need for them or to the person to whom they pertain,is rarely made as disclosures of information pertaining to an individualwith a history of alcohol or drug abuse must be limited in compliance withthe restriction of the Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse PatientRecords regulations, 42 CFR Part 2. Records pertaining to the physicaland mental fitness of employees are, as a matter of Agency policy, affordedthe same degree of confidentiality and are generally not disclosed.</ITAG>DISCLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES:None.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:These records are maintained in file folders.RETRIEVABILITY:These records are retrieved by the name of the individual on whom theyare maintained.SAFEGUARDS:These records are maintained in locked file cabinets labeled confidentialwith access strictly limited to employees directly involved in the Agency'sEmployee Assistance Program.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Files are destroyed 3 years after termination of counseling. The recordsare destroyed by shredding.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Chief, Special Programs and Services Unit, Personnel Branch, Room 533,NLRB, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20570.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An indivdual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(f).CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h).RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Information in this system of records comes from the individual to whomit applies, the supervisor of the individual if the individual was referredby the supervisor, the Employee Assistance Program Coordinator, or staffmember whom records the counseling session, and therapists or institutionsproviding treatment.<ITAG tagnum="66">NLRB-16 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Investigative Services Case Files. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION: None. SYSTEM LOCATION: Office of contractors of the Agency. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: Individuals sought by the Agency for purpose of effecting compliance withthe National Labor Relations Act and Board Orders and court decrees issuedthereunder. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: Records consist of investigative reports on efforts to trace individuals,entities, and assets, and include copies of interview reports, public documents,and certain confidential data gathered. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 5 U.S.C. 552a(m)(1) and 29 U.S.C. 153(d) and 160. PURPOSE: These records are used to effect compliance with the National Labor RelationsAct and Board Orders and court decrees issued thereunder. ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES: These records and information in these records may be used in disclosinginformation to: 1. A congressional office in response to an inquiry from congressionaloffice made at the request of the subject individual. 2. A court or other adjudicative body before which the Agency is authorizedto appear, when either (a) the Agency, or any component thereof, (b) anyemployee of the Agency his or her official capacity, (c) any employee ofthe Agency in his or her individual capacity, where the Agency has agreedto represent the employee, or (d) the United States, where the Agency determinesthat litigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components,is a party to litigation or has interest in such litigation, and the Agencydetermines that disclosure of the records to a court or other adjudicativebody is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.3. The Department of Justice for use in litigation when either (a) theAgency, or any component thereof, (b) any employee of the Agency is hisor her official capacity, (c) any employee of the Agency in his or herindividual capacity, where the Department of Justice has agreed to representthe employee, or (d) the United States, where the Agency determines thatlitigation is likely to affect the Agency or any of its components, isa party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the useof such records by the Department of Justice is deemed by the Agency tobe relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided that in each casethe Agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Departmentof Justice is a use of the information contained in the records that iscompatible with the purpose for which the records were collected. 4. The appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, or local, where thereis an indication of a violation or potential violation of law, whethercivil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or enforcing or implementingthe statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant thereto or to anyagency in connection with its oversight review responsibility. DISCLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES: None. POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: STORAGE: Paper records are kept in file holders in locked filing cabinets in officesof contractors of the Agency. Automated information storage and retrievalsystems may also be used by individual contractors. RETRIEVABILITY: Records are maintained alphabetically by name, or may be retrieved by otherpersonal identifier. SAFEGUARDS: Access to and use of the records is limited to authorized persons on aneed-to-know basis. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL: The records are retained by the contractor for no more than 3 years afterthe case is closed, and are destroyed upon notification from the Agency.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS: Assistant General Counsel, Contempt Litigation Branch, Division of EnforcementLitigation, National Labor Relations Board, Room 923, 1717 PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW., Washington, DC 20570. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE: An individual may inquire as to whether this system contains a record pertainingto him or her by directing a request to the System Manager in accordancewith the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(e). record access procedures:An individual seeking to gain access to records in this system pertainingto him or her should contact the System Manager in accordance with theprocedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.11(f).contesting record procedures:An individual may request amendment of a record pertaining to such individualmaintained in this system by directing a request to the System Managerin accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR 102.117(h). record source categories:Public records, state, and local law enforcement authorities, third partyinformants, and Agency personnel. <ITAG tagnum="74">Appendix </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Names and Addresses of NLRB Offices referenced in Notice of RecordSystems shown above. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">NLRB Headquarters Offices </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">OFFICES OF THE BOARD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Member of the Board </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Executive Secretary, Office of the Executive Secretary </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Director, Office of Representation Appeals </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Director, Division of Information </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Solicitor </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">OFFICES OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">General Counsel </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Associate General Counsel, Division of Operations Management </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Associate General Counsel, Division of Advice </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Associate General Counsel, Division of Enforcement Litigation </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Director, Division of Administration </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Director, Equal Employment Opportunity </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Address: 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Chief Administrative Law Judge, Division of Administrative Law Judges</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Address: Room 1121, Hamilton Building, 1375 K Street, NW., Washington,D.C. 20005 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">San Francisco Office, Division of Administrative Law Judges </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Address: Suite 300, 901 Market Street, Federal Building, San Francisco,California 94102 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">New York Office, Division of Administrative Law Judges </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Address: Paramount Building, 4th Floor, 1501, Broadway Street, NewYork, New York 10036 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Atlanta Office, Division of Administrative Law Judges </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Address: 44 Broad Street NW., Ninth Floor, Atlanta, Georgia 30303</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">NLRB Field Offices </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 1, BostonFederal Office Building, 10 Causeway Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1072.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region, 2, JacobK. Javits Federal Building, Room 3614, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, NewYork 10278. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 3, FederalBuilding, Room 901, 111 West Huron Street, Buffalo, New York 14202. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 4, 1 IndependenceMall, Seventh Floor, 615 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 5, CandlerBuilding, Fourth Floor, 109 Market Place, Baltimore, Maryland 21202. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 6, 1501William S. Moorhead Federal Building, 1000 Liberty Avenue, Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania 15222. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 8, Anthony J.Celebrezze Federal Building, 1240 E. Ninth Street, Room 1695, Cleveland,Ohio 44199. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 9, John Weld PeckFederal Office Building, Room 3003, 550 Main Street, Cincinnati, Ohio 45202.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 10, Marietta Tower,Suite 2400, 101 Marietta Street, NW., Atlanta, Georgia 30323. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 11, U.S. Courthouse,Federal Building, 251 North Main Street, Room 447, Winston-Salem, NorthCarolina 27101. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 12, 700 TwiggStreet, Suite 511, P.O. Box 172068, Tampa, Florida 33672-0068. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 13, Everett McKinleyDirksen Building, 219 South Dearborn Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 14, 210 TuckerBoulevard North, Room 448, St. Louis, Missouri 63101. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 15, 1515 PoydrasStreet, Suite 610, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Relations Board, Region 16, Federal OfficeBuilding, Room 8A24, 819 Taylor Street, Forth Worth, Texas 76102.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 17, TwoGateway Centre, Room 616, Fourth at State, Kansas City, Kansas 66101. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 18, FederalBuilding, Room 316, 110 South Fourth Street, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55401. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 19, HenryM. Jackson Federal Building, Room 2948, 915 Second Avenue, Seattle, Washington,98174.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 20, Suite400, 901 Market Street, San Francisco, California, 94103.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 21, 615South Flower Street, 11th Floor, Los Angeles, California, 90017-2803. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 22, PeterD. Rodino, Jr. Federal Building, Room 1600, 970 Broad Street, Newark, NewJersey 07102.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 23, BobCasey Federal Building/Courthouse, 515 Rusk Street, Room 4014, Houston,Texas 77002.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 24, FedericoDegatau Federal Building, U.S. Courthouse, Room 591, Carlos E. ChardonAvenue, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico 00918.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 25, Minton-CapehartFederal Building, Room 238, 575 North Pennsylvania Street, Indianapolis,Indiana 46204.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 26, Mid-MemphisTower Building, Suite 800, 1407, Union Avenue, P.O. Box 41559, Memphis,Tennessee 38174.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 27, SouthTowers, 3d Floor, 600 17th Street, Denver, Colorado 80202-5433.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 28, SecurityBuilding, 234 North Central Avenue, Suite 440, Phoenix, Arizona 85004. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 29, 16 CourtStreet, Fourth Floor, Brooklyn, New York 11241.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 30, HenryS. Reuss Federal Plaza, 310 W. Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 700, Milwaukee,Wisconsin 53203.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 31, FederalBuilding, Room 12100, 11000 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, California90024.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 32, BreunerBuilding, Second Floor, 2201 Broadway, Post Office Box 12983, Oakland,California 94604.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Regional Director, National Labor Relations Board, Region 33, SavingsCenter Tower, Sixteenth Floor, 411 Hamilton Boulevard, Peoria, Illinois61602.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Officer-in-Charge, National Labor Relations Board, Subregion 36, PortlandBuilding, Room 1360, 1120 Southwest Fifth Avenue, Portland, Oregon 97204. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Officer-in-Charge, National Labor Relations Board, Subregion 37, 300Ala Moana Boulevard, Room 7318, P.O. Box 50208, Honolulu, Hawaii 96850. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Officer-in-Charge, National Labor Relations Board, Subregion 39, OneCommercial Plaza, 21st Floor, Hartford, Connecticut 06103.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region3, Leo W. O'Brien Federal Building, Room 342, Clinton Avenue at North PearlStreet, Albany, New York 12207.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region5, Gelman Building, Suite 100, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, D.C. 20037. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region7, Third Floor, The Furniture Co., 82 Ionia, NW., Grand Rapids, Michigan49503.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region10, Bank of Savings Building, Suite 305, 1919 Morris Avenue, Birmingham,Alabama 35203.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region12, Federal Building, Room 278, 400 West Bay Street, Jacksonville, Florida32202.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region12, Federal Building, Room 916, 51 Southwest Avenue, Miami, Florida 33130. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region16, Robert S. Kerr Building, 440 South Houston Avenue, Room 210, Tulsa,Oklahoma 74127.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region18, Federal Building, 210 Walnut Street, Room 909, Des Moines, Iowa 50309. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region19, Anchorage Federal Office Building, 701 C Street, Room 510, Box 21,Anchorage, Alaska 99513.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region21, 555 West Beech Street, Suite 302, San Diego, California 92101.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region23, Federal Building, Room A-509, 727 East Durango Boulevard, San Antonio,Texas 78206.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region26, Capitol Centre Building, 303 West Capitol Street, Suite 350, LittleRock, Arkansas 72201.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region26, Estes Kefauver Federal Building, U.S. Courthouse, Room A-702, 801 Broadway,Nashville, Tennessee 37203.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region28, Patio Plaza Building, Upper Level, 5000 Marble Avenue, NE., Albuquerque,New Mexico 87110.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region28, Federal Building, Suite C403, 700 East San Antonio Avenue, El Paso,Texas 79901.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Resident Officer, National Labor Relations Board, Resident Office-Region31, 600 Las Vegas Boulevard, South Suite 400, Las Vegas, Nevada 89101.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-10880 Filed 5-13-88; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7545-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>