<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88707-0063 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-07-88.f2.A1062</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="59"><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Human Development Services</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Administration for Children, Youth and Families; Statement of Organization,Functions, and Delegations of Authority</ITAG>This notice amends Part D of the Statement of Organization, Functions,and Delegations of Authority of the Department of Health and Human Services,Office of Human Development Services as follows: Chapter D, Office of HumanDevelopment Services (45 FR 64254) as last amended, September 29, 1980;and Chapter DC, Administration for Children, Youth and Families (ACYF)(49 FR 17593), as last amended April 24, 1984. This reorganization wouldconsolidate the major operational functions of the Title IV-E program,i.e. Foster Care and Adoption Assistance program under the Children's Bureau,ACYF.1. Amend Chapter D, Office of Human Development Services, D.20, paragraph``F. The Administration for Children, Youth and Familes (ACYF)'' by deletingthe last sentence of the paragraph and adding the following:Develops strategies of programmatic reviews of State Plans for programsfor children, youth and families funded by HDS. Participates with the Officeof Regional Operations and Regional Offices in the development of strategiesfor joint financial reviews of the Title IV-E program.2. Amend Chapter DC, as follows:a. Paragraph ``DC.10 Organization. The Administration for Children, Youthand Families'' by deleting lines 11-13 and replacing them with the following:Children's Bureau: National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect and Officeof Discretionary Grants: National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect Division,Program Support Division; Office of Child Welfare State Grants: ProgramOperations Divisons, Formula Grants Division, Finanical Operations ReviewDivision;b. Under DC.20 Functions:(1) Delete paragraph B. ``2 Management Support Division'' in its entiretyand replace with the following:<T3>2. Management Support Division</T3> provides or coordinates all headquarters'management support services including personnel, contracts and grants,budget formulation and executive secretariat, and administrative services.In conjunction with HDS/Office of Management Services, is responsible forbudget formulation and execution. Manages the annual ACYF budget formulationand presentation process for program funds and salary and expense resources;coordinates development of necessary budget documents, exhibits, and supportmaterials.For ACYF programs in the regions and in headquarters, recommends allowances;develops apportionment materials; maintains commitment registers; and reconcilesmonthly accounting reports from the DHHS accounting system. Develops theannual plan for obligation of grant and contract funds; monitors fundingunits for compliance with those plans. Manages the central office salariesand expenses budget. Assists regional offices and the Head Start Bureauin the appeals and hearings process related to suspension or terminationof Head Start grants.Provides Executive Secretariat services to ACYF; receives, assigns andtracks all controlled mail; and assures timely and accurate responses.Serves as the primary ACYF liaison with HDS offices in administrative areasof personnel, payroll, training, word/data processing systems, and equalopportunity and civil rights. Manages the Merit Pay and Employee PerformanceManagement System process in ACYF headquarters.Develops and manages management information systems and other data analysissystems handling data which report on or affect ACYF programs; analyzesdata from these systems and other sources; and provides assistance andservices on data systems to ACYF units. Serves as the ACYF/OMB Forms ClearanceOfficer.Delete paragraph ``D. Children's Bureau'' in its entirety and replace withthe following: <T3>D. Children's Bureau</T3> advises the Commissioner in child welfare,foster care, and adoption matters. Recommends legislative and budgetaryproposals, operational planning system objectives and initiatives, andprojects and issue areas for evaluation, research and demonstration activities.Represents ACYF in initiating and implementing inter-agency activitiesand projects affecting children. Provides leadership and coordination forthe programs, activities, and subordinate units of the Bureau. <T3>D. 1. National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect and Office of DiscretionaryGrant Programs</T3> manages and provides direction and leadership to theNational Center on Child Abuse and Neglect and directs and coordinatesthe administration of discretionary grants under section 426 of the SocialSecurity Act and under the Adoption Opportunities Act. Advises the AssociateCommissioner and the Commissioner in matters related to child abuse andneglect and the development and operation of the discretionary grant program.Provides advice and guidance to the Regions in these areas of responsibility.<T3>D.1.a. National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect Division</T3> developspolicies and plans on programs relating to the prevention, identification,and treatment of child abuse and neglect. Proposes budgetary and legislativeinitiatives. Develops regulations, guidelines and instructions to assistState grant programs on child abuse and neglect. Develops and implements,through grants and contracts, approved research and demonstration programsand plans to prevent, identify and treat child abuse and neglect. Plansand implements training and technical assistance activities by directlymanaging grants and contracts. Manages the Child Abuse and Neglect StateGrant Program. Develops, maintains, and updates the information clearinghouse on childabuse and neglect research programs and other related activities. Throughsurveys and other information collection activities, provides informationon research programs directed at preventing, identifying and treating childabuse and neglect. Compiles, analyzes, and disseminates publications andother materials on child abuse and neglect. Provides assistance to governmentagencies, public and private service organizations, and the general publicconcerning information on child abuse and neglect. Studies the trends ofincidence of child abuse and neglect and assists in the development ofcentral registries and forms for reporting child abuse and neglect. Providesstaff support to the Advisory Board on Child Abuse and Neglect in developingand updating Federal standards, preparing special reports, coordinatingFederally funded programs, and other activities of the Board. (1) Program Policy and Planning Branch In coordination with the ACYF Division of Planning, Research, and Evaluation,establishes objectives, determines priorities, develops and implementsresearch and demonstration programs, and plans to prevent, identify andtreat child abuse and neglect. Recommends evaluation activities to be performed.With the Regional Offices, verifies eligibility and allocates funds toStates found to be in compliance with the requirements of the Child AbusePrevention and Treatment Act, and monitors State programs funded underthe Act. Plans and implements training and technical assistance activities by directlymanaging grants and contracts. Provides staff support to the Advisory Board on Child Abuse and Neglectin the development and updating of Federal Standards, the preparation ofspecial reports, the coordination of Federally funded programs, and otheractivities of the Board. (2) Clearinghouse Branch Develops, maintains, and updates the Information Clearinghouse on ChildAbuse and Neglect on research and demonstration projects, operating programsand other activities. Through surveys and other information collectionactivities provides information on a continuing basis on research and demonstrationprojects and operating programs, directed at preventing, identifying andtreating child abuse and neglect. Complies, analyzes, prepares and disseminates information, publicationsand other materials on child abuse and neglect. Provides assistance to other government agencies, public and private serviceorganizations and the general public concerning the availability and useof information on child abuse and neglect.Studies the incidence of child abuse and neglect to show severity and trendsand assists in the development of central registries and forms for reportingchild abuse and neglect.<T3>D.1.b. Program Support Division</T3> manages the Title IV-B Child WelfareTraining Program and the Adoption Opportunities Program. Provides technicalexpertise in specific, substantive program areas for developing programmaticpolicies, standards, model laws, regulations and guidelines for child welfareservices. Provides expert advice and assistance to a broad array of publicand private agencies in these areas. Develops areas for research, demonstration,and evaluation activities to investigate the current status of child welfarepractices and to improve the quality and levels of service provided tochildren. Manages discretionary projects assigned to the Bureau which arerelated to child welfare services and related areas. Reviews current practicesand problems; recommends action to meet special needs of children at risk;and promotes successful models.Develops and implements training and technical assistance plans. Analyzesregional Children's Bureau training and technical assistance reports andprovides technical guidance to the regional offices. Develops model curriculaand other materials for training persons engaged in child welfare programs.(1) Assistance BranchActs as the principal focus within the Program Support Division for developingand implementing policies, advice and plans on identifying and diagnosingchildren and families who need child welfare assistance including improvingand upgrading services to children and families in their own homes; servicesfor children and families in need of emergency care; services to childrenin need of substitute care (with foster families or in institutions orgroup homes); and services relating to restoration of children with theirfamilies and permanency planning.(2) Adoption Opportunities BranchActs as the principal focus within the Division for development of policies,advice and plans on programs relating to the improvement of adoption services,especially those for children with special needs. Provides technical expertisein developing programmatic policies, standards, model laws, regulatorymaterial and guidelines for improving adoption services. Provides expertknowledge, training and technical assistance to a broad array of publicand private social service agencies in improvement of adoption services.Develops and manages the Adoption Opportunities Program (Title II of theChild Abuse Prevention and Treatment and Adoption Reform Act) to facilitatethe elimination of barriers to adoption and to provide permanent homesfor children who would benefit by adoption. Develops model adoption legislationand procedures and provides training and technical assistance in theiruse by States; develops and manages a national adoption information exchangesystem, including the operation of a national adoption exchange; develops,manages and monitors a training and technical assistance program to promotequality standards and services in the adoption of children with specialneeds.Develops training and technical assistance objectives and program guidancefor the Regional Offices in the improvement of adoption services. Identifies,develops, demonstrates and disseminates training curricula and technicalassistance materials for persons providing adoption services. Recommendsareas for research, demonstration and evaluation activities. Manages assigneddiscretionary projects.<T3>D.2. Office of Child Welfare State Grants</T3> manages, corrdinatesand provides direction and leadership in the program operation, policydevelopment and fiscal operations and review activities included undertitles IV-B and IV-E of the Social Security Act. Advises the AssociateCommissioner and the Commissioner in child welfare, foster care, adoptionassistance and independent living matters. Provides advice and guidanceto Regions on the implementation, operation and review of child welfare,foster care, adoption assistance and independent living programs undertitles IV-B and IV-E.<T3>D.2.a. Program Operations Division </T3>generates policies and proceduresfor developing State child welfare program plans authorized under titlesIV-B and IV-E of the Social Security Act including child welfare services,foster care and adoption assistance; develops and interprets regulations,guidelines, and instructions. Coordinates child welfare services with otherFederal agencies and non-Federal groups. Provides technical direction on administration of state grant programs.Advises Regional Offices on recommendation for disapproval of State plansor amendments. (1) Implementation BranchPerforms reviews for eligibility of funds under Section 427, Pub. L. 96-272and program reviews when required; develops compliance review proceduresand reviews compliance of State plans and expenditures with the requirementsand makes recommendations to the Associate Commissioner; prepares appropriateorientation materials for regional offices and States; assists or preparesregional orientation plans; analyzes and, in conjunction with regionaloffices, collects child welfare services program data; formulates and implementsthe Division's planning strategy including the development of the annualoperational plan; and engages in joint program planning with States. (2) Policy BranchDevelops policies and procedures for developing State plans for title IV-Eand the Child Welfare Program authorized under title IV-B of the SocialSecurity Act; develops and interprets regulations, guidelines and instructionsunder title IV-B and IV-E of that Act and Pub. L. 96-272; interprets questionsof State implementation; assists regional office technical assistance activitiesto meet requirements for State grants; coordinates child welfare serviceswith other Federal agencies and non-Federal groups; analyzes regional officesmonitoring and training and technical assistance reports; and providesprogram technical direction to regional offices. <T3>D.2.b. Formula Grants Division </T3>develops and interprets program-specificfiscal regulations, guidelines and instructions for the management of formulagrant and entitlement programs including Child Welfare Services, FosterCare, and Adoption Assistance. Provides technical guidance to the regionaloffices in all fiscal aspects of these programs and develops proceduresfor the regional offices to use in acting on requests for funds.Develops the annual funding allocations and quarterly financial plans,reviews all States estimates of need. Prepares quarterly State grants foraward, makes adjustments to State funding plans as required. Makes financial adjustments associated with deferral and disallowance actions.Provides technical expertise to the regional offices in the developmentof these actions. Processes all these actions in concert with the Officeof Management Services/Division of Grants and Contracts Management.Manages technical and procedural activities incident to audit questionsand appeals. Provides technical assistance to the HHS/Inspector Generalin developing comprehensive audit techniques for these programs, includingsampling and review methodology. Takes part in audits of State programs.Designs audit plans to meet special circumstances. Provides technical advice on regulations, guidelines, and fiscal practicesto Office of General Counsel in all related audit appeals being heard bythe DHHS Grants Appeals Board. Provides technical assistance on issuesaffecting ACYF formual and entitlement programs to staff of the AssistantSecretary for Legislation and for Management and Budget. <T3>D.2.c. Financial Operations Review Division </T3>arranges for and participatesin financial reviews of State Child Welfare Services, Foster Care and AdoptionAssistance grant operations. This requires coordination with Regional Administrators,and includes developing and refining procedures, establishing standardsand criteria, and training Regional and Central Office Staff in conductingregular on-site financial reviews. Coordinates and consults as appropriate and necessary, with the Commissioner,ACYF, Staff Office Directors, and Regional Administrators in organizing,assigning staff, conducting the reviews, and analyzing review findings.Analyze and review results for consistency in application and operation,and make recommendations to the Commissioner, ACYF, on policies and proceduralimprovements. Assists OGC with cases appealed to the Departmental Grant Appeals Boardas a result of the financial reviews. 3. For this realignment, there will be no change in the functional statementfor the Office of Management Services. The current functional statementis generically stated and does not mention IV-E as part of its function.<ITAG tagnum="6">Otis R. Bowen, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-15216 Filed 7-6-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4130-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>