<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88715-0108 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-15-88.f2.A1107</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Release No. IC-16479; 812-7063]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Public Facility Loan Trust; Application </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">July 12, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC'').</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of application for exemption under the InvestmentCompany Act of 1940 (the ``1940 Act'').<T3>Applicant: </T3>Shawmut Bank, N.A., not in its individual capacity,but solely as trustee (the ``Applicant'' or ``Owner Trustee''), on behalfof the Public Facility Loan Trust (the ``Trust''). <T3>Relevant Sections of the 1940 Act: </T3>Exemption requested under section6(c) from the provisions of sections 10(h), 14(a), 16(a), 17 (a) and (d),18 (a), and (c) and (i) and 32(a) of the 1940 Act. <T3>Summary of the Application: </T3>The Applicant, serving as Owner Trusteeon behalf of the Trust, seeks an order to permit the issuance and saleby the Trust of debt securities and two classes of certificates of beneficialinterest in the Trust, collateralized by certain loans originated by theUnited States Department of Housing and Urban Development (``HUD''), inconnection with the Federal government's loan asset sale program. <T3>Filing Date: </T3>The Application was filed on July 12, 1988. <T3>Hearing or Notification of Hearing: </T3>If no hearing is ordered,the application will be granted. Any interested person may request a hearingon this application, or ask to be notified if a hearing is ordered. Anyrequests must be received by SEC by 5:30 p.m. on July 27, 1988. Requesta hearing in writing, giving the nature of your interest, the reason forthe request, and the issues you contest. Serve the Applicant with the request,either personally or by mail, and also send it to the Secretary of theSEC, along with proof of service by affidavit, or, for lawyers, by certificate.Request notification of the date of a hearing by writing to the Secretaryof the SEC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Secretary, SEC, 450 5th Street, NW., Washington, DC20549; Applicant, c/o Geoffrey K. Hurley, Esq., Shadden, Arps, Slate, Meagherandamp; Flom, 919 Third Avenue, New York, New York 10022-9932.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Karen L. Skidmore, Special Counsel(202) 272-3023; or Fran Pollack-Matz, Staff Attorney (202) 272-3024 (Divisionof Investment Management).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The following is a summary of the application.The complete application is available for a fee from either the SEC's PublicReference Branch in person or the SEC's commercial copier which may becontacted at (800) 231-3282 (in Maryland (301) 258-4300).<ITAG tagnum="84">Applicant's Representations</ITAG>1. The Trust has been organized as a Massachusetts business trust pursuantto a Declaration of Trust (the ``Declaration of Trust'') filed by ShawmutBank, N.A. with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts on July 8, 1988, andhas registered with the Commission as a closed-end, management investmentcompany. The Trust has been organized for the purpose of acquiring certainloans (the ``Loans'') from HUD, pursuant to a loan sale agreement (the``Loan Sale Agreement''), in exchange for equity interests and proceedsof debt securities to be issued by the Trust. The Loans are bonds wereissued by municipalities, special districts and not-for-profit organizationsto refinance construction loans, which bonds were purchased by the predecessoragency to HUD under its Public Facilities Loan Program (``PFLP''). ThePFLP was designed to assist small municipalities in the construction ofpublic works, such as water, sewer, hospital and other public facilities.The Loans comprise substantially all of HUD's portfolio of PFLP loans (the``Portfolio''). 2. The Loans will be sold by HUD in accordance with a directive issuedby the United States Office of Management and Budget (``OMB'') and theamended Guidelines for Loan Asset Sales, dated March 8, 1988, preparedby the Federal Credit Policy Working Group and issued by OMB (the ``Guidelines'').3. The proposed transaction has been designed to implement the objectivesof the Guidelines by: (a) Providing for the sale of Loans without recourseto the Federal government; (b) providing for the transfer of servicingresponsibilities for the Loans to a private sector loan servicer; and (c)ensuring that interest on the Bonds issued to finance the acquisition ofthe Loans by the Trust (and thus, in effect, the future interest paymentson the Loans themselves) will be subject to full Federal income tax. 4. The proposed transaction that is the subject of this application involvesthe issuance of securities by the Trust to finance the Trust's purchaseof the Loans from HUD. In general, in order to be eligible for selectionfrom HUD's Portfolio, the Loan must not have been a ``Delinquent Loan''as of the Cut-off Date specified in the Prospectus (the ``Cut-off Date'').A ``Delinquent Loan'' will be defined in the Prospectus and the Indentureas a Loan which is more than 6 or 12 months (to be determined prior topricing) past due in any scheduled payment (or rescheduled payment) ofprincipal or interest as of the date of determination. The Trust, however,may include a limited amount (not to exceed 10 percent of its assets asof the Closing Date) of Loans that are Delinquent Loans as of the Cut-offDate but subject to the Trust's specifically representing and warrantingthat such Delinquent Loans will become current before the second anniversaryof the Closing Date. If such Delinquent Loans fail to become current aswarranted, HUD will be obligated under the Loan Sale Agreement to performone of the remedies discussed below with respect to a ``Non-ConformingLoan,'' that is, a Loan not complying with certain warranties made by HUDunder the Loan Sale Agreement. Pursuant to the Loan Sale Agreement betweenthe Owner Trustee and HUD, HUD will sell the Loans to the Trust in exchangefor: (a) The proceeds from the issuance of certain debt securities (the``Bonds''); and (b) two classes of certificates evidencing ownership ofbeneficial interests on the net assets of the Trust (the ``Certificates'').5. Under the Loan Sale Agreement, HUD makes certain warranties about theLoans as of the Closing Date. Upon breach of certain warranties and noticethereof and satisfaction of the requirements set forth in the Loan SaleAgreement within the applicable warranty period (``Warranty Period''),(generally, two years from the Closing Date), HUD will promptly either(1) cure the breach, (2) substitute a Loan for a Non-Conforming Loan, (3)make certain cash payments, or (4) purchase Bonds in the open market forsurrender and cancellation, or any combination of the foregoing. HUD mayelect to defer any such performance until such time, if any, as the subjectNon-Conforming Loan becomes a Delinquent Loan. Until a Non-Conforming Loanbecomes a Delinquent Loan, the Bondholders will continue to benefit fromthe principal and interest payments on the Loan. However, if the Non-ConformingLoan becomes a Delinquent Loan, HUD must perform its obligations underthe Loan Sale Agreement and such obligations are backed by the full faithand credit of the United States. <T3>See </T3>the application for a fuller description of these remedies.Notice will be given by the Bond Trustee and the Owner Trustee to the Bondholdersand the Certificateholders of any substitution of Loans, as described inthe application, within five days after such substitution as contemplatedby section 26(a)(4)(B) of the 1940 Act. With the exception of such limitedremedies and the advances in connection with interest deferments, the Loanswill be transferred to the Trust without recourse to HUD.6. The Trust will issue separate maturities of collateralized sequentialpay Bonds in an aggregate principal amount currently estimated in a rangeup to $300 million expected to be issued at a discount to yield net proceedsin a range up to $200 million. The Bonds will be issued pursuant to anindenture (the ``Indenture'') between the Owner Trustee and Chemical Bank,as bond trustee (the ``Bond Trustee''). The Bond Trustee and Owner Trusteeand any successors thereto will be banks and will be required to have atall times an aggregate capital, surplus and undivided profits of not lessthan $50,000,00. The date on which such transactions will occur is referredto herein as the ``Closing Date.''7. The Bonds will be registered under the Securities Act of 1933 (the ``1933Act'') pursuant to a registration statement (the ``Registration Statement'')on Form N-2. the Indenture will be qualified under the Trust IndentureAct of 1939 (``1939 Act''). The Bonds will be rated in the highest ratingcategory (``AAA'' or ``Aaa'') by two nationally recognized statisticalrating organizations (``Rating Agencies'') not affiliated with the Trust.The Trust will offer the Bonds through the underwriters (the ``Underwriters'')named in the prospectus included in the Registration Statement (the ``Prospectus'').8. The Bonds are expected to be issued in separate maturities. Each maturityof Bonds will have a fixed interest rate and stated maturity date and willbe amortized on each Payment Date in a manner such that, assuming principalof and interest on the Loans is paid when due, the overcollateralizationlevels specified in the Indenture will be maintained (to the extent ofavailable moneys therefor under the Indenture). Interest on the Bonds willbe payable on each semi-annual Payment Date. Aggregate principal amounts,initial public offering prices, maturity dates and interest rates of eachmaturity will be determined in light of market conditions at the time ofthe pricing of the Bonds so as to achieve the highest return to HUD bothin terms of net proceeds of the Bonds and the value of the Certificates.The Bonds are currently expected to be issued at substantial discountsbelow par if it is determined at the time of pricing of the bonds thatthe sale of the Bonds with original issue discount will reduce the yieldon the Bonds below the yield which the Bonds would bear if issued at par.The Bonds will not be subject to redemption prior to maturity other thanthrough amortization of principal as described above. 9. The Certificates will evidence ownership of beneficial interest in thenet assets of the Trust and accordingly will entitle holders to sharesof the cash flow of the Trust after the funding or certain funds and paymentof all principal and interest payments on the Bonds then due. Such distributionsto the Certificateholders shall be made semi-annually on or immediatelyfollowing each Payment Date in respect of the Bonds. It is expected thatHUD initially will retain the Certificates.10. For certain tax reasons, described in the application, the Certificateswill be issued by the Owner Trustee in two classes with different rightsas to distributions. On each date on which the Owner Trustee makes a distributionto the Certificateholders one class of Certificateholders will receivea specified return on the Certificates' value assigned to that Class priorto distributions to the other class. The Certificates will be transferable,subject to the limitations described below and in the application. TheCertificates will not be redeemable at the option of the holders. The holdersof the Certificates will not be liable for payment of principal of, orinterest on, the Bonds or for any other liabilities of the Trust. 11. The Owner Trustee will contract with General Electric Capital Corporation(formerly, General Electric Credit Corporation) (the ``Servicer'') as servicerof the Loans under a servicing agreement (``Servicing Agreement''). Underthe Servicing Agreement, the Servicer will administer, service, collectand enforce the Loans on behalf of the Trust. The Servicing Agreement willnot permit the Servicer to resign so long as any Loans are outstandingexcept upon a determination that is duties thereunder are no longer permissibleunder applicable law or if the Servicer has obtained a successor Servicersatisfactory to the Bond trustee and the Owner Trustee, the appointmentof which will not cause the rating on the Bonds to be reduced. The feesof the Servicer will be disclosed in the Prospectus. The Owner Trusteewill assign the Loans and its rights under the Loan Sale Agreement andthe Servicing Agreement to the Bond Trustee pursuant to the Indenture assecurity for the Bonds. 12. The Indenture will provide for three Funds, the Revenue Fund, the ExpenseFund the Liquidity Fund (the ``Funds''), and for one account, the BreachAccount. The Revenue Fund, to be held by the Bond Trustee under the Indentureas security for the Bonds, will be credited with all payments due on theLoans and received after the Cut-Off Date specified in the Loan Sale Agreement,net of the fees of the Servicer, all earnings on the Investment Agreement(described below and in the application), and any required transfers fromthe Expense Fund, the Liquidity Fund and the Breach Account. Amounts creditedto the Revenue Fund will be applied on each Payment Date in the followingorder of priority: first, to pay principal at maturity of and intereston the Bonds due on such Payment Date; second, to pay scheduled AdministrativeExpenses (``Administrative Expenses'' will include fees and expenses ofthe Bond Trustee, the Trust's auditors and accountants, and of the OwnerTrustee, and Servicer Advances (defined below) not previously paid) thendue and not previously paid from the Expense Fund; third, to fund the ExpenseFund to the required level set forth in the Indenture; fourth, the fundthe Liquidity Fund to the required level set forth in the Indenture; fifth,to amortize principal of the Bonds in the manner described in paragraph8; and sixth, to pay Administrative Expenses not paid pursuant to the secondapplication of funds described above. Any remaining amounts in the RevenueFund on such Payment Date (other than certain specified amounts receivedprior to such date) will be promptly paid over by the Bond Trustee to theOwner Trustee for distribution to the Certificateholders after paymentof any expenses of the Trust not payable by the Bond Trustee as AdministrativeExpenses (including any indemnities payable by the Trustee). 13. The Expense Fund may be available to be used on a monthly basis forreimbursement of advances made by the Servicer for the purpose of collectingamounts due on the Loans or for the protection of collateral that is securityfor any Loan (``Servicer Advances'') and, on each Payment Date, to payscheduled payments on the Bonds, as necessary, and Administrative Expenses.The Liquidity Fund, as necessary, will be used to pay scheduled paymentson the Bonds and to pay scheduled Administrative Expenses not previouslypaid form the Expense Fund or the Revenue Fund. The Breach Account willhold cash received from HUD with respect to certain defective Loans. Amountsin the Breach Account will be available to pay any shortfalls in scheduledpayments on such Loans up to the Cash Value of the Breach (as defined inthe application) for such Loans. Any amounts remaining in the Breach Accountafter all Bonds have been paid in full will be transferred to HUD.14. In order to provide for earnings on the Funds referred to above withoutcreating investment discretion in the Bond Trustee, the Indenture willrequire the Owner Trustee and the Bond Trustee prior to the issuance ofthe Bonds, to enter into an investment agreement (the ``Investment Agreement'')with a financial institution. Such institution will be (a) or a nationalbank, a banking institution organized under the laws of any State or theDistrict of Columbia the business of which is substantially confined tobanking and is supervised by the State banking commission or similar official,or a foreign bank subject to substantially the same supervision under theInternational Banking Act of 1978; (b) an insurance company, subject tothe supervision of the insurance commissioner, bank commissioner or anyagency or officer performing like functions, of any State of the Districtof Columbia; or (c) a United States government agency or government sponsoredcorporation, in each case, whose obligations are rated in, or eligibleto be pledged as collateral for securities rated in, the highest ratingcategory (``AAA'' or ``Aaa'') by the same Rating Agencies which rate theBonds. The Trust anticipates entering an Investment Agreement with MorganGuaranty Trust Company of New York or another entity acceptable to theRating Agencies and not affiliated with any parties to the transaction(``Provider'').15. The Investment Agreement will have a term equal to the final maturityof the Bonds. The Indenture will require the Bond Trustee to invest underthe Investment Agreement all amounts held under the Indenture and creditedfrom time to time to the Funds. The Investment Agreement will bear a fixedor variable interest rate or rates specified in the Investment Agreementand disclosed in the Prospectus. If the Investment Agreement bears a variableinterest rate or rates, such rate or rates will be pegged to a publishedfinancial index specified in the Indenture and disclosed in the Prospectus.At no time, however, will such variable rate or rates be permitted to fallbelow the weighted average rate on the Loans.16. The Investment Agreement will not be terminable or assignable by theProvider, except that if the Provider is a bank which is a principal subsidiaryof a bank holding company, the Provider may be permitted to assign itsobligations under the Investment Agreement to its parent corporation ifthe long-term debt rating of the parent by each Rating Agency rating theBonds is at least as high as that or the Bonds (<T3>i.e., </T3>AAA or Aaa, the same as the original Provider). The InvestmentAgreement will terminate if the Bond Trustee or the Owner Trustee shouldinform the Provider that any Rating Agency then rating the Bonds has statedthat the continuation of the Investment Agreement with that Provider willadversely affect such Rating Agency's rating of the Bonds. In the eventof such termination, the Bond Trustee will enter into a substitute investmentagreement that would not result in a reduction in the rating of the Bonds,if such an agreement can be procured. Any such substitute agreement wouldbe permitted only with the financial institutions described above. If theInvestment Agreement is with an entity other than a United States governmentagency or government sponsored corporation, in the event that the amountsinvested in the Investment Agreement exceed the limits required to maintainthe Trust's status as a regulated investment company under the InternalRevenue Code, the Bond Trustee will be required to invest any such excessamounts in one or more additional investment agreements meeting all ofthe requirements of a substitute agreement specified above or, if no suchadditional investment agreement can be procured, in the kinds of investmentsdescribed in paragraph 17 for instances when no substitute agreement canbe procured.17. If no such substitute investment agreement can be procured, amountsin the Funds will be invested by the Bond Trustee only in (a) obligationsissued by the United States (and supported by its full faith and credit);or (b) repurchase agreements with respect to such obligations and overcollateralizedon a basis that will not result in a reduction in the ratings of the Bonds.All such investments must mature before the next scheduled distributiondate and will respect to any amount on deposit in the Expense Fund forreimbursement of advances made by the Servicer, such investments must maturemonthly. In addition, after final payment of the Bonds, any amounts paidover by the Bond Trustee to the Owner Trustee for distribution to Certificateholdersmay be invested, pending distribution, in the same investments describedabove any any demand or time deposit or certificate of deposit which isfully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.18. The Bonds will not be redeemable at the option of the holders and,except in the event of a default on the Bonds followed by an acceleration,holders of the Bonds will not be entitled to compel the liquidation ofthe Loans in order to redeem the Bonds prior to maturity.19. At the date of issuance of the Bonds, the principal balance of theBonds will not exceed the Aggregate Collateral Value of the Loans (as definedin the application). To the extent permitted by the Rating Agencies, AggregateCollateral Value will include a Loan after it becomes Delinquent, as definedin the Prospectus. The Rating Agencies will take into account the inclusionof Delinquent Loans in determining the appropriate level of overcollateralizationand of required funding of the Liquidity Fund. When the maximum overcollateralizationlevel is determined at the pricing of the Bonds, the Applicant undertakesto amend the application in order to inform the SEC of such maximum level.It is expected that the level of overcollateralization will be no lessthan 104% and no more than 120%, which is the level of overcollateralizationrequired to obtain the highest investment grade rating on the Bonds.20. Neither the holders of the Certificates, the Owner Trustee nor theBond Trustee will be able to impair the security afforded by the Loansto the Holders of the Bonds. Without the consent of each Bondholder tobe affected, the Indenture may not be amended so as to: (a) Change thestated maturity of and Bond; (b) reduce the principal amount of or therate of interest on any Bond; (c) change the priority of payment on anymaturity of Bonds; (d) impair or adversely affect the Loans securing anymaturity of Bonds; (e) permit the creation of a lien ranking prior to oron a parity with or subordinate to the lien of the Indenture with respectto the assets pledged under the Indenture; or (f) otherwise deprive theBondholders of the security afforded by the lien of the Indenture. Thesale of the Certificates by HUD or any other holder will not alter thepayment of cash flows under the Indenture, including the amounts to bedeposited in the Funds or Breach Account created pursuant to the Indentureto support payments of principal of and interest on the Bonds.21. Conflicts of interest, if any, between the Bondholders and the holdersof the Certificates in the Trust are addressed in the following ways:(a) The Indenture will subject the Loans, the various Funds and the BreachAccount held under the Indenture, and the Investment Agreement to a firstpriority perfected security interest in favor or the Bond Trustee for thebenefit of the Bondholders. The Indenture will further provide that noamounts may be released from the lien of the Indenture to be remitted tothe Owner Trustee (or the holders of Certificates) on any Payment Dateuntil: (i) The Bond Trustee has made the scheduled payment of principalof and interest on the Bonds on such Payment Date; (ii) all AdministrativeExpenses then due have been paid; (iii) any required deposits have beenmade to the Expense Fund, the Liquidity Fund and the Breach Account; and(iv) the Bond Trustee has paid principal of the Bonds on such Payment Datein the manner described in paragraph 8.(b) The holders of the Certificates will be entitled to receive currentdistributions representing the residual payments on the Loans in accordancewith the terms of the Indenture and the Declaration of Trust. Except forsuch rights to receive residual payments, the holders of the Certificateswill have no rights in, or discretionary control over, the Trust whilethe Bonds are outstanding other than the right to replace the Owner Trusteefor breach of fiduciary duty, willful misfeasance, bad faith, gross negligenceor reckless disregard of its duties under the Declaration of Trust andto replace the Trust's auditors with respect to the responsibilities ofthe auditors other than those arising under the Indenture. The holdersof the Certificates will have the right to replace the Servicer for breachof the Servicing Agreement only after all Bonds have been paid.(c) The Bonds will only be issued if they have been rated in the highestrating category by two Rating Agencies not affiliated with the Trust. 22. The Trust expects to make certain payments to cover various costs tobe paid or reimbursed at the closing of the sale of the Bonds and Certificates,as well as various ongoing costs and expenses, all such costs and expensesbeing fully described in the application and Prospectus. Should the Trustexpect to make any other payments not described in the application, Applicantwill submit an amendment to this application to the Commission requestingthat those fees be exempted from the provisions of section 26(a)(2) ofthe 1940 Act and stating that the amounts thereof will be disclosed inthe Prospectus.23. Upon payment of the Bonds in full and the discharge of the Indenture,any remaining assets of the Trust held by the Bond Trustee will be transferredto the Owner Trustee. Any cash assets will then be distributed to the holdersof the Certificates. Any remaining Loans will be retained by the OwnerTrustee and cash flows from the Loans will be distributed by the OwnerTrustee to the holders of the Certificates at least monthly on a pass-throughbasis after payment of the fees and expenses of the Owner Trustee, theServicer and the Trust's accountants and auditors. Upon final payment ofthe Loans, any remaining assets of the Trust will be distributed to theCertificateholders and the Trust will be terminated.24. In order to allow the Trust to register with the Commission as a closed-endmanagement investment company, exemptive relief is required from the provisionsof the 1940 Act specified below.<ITAG tagnum="84">Applicant's Legal Conclusions</ITAG>1. Section 10(h)Section 10(h) of the 1940 Act applies certain of the restrictions of sections10 (a), (b) and (c) of the 1940 Act to the board of directors of the depositorof a registered management company which is an unincorporated company notitself having a board of directors, as well be the case with the Trust.Hud, by conveying the Loans to the Trust, might be deemed to be the depositorof the Trust. However, HUD, as a Federal department in the Executive Branch,has no board of directors nor can it elect or appoint a board of directors.Except for its limited rights as a Certificateholder, HUD would not haveany discretion over the administration of the Trust under the Declarationof Trust and the Indenture. Moreover, the Trust will operate as a passiveentity without the traditional methods of management and investment.2. Section 14(a)Section 14(a)(1) of the 1940 Act provides that no investment company shallmake a public offering of securities of which such company is the issuerunless such company has a net worth of at least $100,000. On the date ofissuance of the Bonds and the Certificates, the aggregate scheduled paymentsof principal of and interest on the Loans plus the amount on deposit inthe Funds will exceed the aggregate scheduled payments of principal ofand interest on the Bonds by substantially more than $100.000. Thus, thenet worth of the Trust will exceed $100,000 on the date of issuance ofthe Bonds and the Certificates. Prior to the issuance and delivery of theBonds to the Underwriters, the Underwriters will agree to purchase theBonds subject to customary conditions of the closing. The Underwriterswill not be entitled to purchase less than all of the Bonds. Accordingly,either the offering will not be completed at all or the Trust will havea net worth in excess of $100,000 on the date of issuance of the Bondsand the Certificates Based on the determination of the independent evaluator,it is not anticiated that the net worth of the Trust will fall below theminimum level until the Bonds and the Certificates have been retired. 3. Section 16(a)Section 16(a) of the 1940 Act requires that no peson shall serve as directorof a registered investment company unless elected to that office by theholders of the outstanding voting securities of such company. The powersof the Bond Trustee and the Owner Trustee are so circumscribed that neitherthe Bond Trustee nor the Owner Trustee should be deemed a director withinthe meaning of section 2(a)(12) of the 1940 Act. Election or subsequentratifications of the Owner Trustee or the Bond Trustee are not necessaryin the public interest or to protect investors, and the additional expensefor the Trust is not justified. The Trust will be a passive entity thatwill not require investment management. Similar to a unit investment trust,neither the Owner Trustee nor the Bond Trustee will be authorized to managethe Trust's portfolio of Loans. The activities of the Owner Trustee willbe carefully limited to receipt of payments from the Bond Trustee whilethe Bonds are outstanding and of payments on the Loans thereafter and tomaking current distributions to Certificateholders of the amounts received.The Bond Trustee will also be required to mail a report, based informationsupplied by the servicer, to Bondholders, as described in Condition 5 below,which will enable Bondholders to determine the extent to which any outstandingDeliquent Loans may affect the ability of the Trust to make payments ofinterest and principal on the Bonds in accordance with the Bonds in accordancewith the provisions of the Indenture. Moreover, the Trust has agreed tocomply with section 26 of the 1940 Act as if it were a unit investmenttrust, including the requirements in that section regarding entities actingon behalf of the Trust and the limitations on expenses set forth therein.Finally, exemption from section 16(a) of the 1940 Act is necessary in lightof the exemption requested from section 18(i) of the 1940 Act discussedbelow to permit the issuance of only non-voting securities.4. Section 17(a)An exemption from section 17(a) of the 1940 Act is sought to permit theTrust to acquire Loans from HUD in exchange for the Certificates and theproceeds of the Bonds issued by the Trust, to repay HUD if HUD advancesfunds upon a deferment of interest payment granted to the borrower by HUD,and to effect substitution for Non-Conforming Loans or make cash paymentsto the Trust in lieu of such substitutions.Section 17(a) of the 1940 Act prohibits specified transactions betweencertain persons related to a registered investment company and such investmentcompany. HUD would otherwise be prohibited from entering into the abovetransactions under section 17(a) of the 1940 Act because HUD may eitherbe considered an ``affiliated person'' under section 2(a)(3) of the 1940Act or a ``promoter'' under section 2(a)(30) of the 1940 Act.Section 17(a) of the 1940 Act specifically excepts sales which involvesecurities deposited with the trustee of a unit investment trust. Althoughthe Trust is not a unit investment trust, its structure is very similarto one in that both entities involves the deposit into a trust by a relatedperson of a predetermined fixed portfolio of securities. Moreover, thetransactions would meet the requirements of section 17(b) of the 1940 Act,the provision granting the Commission authority to exempt transactionsunder section 17(a) of the 1940 Act, in that the terms of the exchangewill be reasonable and fair and do not involve overreaching on the partof any person concerned.In order to establish the reasonableness and fairness of the price of theLoan received by HUD, HUD's financial advisor, PaineWebber Incorporated,will advise HUD that the proceeds of the Bonds, less transaction costs,plus the Certificates representing the residual interest in the Trust,represent a fair price for the Loans. In order to establish that the pricepaid by the Trust for the Loans is reasonable and fair to the Trust, theTrust will retain an independent, qualified evaluator (not including anyUnderwriters for the Bonds or the Certificates) which will determine thatthe consideration to be paid by the Trust for the Loan is reasonable andfair.HUD is also seeking an exemption from 17(a) because HUD has statutory authorityto permit the borrower on a Loan to defer interest payments for certainperiods upon certain terms and after the making of certain findings byHUD. HUD will be obligated to advance to the Trust interest payments whichwould be due but for the deferral. The Trust, in turn, will be obligatedto reimburse HUD for the aforesaid advances (together with interest accruedthereon pursuant to the terms of the deferral) in accordance with the borrower'sobligation to repay deferred interest under the terms of the deferral.This is intended to allow Bondholders to receive interim cash flows withoutaltering whatever credit risk the Bondholders have assumed by purchasingthe Bonds. Any institutional purchaser of the Certificates will have thesophistication and bargaining power necessary to take into account whateverrisk is assumed by the Certificateholder in the price it is willing topay HUD for the Certificates.Any cash payments made in lieu of Loan substitutions must be in amountsadequate to replace the cash flow from the Non-Conforming Loans or, incases where the defects affect collateral for Loans, to replace the defectivecollateral. If HUD elects to surrender Bonds in Lieu of the foregoing remedies,HUD must purchase Bonds with a weighted average life as long as practicableas the dollar weighted average life of the Loans as to which any breachhas occurred. As a condition to delivery of the Bonds, HUD must also delivera statement from the auditors confirming that (1) the aggregate collateralvalue is at least equal to the aggregate outstanding principal amount ofthe Bonds and (2) schedule payments on the Loans (other than the Loan orLoan as to which any breach has occurred), together with reinvestment incomethereon, is sufficient to pay interest on the Bonds on each date when suchpayment is due and to retire each class of Bonds no later than its scheduledmaturity. Consequently, provision for such payment will provide protectionfor Bondholers, in the event defects in the Loans are identified, at leastas great as the protection afforded by the other remedies available tothe Trust under the Loan Sale Agreement.5. Section 17(d)An exemption is being sought from Section 17(d) of the 1940 Act to permitthe Trust, in the event HUD is deemed an ``affiliated person'' or ``promoter''under the 1940 Act, to effect substitutions of conforming for Non-ConformingLoans or to surrender Bonds or make cash payments in lieu thereof or torepay HUD for any advances upon a deferment of interest payments. Applicantsstate that these transactions will not be on a basis different from orless advantageous than that of other participants insofar as the Trustwill be the only participant on one side of the transaction dealing withHUD as the participant on the other side of the transaction. An exemptionis also being sought from section 17(d) of the 1940 Act to permit the Trust,in the event that GECC is deemed an ``affiliated person'' of a ``principalunderwriter'' under the 1940 Act, to enter into a servicing agreement withGECC. Section 17(d) makes it unlawful for any affiliated person of or principalunderwriter for a registered investment company or any affiliated personof such person or principal underwriter to effect a transaction in whichan investment company is a joint or joint and several participant in contraventionof such rules and regulations as the Commission may prescribe for the purposeof limiting or preventing participation by such investment company on abasis different from or less advantageous than that of such other participant.In the proposed transaction, Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. Incorporated (``KidderPeabody''), as one of the co-managers of the proposed offering of the Bonds,could be deemed a ``principal underwriter''. Both Kidder Peabody and GECCare subsidiaries of General Electric Financial Services, Inc., therefore,they are under common control. Although GECC could be deemed an affiliatedperson of a principal underwriter, Kidder Peabody and GECC are separatelymanaged. As described in the application, GECC has been selected as theservicer because of a competitive bid and non-quantitative factors suchas ability and related experience. The Trust believes, among other things,that the level of services proposed to be provided by GECC represents themost appropriate and highest quality of services being offered by qualifiedcandidates, and the proposed fees (including GECC's absorption of start-upcosts) represent the lowest cost to the Trust consistent with the extentand quality of service being offered. Consequently, permitting GECC toact as servicer for the Trust would be consistent with the provisions,policies and purposes of the 1940 Act, and the Trust would not be treateddifferent from or less advantageous than the other participants. 6. Section 18(a) Section 18(a) of the 1940 Act prohibits a registered closed-end investmentcompany from issuing any class of senior securities unless certain assetcoverage requirements are met. The Trust will have an asset coverage ratioimmediately after the sale of the Bonds and Certificates currently expectedto be at least 4 percent and no more than 120 percent. In addition, theTrust will receive advances from HUD upon deferral of interest paymentsby HUD and repay such advances. The proposed transaction, in view of theovercollateralization of the Trust and the nature of the investors in theCertificates, adequately protects against the dangers of excessive leveraging,the concern underlying section 18(a) of the 1940 Act. As a condition tothe issuance of the Bonds, the Trust will obtain a determination from anindependent, qualified evaluator that the aggregate scheduled paymentson the Loans plus the initial deposit in the Funds and reinvestment earningswill exceed the aggregate scheduled payments of principal and intereston the Bonds by an amount adequate to provide for payment of the Bondsin light of the payment terms and past experience on the Loans. Moreover,the Certificates may only be sold to sophisticated institutional investorshaving sufficient expertise to evaluate the risks involved in acquiringeither Class of Certificates. 7. Section 18(c) The Applicant is seeking an exemption from section 18(c) of the 1940 Actto permit the Trust to issue the Bonds in several maturities. Section 18(c)of the Act makes it unlawful for any registered investment company to havemore than one class of senior security of debt or equity. Here, each maturityof Bonds will be secured by collateral equally and ratably with every othermaturity and all maturities will have the benefit of the same covenantsand rights on default. Moreover, no action by the Owner Trustee or theCertificateholders can affect the timely payment of Bonds, and no actionby the Bondholders of one maturity can affect the timely payments of Bondsof any other maturity. All of the assets of the Trust will be pledged tothe Bond Trustee and the Owner Trustee will be permitted to borrow againstthe assets of the Trust. Further, Loans will not be permitted to be removedfrom the Trust or substituted for other assets, except under limited circumstances.8. Section 18(i) Under section 18(i) of the 1940 Act, a registered investment company maynot issue stock which does not have equal voting rights with every otherclass of stock. The Trust will operate essentially as a unit investmenttrust, to which section 18(i) of the 1940 Act does not apply. Given thelack of discretion vested in the Certificateholders and the Owner Trustee,voting rights would have very little actual effect on the operation ofthe Trust and would not enhance investor protection. 9. Section 26 Applicant has agreed that it will be subject to section 26 of the 1940Act (with certain exceptions) as though it were a unit investment trustwithin the meaning of section 4(2) of the 1940 Act. With respect to sections26(a)(2) (B) and (C), the Applicant has requested to be able to pay certaincosts and expenses described in the application. The Applicant believesthat the payment of those costs and expenses will be fair and reasonablein light of the requirements of the offering and sale of Bonds and theongoing servicing requirements for the Loans. To the extent any administrativecosts and fees are determined on the basis of a percentage of outstandingBonds, the Applicant has specifically considered the fairness of such percentageformula under the Indenture and that the practice of determining fees inthis manner is fair within the meaning of section 26 of the 1940 Act. TheApplicant further believes that the granting of the Order sought by thisapplication will satisfy the provisions of section 26(b) of the 1940 Actrelating to substitution of collateral to the extent Loan substitutionis made as described in the application. 10. Section 32(a) Sections 32(a)(1) and 32(a)(3) of the 1940 Act require the independentpublic accountant filing the investment company's financial statementsto be selected annually by a vote of a majority of the board of directorsand ratified annually by a majority of the voting securities of the investmentcompany. The Trust, however, will not have voting securities. The initialauditors will be selected and disclosed in the Prospectus prior to theissuance of the Bonds and Certificates. Both the Bond Trustee and the OwnerTrustee will have the right to remove the auditors for the Trust. Moreover,the Trust will not engage in any investing or reinvesting of securities,except to a limited extent. As a result, the Trust's financial statementswill be primarily records of receipts and distributions, and audits ofthe Trust's financial statements will be straightforward and will not involvecomplex auditing and accounting principles. Therefore, the additional expenseof ratification of the auditors would not be justified given the natureof the Trust. 11. Section 6(c) For the reasons stated above, the requested exemptions are consistent withthe section 6(c) standards. The relief requested is appropriate in thepublic interest, because: (a) The Trust's activities will promote the publicinterest by permitting HUD to sell its loan assets pursuant to a directivefrom the United States Office of Management and Budget and will provideinvestors with a highly rated security; (b) the Trust may be unable toproceed fully and in a timely manner with its proposed activities in theuncertainties concerning the applicability of the above sections are notremoved; and (c) the activities of the Trust are not the types of activitiesintended to be prevented by the 1940 Act. <ITAG tagnum="84">Applicant's Conditions </ITAG>Applicant agrees that if the requested order is granted it will be expresslyconditioned on the following conditions: A. Conditions Relating to the Bonds (1) The Bonds will be registered under the 1933 Act. The Indenture willbe qualified under the 1939 Act.(2) The Loans, the Funds, the Breach Account and the Investment Agreementsecuring the Bonds (``Collateral'') will be held by the Bond Trustee. TheBond Trustee may not be an affiliate (as the term ``affiliate'' is definedin Rule 405 under the 1933 Act, 17 CFR 230.405) of the Trust. The BondTrustee will be provided with a first priority perfected security interestin the Collateral. The Servicer will not be affiliated with either theBond Trustee or the Owner Trustee. (3) The initial collateral for the Bonds will consist only of the Loansand any moneys initially deposited to the credit of the Funds and investedin the Investment Agreement. No Loans may be released from the liens ofthe Indenture prior to the payment of the Bonds (except upon the accelerationof defaulted Loans) or substituted except pursuant to the limited substitutionobligations of HUD under the warranties of HUD contained in the Loan SaleAgreement described in the application. Any such substitute collateralmay consist only of Loans and will: (a) Be of equal quality as the Non-ConformingLoans being replaced in that they will be covered by the warranties ofHUD contained in the Loan Sale Agreement (subject to the limitation onHUD's obligation to replace Non-Conforming Loans notified to it duringthe Warranty Period) and will be selected by HUD in a manner so as to notadversely affect the rating of the Bonds; (b) have equal or greater principalamounts and cash flow as the Non-Conforming Loans being replaced, subjectto the cash payment option and credit to HUD for prior substitutions ofSubstitute Loans with cumulative payments in excess of the Non-ConformingLoan being replaced; and (c) meet the conditions set forth in paragraph(2) above. The replacement of such Substitute Loans for Non-ConformingLoans will not affect the level of collateralization on which the originalrating or ratings on the Bonds were based or affect the rating or ratingson the Bonds. If HUD elects to purchase Bonds in the open market and surrendersuch Bonds in lieu of other remedies for breach of warranty, HUD will purchaseBonds with a weighted average life as long as practicable as the weightedaverage life of the Loan or Loans as to which such breach of warranty occurred.In surrendering any such Bonds, HUD must also deliver a statement fromthe auditors confirming that (i) the Aggregate Collateral Value calculation(excluding the Loan or Loans as to which the breach of warranty occurred)is at least equal to the then outstanding principal amount of Bonds and(ii) the scheduled payments on the Loans (excluding the Loan or Loans asto which the breach of warranty occurred), together with reinvestment incomethereon, is sufficient to pay interest on the Bonds on each date when suchpayment is due and to retire each class of Bonds no later than its statedmaturity. (4) The Bonds will be rated in the highest bond rating category by twoRating Agencies that are not affiliated with the Trust. The Bonds willnot be considered ``redeemable securities'' within the meaning of section2(a)(32) of the 1940 Act. (5) On each Payment Date, the Bond Trustee will mail to each Bondholdera written report containing the following information as of the end ofthe immediately preceding Payment Date: (i) The aggregate principal amountof each Class of Bonds outstanding, (ii) the respective amounts creditedto each of the Funds, (iii) the amount of any draw on any Fund, (iv) therespective amounts of the Expense Fund Requirement and the Liquidity FundRequirement, (v) two calculations of Aggregate Collateral Value, one calculationincluding Delinquent Loans and one calculation excluding Delinquent Loans,(vi) the respective ratios which the two Aggregate Collateral Value calculationsdescribed in clause (v) bear to the then aggregate outstanding principalamount of the Bonds (which ratios will provide Bondholders with informationas to the extent of then existing overcollateralization), (vii) a scheduleindicating the number and aggregate principal amount of Delinquent Loansand delinquency periods aggregated by years, and (viii) the amount of fundsreleased from the Revenue Account to make distributions to holders of Certificates.With respect to the calculations under clauses (v) and (vi) above, theBond Trustee will receive such information from the Servicer with respectto Delinquent Loans as will enable it to generate the information specifiedin such clauses. Such report will also state, based on the informationset forth therein, whether or not scheduled payments on the Loans (bothincluding and excluding Delinquent Loans), together with reinvestment incomethereon, will be sufficient to pay interest and principal on the Bondsin accordance with their terms. Copies of each such report will be providedto the Owner Trustee who will distribute them to Certificateholders. Inaddition, no less often than annually, an independent public accountantwill audit the financial statements of the Trust. Upon completion, copiesof the auditor's reports will be provided to the Bond Trustee and the OwnerTrustee and will be made available to the Bondholders and the Certificateholders.(6) At the time of the deposit of the Collateral with the Trust, the scheduledpayments to be received by the Bond Trustee on the Collateral will be morethan sufficient to make all payments of principal of and interest on theBonds. The Collateral will pay down as the Loans are repaid, but will notbe released from the lien of the Indenture prior to the payment of theBonds (except upon the acceleration of defaulted Loans and substitutionsof Non-Conforming Loans).B. Conditions Relating to the Certificates (1) The Certificates will be offered and sold to sophisticated institutionalinvestors pursuant to private placements exempt from the registration requirementsof the 1933 Act under section 4(2) thereof. Such institutional investorsmay include one or more banks, savings and loan associations, insurancecompanies, pension funds and other large institutional investors (<T3>i.e</T3>., having assets of not less than $100,000,000) that will havesuch knowledge and experience in financial and business matters so as tobe capable of evaluating the risks of the purchase of the Certificates(``Eligible Investors''). (Any Mutual Funds which may purchase Certificateswill continue to be required to satisfy themselves that purchase of suchCertificates complies with the provisions of section 12(d)(1) of the 1940Act.) (2) Sales of the Certificates will be to a limited number, not exceeding100, of sophisticated institutional investors. Each purchaser of Certificateswill be required to represent that it is acquiring its Certificates forinvestment for its own account and not as nominee for undisclosed investorsand to agree that it will not resell its Certificates except to other EligibleInvestors pursuant to private placements subject to the same representationand agreement and subject to the above limitation on the number of Certificateholders.(The Declaration of Trust will provide that the Owner Trustee may not registerany transfer of Certificates if, following such transfer, the number ofCertificateholders would exceed one hundred.) (3) Neither the Trust nor any Certificateholder will be affiliated withthe Bond Trustee. No holder of a controlling interest in the Trust (assuch term is defined in Rule 405 of the 1933 Act) nor the Trust, will beaffiliated with either (a) any custodian which may hold the Collateralon behalf of the Bond Trustee; or (b) any statistical Rating Agency ratingthe Bonds. (4) The Certificates will not be redeemable at the option of the holders.C. Other Conditions (1) All administrative fees and expenses in connection with the administrationof the Trust will be paid or provided for in a manner satisfactory to eachRating Agency rating the Bonds. The Trust will provide for the paymentof administrative fees and expenses incurred in connection with the issuanceof the Bonds and the administration of the Trust by the following methods:(a) The Expense Fund will be established with the Bond Trustee under theIndenture to provide for the payment of such fees and expenses. Such feeswill be either fixed amounts or will be determined as a percentage of theaggregate outstanding principal amount of the Bonds, or a combination ofboth, in any case to be determined prior to the establishment of the ExpenseFund. Thereafter, the Bond Trustee will look solely to the Expense Fundfor the payment of Administrative Expenses and, to the extent there arenot sufficient moneys in the Expense Fund, then to the Revenue Fund. Theprocedure used to calculate the anticipated level of fees and expenseswill provide for funds sufficient to pay such fees and expenses. To theextent any such fees are determined on the basis of a percentage of outstandingBonds, the Applicant has specifically considered the fairness of such percentageformula under the Indenture and that the ``standard industry practice''of determining fees in this manner is fair within the meaning of section26 of the 1940 Act. (b) The Bonds will be secured by the Collateral, the value of which isin excess of the amount necessary to make payments of principal and intereston the Bonds, and such excess or a portion thereof will be applied to thepayment of such fees and expenses, and may be used in combination withthe other method described above. The anticipated level of fees and expenseswill be more than adequately provided for by the above methods. (2) Applicant agrees that the Trust will comply with the provisions ofsection 26 of the 1940 Act as though it were a unit investment trust withinthe meaning of section 4(2) of the 1940 Act, provided that for purposesof sections 26(a)(4) (A) and (B) of the 1940 Act, the Bond Trustee andthe Owner Trustee shall perform the recordkeeping and notice responsibilitiesof the depositor or its agent as provided therein, and the requirementsof section 26(a)(2) (B) and (C) shall not prevent the Trust from payingcertain expenses described in the application. (3) The Owner Trustee will be required under the Declaration of Trust,and, to the extent stated in the application, the Bond Trustee will berequired under the Indenture, to monitor compliance by the Trust with therequirements of the 1940 Act and to fulfill the Trust's ongoing obligationsunder the 1940 Act including, without limitation, the filings of periodicreports with the Commission as and when required by the 1940 Act. (4) To alleviate any potential conflict of interest between the Bondholdersand the Certificateholders, the Applicant further agrees that the representationsin the application regarding the Certificates may be made express conditionsto the requested Order. Therefore, Applicant requests that the Commission enter an order pursuantto section 6(c) of the 1940 Act exempting the Trust from sections 10(h),14(a), 16(a), 17 (a) and (d), 18 (a), (c) and (i) and 32(a) of the 1940Act.<ITAG tagnum="21">For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, underdelegated authority.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jonathan G. Katz,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-16020 Filed 7-13-88; 10:42 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 8010-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>