<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88511-0023 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-11-88.f2.A1022</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">50 CFR Part 683</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 80483-8083]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Western Pacific Bottomfish Fisheries</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), NOAA, Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>NOAA issues a proposed rule to implement Amendment 2to the Fishery Management Plan for the Bottomfish and Seamount GroundfishFisheries of the Western Pacific Region (FMP), which creates a limitedaccess program for the bottomfish fishery in certain waters of the NorthwesternHawaiian Islands (NWHI). The program would establish a control zone calledthe Ho'omalu Zone, in which a person must have a limited access permitto fish, and a qualifying zone called the Mau Zone, in which a person couldearn points to qualify for future eligibility for a limited access permit.Persons who can demonstrate participation in, or substantial financialcommitment to participate in the NWHI fishery, on or before August 7, 1985,would be eligible for initial permits to participate in the Ho'omalu Zonefishery. A landings requirement would be established to maintain eligibilityfor annual renewal of permits. No new permits to enter the fishery wouldbe issued until stocks are sufficiently large to provide adequate catches.A point system would be established to control issuance of permits forfuture access to the fishery. The Western Pacific Fishery Management Council(Council), with the advice of an industry and government Advisory ReviewBoard, would make recommendations to the Regional Director, Southwest Region,NMFS, regarding future access to the fishery. The objectives of the limitedaccess program are to reduce the risk of overfishing, reduce the levelof over-capitalization in the fishery, increase stability in the fishery,and increase profitability or net return to the fishery. The Council willundertake a full evaluation of the effectiveness of the program in fiveyears. This rule would also make it a violation of Federal law to failto report fishery data in accordance with State reporting requirementsand would require vessel operators to notify the U.S. Coast Guard priorto anticipated arrival in port to unload bottomfish taken in the NWHI.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Written comments must be received or on before June 20,1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments should be sent to E.G. Fullerton, Director,Southwest Region, National Marine Fisheries Service, 300 South Ferry Street,Terminal Island, CA 90731. Copies of the limited access program, the environmentalassessment (EA), and the regulatory impact review (RIR) may be obtainedby contacting the Western Pacific Fishery Management Council, 1164 BishopStreet, Suite 1406, Honolulu, HA 96813, telephone 808-523-1368.Comments on the collection of information requirement should be sent tothe Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Managementand Budget, Attention: Desk Officer for NOAA, Washington, DC 20503.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Svein Fougner (Chief, FisheriesManagement and Analysis Branch). 213-514-6660.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The domestic fisheries for bottomfishin the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) adjacent to the State of Hawaiiare managed under the Fishery Management Plan for the Bottomfish and SeamountGroundfish Fisheries of the Western Pacific Region (FMP). The FMP was developedby the Council under the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act(Magnuson Act) and implemented August 27, 1986 (51 FR 27413, July 31, 1986).The Council explicitly considered, but did not adopt a limited access programin the FMP because further study was deemed necessary. In a separate noticeaction, the Council adopted a control data for access into the NWHI bottomfishfishery (51 FR 11462; April 3, 1986). This date (August 7, 1985) was setto provide a potential cutoff for eligibility based on past participationin the event the Council would choose prior participation as a criterionfor eligibility for permits under the program. The intended effect of thecutoff date announcement was to discourage new access to the fishery basedon speculation while further study and discussions were undertaken on whether,and if so how, access to the resource should be controlled. Such speculationfrequently occurs and could have negated the effects of any limited accessprogram. The notice also provided current and prospective fishermen a basisfor making informed investment decisions knowing that limited access wasa definite management possibility in the future.It should be noted that the FMP, as approved, provided the option of institutinga limited access program through the framework process rather than as anamendment. The Council chose to use the FMP amendment process because ofthe significance of the action. The amendment process provides greateropportunity for broad public review as well as government agency reviews.The record will be far more complete as a result and will thus provideguidance to other Councils that may consider limited access for their fisheries.The bottomfish fishery of the NWHI management area has grown greatly sincevessels first began exploiting the resource in the 1980s. The fleet grewfrom 8 vessels in 1980 to 29 vessels in 1986. Landings increased substantiallyfrom only 100,000 pounds in 1981 to about 784,000 pounds in 1986. However,catch rates have dropped sharply for the most abundant and highly pricedspices (opakapaka), and fishermen have been able to maintain total revenuesonly by harvesting larger amounts of less abundant (onaga) or less valuable(hapu'upu' u, ulua) species. Vessels also have had to make longer tripsin attempts to find areas with higher catch rates and larger fish. It isestimated that the average vessel in the fishery is losing $50,000 or moreper year before depreciation and taxes, despite increased fishing effortin relatively lightly fished areas where catch rates have been favorable.In summary, the fishery has been overcapitalized. Although some vesselshave recently left the fleet, there is far more capacity to harvest fishthan there are fish to be harvested. Further, the possibility exists thatnew vessels will enter the fishery despite the present over-fishing ofthe stocks and economic prospects. This situation was first brought tothe Council's attention in 1984 when several vessel owners proposed thatthe Council develop a limited access program. The Council concluded thatfurther information and analysis was necessary and proceeded to contractfor a study. In 1985, the Council established a ``control date'' of August7, 1985, which could serve as a cutoff for eligibility for access intothe fishery under a future limited access program using prior participationas a criterion for initial permits.This control date was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (51 FR 11462, April 3, 1986), and work proceededon an assessment of limited access alternatives. This proposed rule wouldimplement the program supported by that assessment.The goal of the limited access program is to achieve a longterm balancebetween harvesting capacity and harvestable stocks of bottomfish in theNWHI management subarea, so that those in the fishery will make a profitwhile the stocks remain healthy. This would be accomplished by initiallylimiting the number of persons and vessels eligible to obtain permits tofish for bottomfish in a newly designated Ho'omalu Zone in the NWHI managementsubarea. The program requires continuing participation in the fishery tomaintain eligibility for renewal of permits, preventing new access untilit is demonstrated that the bottomfish stocks can support additional effort,and establishing a system by which persons can earn points for possibleaccess to the fishery when new access is permitted. A section-by-sectionsummary of the program follows:(a) Vessel owners and captains who can demonstrate that, on or before August7, 1985, they participated in, or made commitments to invest (e.g., byobtaining a loan, making an offer to buy a vessel, or having a vessel underconstruction) for future participation in the fishery, would be eligibleto obtain permits initially. This assures that those who were in the fishery,either as owners of vessels or as captains of those vessels, will havea continuing opportunity to participate regardless of monetary or non-monetarymotivations but prevents new access until the health of the bottomfishstocks and the fishery can support additional boats. An owner with morethan one vessel in the fishery in the qualifying period would be eligiblefor one permit for each vessel that made at least one qualifying landingof bottomfish in 1986 and 1987. A person who owns two or more vessels whichmade landing on or before August 7, 1985, but either none or only one ofthose vessels made a qualifying landing in 1986 and 1987 would be eligiblefor only one permit. The permits will be area-specific; a person with alimited access permit for the Ho'omalu Zone may not fish for bottomfishin the Mau Zone; and a person with a permit for the Mau Zone may not fishfor bottomfish in the Ho'omalu Zone.(b) Permits would be awarded to vessel owners for specific vessels. Thisis to recognize that the owners are the persons who have the greatest stakein the fishery and who would be most directly affected by the program.The owners decide how to use their vessels and associated resources andshould have control over the permits for the vessels.(c) Eligible owners would have five years from the effective date of theprogram (January 1, 1989) in which to apply for their initial permit. Thisis intended to provide flexibility for a vessel owner to defer obtaininga permit until the owner concludes conditions are suitable to enter thefishery. This should prevent an initial rush to participate in the fishery.Such an increase in participation could have resulted in further reductionin stocks under the license renewal conditions (i.e., 3 trip minimum).(d) Documentation of participation would include official landing recordssubmitted to a State or Federal agency demonstrating that the vessel madeat least one landing (regardless of weight) of bottomfish from the NWHIon or before August 7, 1985. For the purposes of this section the NWHIis the area defined in andSection; 683.5(a)(2) and is that portion of theEEZ adjacent to Hawaii that is west of 161anddegrees;20andmin172; W. longitude.(e) A person who can document that he was captain of a vessel that madeone or more qualifying landings from the NWHI bottomfish fishery on orbefore August 7, 1985, and who becomes owner of a 50 percent or greatershare of a vessel within five years of the effective date of this programalso would be eligible for an initial permit within that time. This isintended to recognize that these captains should have the option of enteringthe fishery on the normal progression from captain to owner or part-ownerof a vessel. It ensures that no owners or non-owner captains of vesselsthat made qualifying landings on or before August 7, 1985, will be automaticallyexcluded from the fishery.(f) A vessel for which a permit has been obtained must make at least threequalifying landings from the Ho'omalu Zone in the calendar year in whichthe permit was issued to be eligible for permit renewal for the next year.A qualifying landing is a landing which contained at least 2,500 poundsof bottomfish from the Ho'omalu Zone or a landing totalling more than 2,500pounds of fish from the Ho'omalu Zone, of which at least half of the fishby weight was bottomfish. This is intended to provide a performance standardfor continuing eligibility. Only those who continue to fish up to a minimumlevel will remain in the fishery. This provision is expected to resultin a gradual reduction in the fleet. Some owners will conclude that otherfisheries offer better opportunities and will shift effort accordingly;others will be unable to meet the landing criterion and will be forcedto withdraw from the fishery. Remaining vessel owners will have a betterchance of covering costs with less risk of biological overfishing of thestocks. The choice of three landings as the minimum performance level wasbased on the conclusion that the fishery is intended to support those whoderive a sizable portion of their fishing income from the fishery. Requiringfewer than three landings would allow occasional participants to maintaineligibility, while more than three landings could pose a hardship for thosewhose vessels operate in two or more fisheries, including bottomfish inthe NWHI. The program includes a provision for a permit holder to applyfor a waiver from the three-landing requirement when circumstances beyondthe holder's control prevented the permit holder's vessel from making therequisite landings. General economic conditions or marketing difficultieswill not qualify as sufficient reason for a waiver.(g) An owner who obtains and then voluntarily surrenders a permit to theRegional Director in the first five years of the plan will have priorityfor a new permit when it is found the fishery can sustain new access. Thisis intended to encourage owners to withdraw from the fishery with minimaladverse impact in the long term. If successful, this step will providebetter income opportunities for remaining participants and less risk ofbiological overfishing. If two or more owners voluntarily surrender permitsand all apply to reenter at the same time, priority will be given to theperson who first surrendered his permit. A permit holder may use this optiononly once.(h) New permits may be issued in the future when the Regional Director,after consulting with the Council, finds that stocks are sufficient inthe Ho'omalu Zone to generate catches high enough so that total fleet revenueswith the added vessel(s) will equal or exceed total fleet costs (fixedplus variable). That is, the average vessel will have to exceed the break-evenlevel of production before additional vessels will be permitted. This isintended to allow the fishery to become economically viable for the averagevessel before new vessels will be allowed to compete for the resource.The Regional Director will place a notice in the Federal Register and useother means to notify prospective participants of the opportunity to applyfor a permit under this program.(i) Eligibility for new permits will be based on a point scale for prospectiveparticipants based on prior experience in fishing for bottomfish in theHawaiian Archipelago. A vessel owner or captain would receive two eligibilitypoints for each year for which he can document three or more qualifyinglandings of bottomfish caught in the NWHI. A qualifying landing for thepoint system is a landing which contained at least 2,500 pounds of bottomfishfrom the NHWI or which contained a total of at least 2,500 pounds of fishfrom the NWHI, at least half of which was bottomfish. One point would beawarded to an owner or captain for each year that the vessel landed atleast 6,000 pounds of bottomfish from the main Hawaiian Islands. Pointsmay only be earned for one area in any given year. The applicant who hasat least a 25 percent interest in a vessel and who has the highest numberof points would get the first new permit issued under the program, providedthat no person who voluntarily surrendered a permit wants to reenter. Thisis intended to give priority to those captains who have served longestin the fishery without owning a vessel and who become owners (25 percentor more) of vessels to be used in the fishery. Participation as a captainin the NWHI qualifies for more points than in the main Hawaiian Islandsbecause of the familiarity gained for that area. This is important in termsof safety and knowledge about the special protected resources of the NWHI.The partial ownership requirement is set to ensure that the participantwill have an ongoing stake in maintaining the viability of the fishery.If two or more persons are tied for the highest number of points and thenumber of permits is less than the number of applicants, the permit(s)will be awarded by the Regional Director by a lottery system.(j) Permits may not be sold or otherwise transferred. If a permitted vesselis sold, the seller will retain the permit. The prohibition on the saleof permits is intended to ensure that no persons will have a windfall financialbenefit by virtue of eligibility for initial permits under the programand to minimize the potential for one or a few interests to acquire a virtualmonopoly or oligopoly in the fishery. The Council considered using an individualfisherman's quota system but concluded that it would be impossible to agreeon cumulative bottomfish quotas or species quotas that could be allocatedin such shares. The Council also preferred not to allow the cost of permitsto become a significant barrier to future access to the fishery.(k) Notwithstanding the general prohibition on permit transfers, a permitholder may replace his permitted vessel with another vessel of up to 60feet in length without obtaining any approvals. This is intended to allowa vessel owner to increase the size of his vessel for safety purposes.This provision recognizes that adverse sea conditions often arise in thecontrol zone.(l) A permit holder also may apply to the Regional Director for permissionto replace his permitted vessel with another vessel of equal catching power.The Regional Director will consult with the Council before acting on sucha request. This would allow use of a vessel with greater safety or comfortbut not greater catching power.(m) A permit holder may apply to the Regional Director for permission toreplace his vessel with one of greater fishing power in order to maintainfishing power comparability with other permitted vessels in the fishery.The Regional Director will consult with the Council and will review theapplication for consistency with the objectives of the limited access programbefore taking action on such applications.(n) Permits may be held and renewed by partnerships or corporations. If50 percent or more of their interest in the permitted vessel passes topersons other than those listed in the original application, however, thepermit will lapse and be surrendered to the Regional Director. This isintended to ensure that a partnership or corporation ownership will notbe used to circumvent the prohibition on sale or transfer of a permit.(o) Designated captains and relief captains must attend a workshop on safetyand endangered species concerns specific to the NWHI. The waters in theNWHI present unusual conditions which give rise to special safety concerns.In addition, there are several endangered and threatened species in thearea, and special management regulations exist to protect them. The workshopis intended to minimize the risk of problems associated with these factors.(p) The Council will establish an Advisory Review Board to assist the Councilin developing recommendations for the Regional Director concerning whetherand when new access to the Ho'omalu Zone is appropriate, catching powerequivalency for replacement vessels, and other matters in implementingthis program. The Board will consist of nine persons, including two limitedaccess permit holders, two persons fishing for bottomfish in the Mau Zoneor around the main Hawaiian Islands, one person engaged in marketing orprocessing of NWHI bottomfish, two technical State fishery staff, and twoNMFS staff. The technical staff will include at least one biologist andone economist. The term of nongovernment members is limited to five years,and initial terms may be staggered. The intent of the panel is to provideboth technical information and practical fishery information in carryingout the program. The composition of the panel is intended to ensure fullrepresentation of fishing interests and technical experts on the fishery.(q) The program provides an appeal mechanism by which persons can requesthigher level review of a decision by the Regional Director. The AssistantAdministrator for Fisheries would decide such appeals.(r) The Council is aware of the potential that the limited access programwill not have the intended effects. This is a new approach, and the responsesof fishermen cannot be predicted with certainty. It is quite possible thatprogram changes will be needed as experience is gained in the program.The effectiveness of the program will be assessed in the annual reviewof the fishery called for under the FMP. In addition, the Council willcomplete a special evaluation of the program after the initial five-yeargrace period during which historic participation is an automatic eligibilitycriterion. At that time, the Council and the NMFS will know how many personsare eligible for permits and can better predict future participation andproblems.(s) The proposed rule contains two provisions intended to facilitate monitoringof the fishery for future evaluation of its effectiveness and administrationof the program. The first provision requires that fishermen with Federalpermits to fish for bottomfish comply with State fishery reporting requirements.This will not add to the reporting burden but should strengthen the effectivenessof State reporting requirements. State-collected landings data will beimportant to determine changes in the fishery under this program and toassess whether the program is having the intended effects. The second provisionrequires vessel operators to notify the U.S. Coast Guard in advance ofthe anticipated arrival in port to unload bottomfish taken in the NWHI.This will support determination of participation by vessels in the fisheryand occasional inspection of the catch to collect biological data withthe cooperation of the vessel operators.Nothing in the limited access program is intended to prevent or limit theauthority of the Council to propose and the Secretary of Commerce (Secretary)to institute additional conservation and management measures necessaryto protect the productivity of the bottomfish stocks of the NWHI. It isexpected, however, that such measures will be far more likely to succeedafter the limited access program is in effect. In addition, it is expectedthat, with limited access in effect, the participants in the fishery willultimately have greater flexibility in their selection of fishing strategiesto maximize economic returns or achieve non-monetary objectives with areduced regulatory burden.In developing this program, the Council considered the question of whetherto make special provision for native Hawaiian fishing rights. No recommendationsor proposals are made at this time. The Council is continuing to researchthis issue with the Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation and the Office ofHawaiian Affairs.The proposed program will add slightly to the information collection burdenunder the FMP. Fishermen in the NWHI already are required to obtain permitsunder the current management regulations. Those who may be eligible forpermits under the limited access program will have to provide additionalinformation to document their prior participation or their financial commitmentfor anticipated participation in the fishery. This does not entail newcatch or effort reporting requirements. However, the applicant will haveto provide either copies of historic catch records filed with a State orFederal agency or a statement from a State or Federal agency confirmingthat the applicant was an owner or captain of a vessel that made qualifyinglandings from the fishery during the period in question.The proposed rule does not require that catch, effort, or fishery operationsdata be submitted to the Secretary under this program. The FMP calls foran annual report to be prepared for Council consideration. The State andTerritory governments and the NMFS provide information for this report,which is used to consider the need for changes in management of the fishery.The annual report includes an assessment of economic conditions as wellas the status of the stocks. It is anticipated that existing State andFederal reporting requirements will be sufficient to make the determinationsrequired under the limited access program. The provision making it a violationof Federal law to fail to report in conformance with State laws and regulationsgoverning reporting landings should reinforce the effectiveness of statereporting requirements and enhance their enforcement.<ITAG tagnum="84">Classification</ITAG>Section 304(a)(1)(D)(ii) of the Magnuson Act requires the Secretary topublish regulations proposed by a Council within 15 days of receipt ofany amendment to an FMP. At this time, he has not determined whether theFMP amendment that these rules would implement is consistent with the nationalstandards, other provisions of the Magnuson Act, and other applicable law.The Secretary, in making that determination, will take into account thedata, views, and comments received during the comment period.The Southwest Region prepared an environmental assessment for this amendmentand the Assistant Administrator for Fisheries concluded that there willbe no significant impact on the environment as a result of this rule. Acopy of the environmental assessment can be obtained from the Region orCouncil (see <T2>ADDRESSES</T2>).The Council incorporated a regulatory impact review in the amendment, whichconcludes that this rule will have a long-term positive impact on the fisheryand on related processing and marketing sectors. Preventing new accessat this time will prevent additional effort, which would drive catch ratesdown to even lower levels than at present. The performance standard isexpected to be sufficient to ensure that those dependent on the fisherywill be able to maintain their participation without putting excessivepressure on the stocks, while those not dependent on the fishery will beless likely to maintain eligibility for future participation. The measureallowing those initially eligible to obtain permits to defer applying forpermits for up to five years is expected to allow such persons flexibilityto participate in other fisheries without losing eligibility; this wouldfurther reduce pressure on the stocks, while giving persons in the fisherya better chance to cover costs. The measure allowing voluntary surrenderof a permit with priority for later access to the fishery is expected toencouarge some producers to exit from the fishery. Again, this will reducepressure on the stocks and remaining participants should achieve betterreturns. The fishery accounted for total catch of 784,000 pounds valuedat $1.9 million in 1986. Without the proposed program, the fishery is expectedto decline to a level substantially below the maximum sustainable yield(MSY) level (600,000 pounds for the portion of the NWHI within the rangefor deliveries for the fresh fish market) and ex-vessel revenue would likelybe less than $1 million per year. With the limited access program, thefishery is expected to achieve production of 600,000 pounds per year (theMSY) valued at $1.4 million. In addition, the average vessel is expectedto be able to cover all costs of operation, although some vessels willmake more and some less. Furthermore, deliveries of fish to markets areexpected to be more stable and level throughout the year, which will benefitboth marketers and consumers. Finally, although there may be a one-timeincrease in administrative costs to implement the program initially, thesecosts will be reduced over time as the size of the harvest sector is reducedand fishery patterns become more stable.The Under Secretary, NOAA, determined that this proposed rule is not a``major rule'' requiring a regulatory impact analysis under Executive Order12291. The proposed action will not have a cumulative effect on the economyof $100 million or more, nor will it result in a major increase in coststo consumers, industries, government agencies, or geographical regions.No significant adverse impacts are anticipated on competition, employment,investments, productivity, innovation, or competitiveness of U.S.-basedenterprises.This proposed rule is exempt from the review procedures of section 8(a)(2)of Executive Order 12291. Deadlines imposed under the Magnuson Act, asamended by Pub. L. 99-659, require the Secretary to publish this rule 15days after its receipt. The proposed rule is being reported to the Director,Office of Management and Budget (OMB), with an explanation of why it isnot possible to follow procedures of the order.The General Counsel of the Department of Commerce certified to the ChiefCounsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration that this proposedrule, if adopted, will not have a significant economic impact on a substantialnumber of small businesses. No person who participated in the fishery onor before the control date will be forced to exit the fishery. Only tenentered the fishery in 1986 and a few more in 1987, but all had had noticethat they were entering subsequent to the cut-off date and could be excludedfrom the fishery if the limited access program were adopted. The programwill provide an opportunity for fishermen to make the own decisions concerningwhether to remain in the fishery. The reporting burden will be somewhatincreased to obtain information needed to decide whether applicants areeligible for permits, but the added burden is slight. Therefore, a regulatoryflexibility analysis was not prepared. This proposed rule contains collection of information requirements subjectto the Paperwork Reduction Act. Permit application procedures will notchange appreciably from those now in place, but applicants will have toobtain and submit certification of records of past participation or documentationof commitments intended to lead to future participation in the fisheryin past years. In addition, it is proposed that permit holders be requiredto report in advance their anticipated arrival in a port to unload fishtaken in the Ho'omalu zone of the NWHI. The new information collectionrequest has been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for clearance.Current reporting requirements are authorized by OMB number 0648-0097.Further, it is proposed that it be a violation of Federal law to fail toreport fishery data in accordance with State reporting requirements. Thisis not a new reporting burden on fishermen; it merely facilitates enforcementof existing State reporting requirements.The Council has initially determined that the measures established in thisamendment are consistent to the maximum extent practicable with the approvedCoastal Zone Management Program in Hawaii. A letter requesting the Stateof Hawaii's concurrence was forwarded by the Council. This proposed rule does not contain policies with federalism implicationssufficient to warrant preparation of a federalism assessment under ExectutiveOrder 12612. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 683</ITAG>Fisheries, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: April 29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Rolland A. Schmitten,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, National Marine FisheriesService.</ITAG>For the reasons stated in the preamble, 50 CFR Part 683 is proposed tobe amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 683_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 50 CFR Part 683 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 16 U.S.C. 1801 <T3>et seq.</T3></ITAG>2. In andSection;683.2, a new definition for <T3>Qualifying landing </T3>is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;683.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><T3>Qualifying landing </T3>means a landing that meets a standard requiredfor permit eligibility under andSection;683.25, as follows: (a) Initial permit eligibility. (1) A qualifying landing for initial permit eligibility under andSection;683.25(b)(1)and (3) is a landing that contained bottomfish from the NWHI, regardlessof amount, and which was made on or before August 7, 1985; (2) A qualifying landing for 1986 and 1987 under andSection;683.25(b)(2)is a landing which contained at least 2,500 pounds of bottomfish from theNWHI or a landing of at least 2,500 pounds of fish from the NWHI, of whichat least 50 percent by weight was bottomfish; (b) Permit renewal_a qualifying landing for permit renewal under andSection;683.25(e)is a landing which contained 2,500 pounds of bottomfish from the NWHI ora landing or at least 2,500 pounds of fish from the NWHI, of which at least50 percent by weight was bottomfish. (c) New access eligibility points_a qualifying landing for eligibilitypoints under andSection;683.25(d) is any landing of bottomfish from the NWHI,regardless of weight, if made on or before August 7, 1985, a landing ofat least 2,500 pounds of bottomfish from the NWHI, or a landing of at least2,500 pounds of fish from the NWHI, of which at least 50 percent by weightwas bottomfish. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>3. In andSection;683.5, paragraph (a)(2) is amended by adding (a)(2)(i) and(ii) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;683.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Management subareas. </ITAG>(a) * * * (2) * * * (i) Ho'omalu Zone means that portion of the EEZ around the NWHI west of165anddegrees; W longitude. (ii) Mau Zone means that portion of the EEZ around the NWHI between 161anddegrees;20andmin16; and 165anddegrees; W longitude. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>4. andSection;683.6, paragraph (k) is redesignated (n) and new paragraphs(k), (1), and (m) are added, to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;683.6 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General prohibitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(k) Fish for bottomfish in the Ho'omalu Zone without a limited access permitissued under andSection; 683.25;(1) Serve as captain or relief captain on a vessel fishing for bottomfishin the Ho'omalu Zone without first participating in a protected speciesseminar conducted by the National Marine Fisheries Service and U.S. Fishand Wildlife Service;(m) Falsify or fail to make and/or file any and all reports of bottomfishlandings, containing all data and in the exact manner, required by theapplicable State law as specified in andSection; 683.25, provided that theperson is required to do so by the applicable State law;<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>5. A new andSection; 683.10 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 683.10 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Appeals of administrative action.</ITAG>(a) Except as provided in Subpart D of 15 CFR Part 904, any applicant fora permit or permit holder may appeal the granting, denial, conditioning,or suspension of their permit or a permit affecting their interests tothe Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, NOAA. In order to be consideredby the Assistant Administrator, such appeal must be in writing, must statethe action(s) appealed and the reasons for the appeal, and must be submittedwithin 30 days of the action(s) by the Regional Director. The appellantmay request an informal hearing on the appeal.(b) Upon receipt of an appeal authorized by this section, the AssistantAdministrator will notify the permit applicant, or permit holder, as appropriate,and will request such additional information and in such form as will allowaction upon the appeal. Upon receipt of sufficient information, the AssistantAdministrator will decide the appeal in accordance with the criteria setforth in 50 CFR Part 683 and the amendment to the bottomfish FMP, as appropriate,based upon information relative to the application on file at the NMFSand the Western Pacific Fishery Management Council and any additional information,the summary record kept of any hearing and the hearing officer's recommendeddecision, if any, as provided in section 3 of this section, and such otherconsiderations as deemed appropriate. The Assistant Administrator willnotify all interested persons of the decision, and the reasons therefor,in writing, normally within 30 days of the receipt of sufficient information,unless additional time is needed for a hearing.(c) If a hearing is requested or if the Assistant Administrator determinesthat one is appropriate, the Assistant Administrator may grant an informalhearing before a hearing officer designated for that purpose after firstgiving notice of the time, place, and subject matter of the hearing inthe <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Such a hearing will normally be held no laterthan 30 days following publication of the notice in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>unless the hearing officer extends the time forreasons deemed equitable. The appellant, the applicant (if different),and, at the discretion of the hearing officer, other interested persons,may appear personally or be represented by counsel at the hearing and submitinformation and present arguments as determined appropriate by the hearingofficer. Within 30 days of the last day of the hearing, the hearing officerwill recommend in writing a decision to the Assistant Administrator.(d) The Assistant Administrator may adopt the hearing officer's recommendeddecision, in whole or in part, or may reject or modify it. In any event,the Assistant Administrator will notify interested persons of the decision,and the reason(s) therefor, in writing within 30 days of receipt of thehearing officer's recommended decision. The Assistant Administrator's actionwill constitute final action for the agency for the purposes of the AdministrativeProcedure Act.(e) Any time limit prescribed in this section may be extended for a periodnot to exceed 30 days by the Assistant Administrator for good cause, eitherupon his or her own motion or upon written request from the appellant orapplicant stating the reason(s) therefor.6. A new andSection; 683.11 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 683.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reports.</ITAG>Any person who has a Federal permit to fish for bottomfish or seamountgroundfish in the NWHI, and who is required to do so by the applicableState law, must make and/or file any and all reports of bottomfish landings,containing all data and in the exact manner required by the applicableState law.7. In andSection; 683.21, paragraphs (a) and (f) are revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 683.21</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Permit requirement for the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Permit areas. </T3>(1) The owner of any vessel being used to fish forbottomfish in the Mau Zone must have a permit issued under this sectionfor that vessel.(2) The owner of any vessel fishing for bottomfish in the Ho'omalu Zonemust have a permit issued under andSection; 683.25 for that vessel.(3) The owner of any vessel fishing for seamount groundfish in a given,fishery management area must have a permit issued under this section forthat vessel.(4) No vessel may be covered by a permit for both the Ho'omalu Zone andthe Mau Zone at the same time.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) <T3>Expiration. </T3>Permits issued under this section expire on December31 of the year covered by the permit.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>8. Section 683.25 is redesignated andSection; 683.26, and a new andSection;683.25 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 683.25</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Limited access management program.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Limited access permits. </T3>General requirements.(1) The owner of any vessel engaged in fishing for bottomfish in the Ho'omaluZone must have a permit issued under this section.(2) Permits issued under this section expire on Decmeber 31 of the yearcovered by the permit.(3) Each application for a permit must be submitted to the Regional Directorby the vessel owner at least 30 days before the date on which the applicantwants the permit to be effective.(4) Each application must be submitted on the form used to apply for apermit under andSection; 683.21(b) and a supplementary information sheetto be provided by the Regional Director. Each application must be signedby the vessel owner and must contain, in addition to the information listedin andSection; 683.21(b)(2), the following information:(i) The qualification criterion that the applicant believes he or she meetsfor issuance of a limited access permit; and(ii) Copies of landings receipts or other documentation with a certificationfrom a State or Federal agency that this information is accurate, to demonstrateparticipation in the NWHI bottomfish fishery; or(iii) Notarized copies of loan documents or other documents that woulddemonstrate financial commitments on or before August 7, 1985, to enterthe NWHI bottomfish fisher; or (iv) Written evidence indicating that an offer was made to purchase a vesselor that a vessel was under construction, on or before August 7, 1985, andthat the vessel was to be used in the NWHI bottomfish fishery.(v) If the application is filed by a partnership or corporation, the applicationmust identify the names of the owners and their respective percentage ofownership of the partnership or corporation.(5) Protected species seminar. Each designated captain and relief captainmust participate in a seminar conducted by NMFS and U.S. Fish and WildlifeService to ensure familiarity with protected species laws and regulationsapplicable to the NWHI and the species those laws and regulations are designedto protect.(6) Sale or transfer of permits to new owners.(i) A vessel permit may not be sold or otherwise transferred to a new owner.(ii) A permit or permits may be held by a partnership or corporation. If50 percent or more of the ownership of the vessel passes to persons otherthan those listed in the original application, the permit will lapse andmust be surrendered to the Regional Director.(7) Transfer of permits to new vessels.(ii) An owner of a permitted vessel may, without limitation, transfer hispermit to another vessel owned by him, provided that the replacement vesseldoes not exceed 60 feet in length and that the replacement vessel is putinto service within 12 months after the owner declares to the RegionalDirector the intent to make the transfer of the permit.(ii) An owner of a permitted vessel may apply to the Regional Directorfor approval to use the permit for a replacement vessel greater than 60feet in length. The Regional Director may allow this change upon determining,after consulation with the Council and considering the objectives of thelimited access program, that the replacement vessel has equal catchingpower as the original vessel, or that the replacement vessel has catchingpower that is comparable to the rest of the vessels holding permits forthe fishery, and that the change is not inconsistent with the objectivesof the program.(iii) The Regional Director will consider vessel length, range, hold capacity,gear limitations, and other appropriate factors in making determinationsof catching power equivalency and comparability of the catching power ofvessels in the fishery.(b) <T3>Supplementary requirements for initial permits. </T3>An applicationfor an initial permit under this paragraph must be filed within five yearsof the effective date of this program. A permit for a vessel to be usedfor fishing for bottomfish in the Ho'omalu Zone may be issued to:(1) Any owner who can document that a vessel owned by him made one or morequalifying landings of bottomfish from the NWHI on or before August 7,1985.(2) Any owner of two or more vessels that made at least one qualifyinglanding under (b)(1) of this section, or such owners may obtain a permitfor each such vessel that made at least one qualifying landing of bottomfishunder (b)(1) of this section and also in both 1986 and 1987.(3) Any person who can document that on or before August 7, 1985, he orshe had incurred substantial expenditures for or had received written approvalof a loan to purchase or construct a vessel to be used in the NWHI bottomfishfishery.(4) Any person who can document that on or before August 7, 1985, he orshe made an offer to purchase a vessel for the NWHI bottomfish fisheryor had such a vessel under construction.(5) Any person who can document that he or she was captain of a vesselthat made at least one qualifying landing of bottomfish from the NWHI onor before August 7, 1985, and who becomes an owner of 50 percent or moreinterest in a vessel within five years of the effective date of this program.(c) <T3>Supplementary requirements for permit renewal. </T3>(1) A permit willbe eligible for renewal if the vessel covered by the permit makes threeor more qualifying landings during the permit year.(2) The owner of a permitted vessel that did not make three or more qualifyinglandings of bottomfish in a year may apply to the Regional Director forwaiver of the landing requirement. If the Regional Director finds thatfailure to make three landings was due to circumstances beyond the owner'scontrol, he may renew the permit. A waiver may not be granted if the failureto make three landings was due to general economic conditions or marketconditions such that the vessel operations would not be profitable.(d) <T3>Supplementary requirements for new access permits. </T3>The RegionalDirector may issue new vessel permits under this part when the RegionalDirector has determined, in consultation with the Council, that bottomfishstocks in the Ho'omalu Zone are able to support additional fishing effort.This will be established by determining that the total estimated annualrevenue to the fleet exceeds the total estimated annual fixed and variablecosts to the fleet in the Ho'omalu Zone by an amount at least equal tothe average cost of a vessel year. This determination will be made andpublished annually in association with the annual report required underandSection; 683.24 of this part.(e) <T3>Eligibility. </T3>When the Regional Director has determined under paragraph(d) of this section that new permits may be issued, they will be issuedto applicants based upon eligibility determined as follows:(1) <T3>Point system. </T3>(i) Two points will be assigned each year in whichthe applicant was owner or captain of a vessel, which made three or morequalifying landings of bottomfish from the NWHI.(ii) One point will be assigned for each year in which the applicant wasowner or captain of a vessel that landed at least 6,000 pounds of bottomfishfrom the main Hawaiian Islands.(iii) Points will be assigned only under (e)(1)(i) or under (e)(1)(ii)of this section for any one year.(iv) Points will be assigned for every year for which the requisite landingscan be documented.(2) An applicant must own at least a 25 percent share in the vessel thatthe permit would cover, and only one permit will be assigned to any vessel.(3) New permits will be awarded to applicants in descending order startingwith the applicant with the largest number of points. If two or more personshave an equal number of points, and there are insufficient new permitsfor all such applicants, the new permits will be awarded by the RegionalDirector through a lottery.(4) Notwithstanding (e)(3) of this section, a person who originally qualifiesfor and obtains a permit under andSection; 683.25(a) and who voluntarilysurrenders that permit to the Regional Director within the first five yearsof this program will have priority over applicants under the point scalesystem for a new permit under this section. If two or more persons qualifyunder this provision, the person surrendering his permit at the earliestdate will have first priority. If two or more such persons are equallyqualified under the date of surrender criterion, the permit will be awardedby the Regional Director by a lottery. A permit holder may qualify forthis provision only one time.(5) The Regional Director will place a notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and will use other means to notify prospectiveapplicants of the opportunity to file applications for new permits underthis program.9. A new andSection; 683.27 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 683.27</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Notification of landings.</ITAG>The operator of a fishing vessel that has taken bottomfish in the Ho'omaluZone must contact the U.S. Coast Guard, by radio or otherwise, at the 14thDistrict, Honolulu, Hawaii (Telex: 392401); Pacific Area, San Francisco,California (Telex: 330427); or 17th District, Juneau, Alaska (Telex: 45305),at least 24 hours before landing, and report the port and the approximatedate and time at which the bottomfish will be landed.10. A new andSection; 683.28 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 683.28</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Native Hawaiian fishing rights [Reserved]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-9882 Filed 5-6-88; 4:16 pm]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-22-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>