<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88926-0102 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-26-88.f2.A1101</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Privacy Act of 1974; Systems of Records Publication</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Credit Union Administration (NCUA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of publication of systems of records.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552a(3)(4), NCUA publishesits Systems of Records as currently maintained by the Agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street,NW., Washington, DC 20456.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>September 26, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Roy De Loach, Staff Attorney,Office of General Counsel, at the above address, or telephone (202) 357-1030.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4), theNational Credit Union Administration (NCUA), hereby publishes its Systemsof Records as currently maintained by the Agency. These systems were lastpublished in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on December 30, 1981 (46 FR 63141).<ITAG tagnum="84">REGULATORY PROCEDURES</ITAG>Regulatory Flexibility ActNCUA's Systems of Records notice does not have any impact on small creditunions.Paperwork Reduction ActNCUA's Systems of Records does not contain any collection of informationrequirements.Executive Order 12612NCUA's Systems of Records notice does not affect state regulation of creditunions.<ITAG tagnum="21">By the National Credit Union Administration Board on September 7,1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Section 3, 88 Stat. 1897 (5 U.S.C. 552))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Becky Baker,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">TABLE OF CONTENTS</ITAG>List of Systems<ITAG tagnum="21">1. Employee Security Investigations Containing Adverse Information,NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">2. Grievance Records, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">3. Payroll Records System, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">4. Verified Employee Mailing List, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">5. Travel Advance and Voucher Information System, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">6. New Examiner Training Files, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">7. Region I Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">8. Region II Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">9. Region III Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">10. Region IV Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">11. Region V Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">12. Region VI Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">13. Emergency Information (Employee) File, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">14. Employee Injury File, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">15. Investigative Reports Involving Any Crime or Suspected Crime Againsta Credit Union, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">16. Freedom of Information Act Bills Delinquent 30 Days or More, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">17. Acquired Assets and Share Payout Records System, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">18. Member Accounts, Credit Unions Closed for Involuntary Liquidation,NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">19. Trusteed Account Records System, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">20. Investigation Files, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">21. Consumer Complaints Against Federal Credit Unions, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">22. Litigation Case Files, NCUA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note_</T4> See Appendices for general ``routine uses'' applicable toeach system of records and for a listing of the locations of NCUA RegionalOffices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-1</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Employee Security Investigations Containing Adverse Information, NCUA.SYSTEM LOCATION:Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street,NW., Washington, DC 20456.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:NCUA employees on whom a routine Office of Personnel Management (OPM) securityinvestigation has been conducted, the results of which contain adverseinformation.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Arrest records and/or information on moral character, integrity, or loyaltyto the United States.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:Records maintained pursuant to OPM requirements. A separate notice is publishedbecause these records are maintained separately to provide extraordinarysafeguards against unwarranted access and disclosures.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:(1) Records are reviewed by the NCUA Security Officer. If the records aredetermined to be of a substantive nature, they are referred to RegionalDirector for whatever action, if any, is deemed necessary. (2) Standardroutine uses as set forth in Appendix A.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Records are maintained on paper hard copy.RETRIEVABILITY:Records are indexed by name.SAFEGUARDS:Records are maintained in a locked file cabinet accessible only to theSecurity Officer and his designated assistant. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:If the investigation is favorable to the employee, the record is destroyed.If the investigation uncovers adverse information and the employee is terminated,the record is held for two years; if the employee is retained, the recordis destroyed. If the investigation uncovers severe adverse informationthe record is retained for two years whether the employee is retained orterminated.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Security Officer, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street,NW., Washington, DC 20456.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Security Investigations Index, FBIHeadquarters investigative files, fingerprint index of arrest records,Defense Central Index of Investigations, employers within the last fiveyears, listed references, and personal associates, school registrars andresponsive law enforcement agencies.systems exempted from certain provisions of the act:In addition to any exemption to which this system is subject by Noticespublished by or regulations promulgated by the OPM, the system is subjectto a specific exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5) to the extent thatdisclosures would reveal a source who furnished information under an expresspromise of confidentiality, or prior to September 27, 1975, under an expressor implied promise of confidentiality. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-2</ITAG>System name:Grievance Records, NCUA.system location:Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street NW.,Washington, DC 20456.categories of individuals covered by the system:Current or former Federal employees who have submitted grievances withNCUA in accordance with Part 771 of the OPM's regulations. These case filescontain all documents related to the grievance, including statements ofwitnesses, reports of interviews and hearings, examiners' findings andrecommendations, a copy of the original and final decision with relatedcorrespondence and exhibits. authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 1302, 3301, and 3302, E.O. 10577, 3 CFR 1954-1958 Comp., p. 218;E.O. 10987; 3 CFR 1959-1963 Comp., p. 519.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) Information is used by the appropriate Federal, State, or local agencyresponsible for investigating, prosecuting, enforcing, or implementinga statute, rule, regulation, or order where the disclosing agency becomesaware of an indication of a violation or potential violation of civil orcriminal law or regulations. (2) Information is used by any source from which additional informationis requested in the course of processing a grievance to the extent necessaryto identify the individual, inform the source of the purpose(s) of therequest, and identify the type of information requested. (3) Information is used by a Federal agency in response to its requestin connection with the hiring or retention of an employee, the issuanceof a security clearance, the conducting of a security or suitability investigationof an individual, the classifying of jobs, the letting of a contract, orthe issuance of a license, grant, or other benefit by the requesting agency,to the extent that the information is relevant and necessary to the requestingagency's decision on the matter. (4) Information is used by the congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from that congressional officemade at the request of that individual. (5) Information is used by another Federal agency or by a court when theGovernment is party to a judicial proceeding before the court. (6) Information is used by the National Archives and Records Service (GeneralServices Administration) in records management inspections conducted underauthority of 44 U.S.C. 2904 and 2906.(7) Information is used by NCUA in the production of summary descriptivestatistics and analytical studies in support of the function for whichthe records are collected and maintained, or for related work force studies.While published statistics and studies do not contain individual identifiers,in some instances, the selection of elements of data included in the studymay be structured in such a way as to make the data individually identifiableby inference. (8) Information is used by officials of the Office of Personnel Management,the Merit Systems Protection Board, including the Office of the SpecialCounsel, the Federal Labor Relations Authority and its General Counsel,or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission when requested in performanceof their authorized duties. (9) Information (that is relevant to the subject matter involved in a pendingjudicial or administrative proceeding) is used to respond to a requestfor discovery or for appearance of a witness. (10) Information is used by officials of labor organizations reorganizedunder the Civil Service Reform Act when relevant and necessary to theirduties of exclusive representation concerning personnel policies, practices,and matters affecting work conditions. (11) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Records are maintained in file folders. retrievability:Records are retrievable by the names of the individuals on whom they aremaintained. safeguards:Records are maintained in lockable metal filing cabinets to which onlyauthorized personnel have access. retention and disposal:Records are disposed of three (3) years after closing of the case. Disposalis by shredding or burning. system manager(s) and address:Director, Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456. notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised. record access procedure:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. contesting record procedures:Request to amend or correct a record should be directed to the system managerlisted above. record source categories:Individual on whom the record is maintained; testimony of witness; agencyofficials; related correspondence from organization or persons. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-3 </ITAG>System name:Payroll Records System, NCUA. system location:(1) Controller's Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street,NW., Washington, DC 20456. (2) General Services Administration, Region VI, Kansas City, Missouri.categories of individuals covered by the system:Employees of NCUA. categories of records in the system:Salary and related payroll data, including time and attendance information.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 703; 44 U.S.C. 3301. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) Information is used to ensure proper compensation to all NCUA employeesand to formulate financial reports and plans used within the agency oris sent to the General Services Administration (GAS). (2) Also, informationis used to document time worked and provide a record of attendance to supportpayment of salaries and use of annual, sick, and nonpaid leave. (3) Usersof the time and attendance information include the employee's supervisor,the office's timekeeper, the payroll officer, and the GSA National PayrollCenter in Kansas City, Missouri. (4) Further information in this systemis used to make reportings to state and local taxing authorities. (5) Standardroutine uses as set forth in Appendix A. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Records are retrieved by name or social security number. safeguards:  Records are maintained in secured offices, accessible by written authorizationonly. retention and disposal: Records are retained and disposed in accordance with GSA policy. system manager(s) and address: (1) Primary: Payroll Officer, Controller's Office, National Credit UnionAdministration, 1776 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456; (2) Secondary:Office Timekeepers, National Credit Union Administration, Central Office(1776 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456) and Regional Offices (see AppendixB for Regional Offices' addresses). notification procedure: An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised. record access procedure: Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above. RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES: Information is primarily obtained from the individual whom the record concerns,the Office of Personnel Management, and the GSA. Also, time and attendanceinformation is prepared and submitted by the timekeeper in a given employee'soffice. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-4 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Verified Employee Mailing List. SYSTEM LOCATION: Office of Information Systems, National Credit Union Administration, 1776G Street NW., Washington, DC 20456.  CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: NCUA employees. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: This system contains the following information for each employee: Name,address, telephone number, birthdate, ethnic and sex codes, GS grade, employeetype, and employee identification number. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 5 U.S.C. 301; 44 U.S.C. 3301. ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES: (1) Information is used to produce mailing labels and make reporting tothe EEO Director and other NCUA employees with an official need for a listingof NCUA employees. (2) Also, the information is used to generate an NCUAtelephone directory for distribution to all NCUA employees. (3) Standardroutine uses as set forth in Appendix A. POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: STORAGE: Records are maintained on computer readable media. RETRIVEABILITY: Records are retrievcable by employee name or identification number. SAFEGUARDS: Accessibility is limited to specific written requests. The file itselfis password protected. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL: Information is maintained on active, retired, and deceased employees foran indefinite period of time. SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS: Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street NW.,Washington, DC 20456. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE: An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised. RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURE: Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above. RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES: NCUA Form 1042 is completed for each new employee by personnel staff orthe regional office manager. Form 1051 is completed by same to report changes.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-5 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Travel Advance and Voucher Information System, NCUA. SYSTEM LOCATION: Controller's Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G StreetNW., Washington, DC 20456. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: All NCUA empolyees who have traveled in the course of performing theirduty and who have been reimbursed for the expense of such travel. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: This system contains information from the following forms: Travel Vouchers(NCUA 1012), reimnbursement for COS Expenses (NCUA 1302) Authorizationof Moving and Related Travel Expenses for COS (NCUA 11301), Travel Orders(NCUA 1500), Suspension Statements (NCUA 1399), Application for Advanceof Funds (NCUA 1399), and Travel Voucher Cover Sheet (NCUA 1364).   AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM:5 U.S.C. 5701-5752; Executive Order 11609 (July 22, 1971); Executive Order11012 (March 27, 1962); 5 U.S.C. 4101-4118; Federal Travel Regulations,FPMR 101-7, Chapter 2, Section 6.3.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USER AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:(1) Records are used to provide documentary support for reimbursementsto employees for on-the-job travel expenses.(2) Users of the information include first and second line supervisors,NCUA accounting staff, and budgeting staff.(3) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Records are stored in paper hard copy form and in an on-line ADP system.RETRIEVABILITY:Records are retrievable by social security number.SAFEGUARDS:The paper hard copy records are maintained in secured offices.The computer disc is located in a secured office and its access is limitedto user employees who know the logical identification access number.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Records are maintained in the Division of Financial Operations until theannual GAO audit is completed. After the audit, the paper hard copy recordsare stored in a Federal Records Center for a minimum of three years andthe computer disc is purged. SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Director, Accounting Services Division, Controller's Office, National CreditUnion Administration, 1776 G Street NW, Washington, DC 20456.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Records are prepared by the individual whom the record concerns.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-6</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:New Examiner Training Files, NCUA.SYSTEM LOCATION:(1) Regional Office where new employee is assigned (See Appendix B forRegional Office's locations.) (2) Office of Examination and Insurance, National Credit Union Administration,1776 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20456. At the end of the training periodin the Region, the records are transferred to the Personnel Office. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:NCUA examiners, from entry level to one year on staff.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Biweekly training reports, training progress reports, on-the-job trainers'evaluations of classroom training, trainees' evaluation of training program.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:5 U.S.C. 4101-4116.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:(1) Information is used to determine the retention or termination of anew examiner after 23 weeks of on-the-job training. (2) Standard routineuses as set forth in Appendix A.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Records are stored on paper hard copy.RETRIEVABILITY:Records are retrievable by employee name.SAFEGUARDS:Records are maintained in metal file cabinets in secured offices of eachRegional Office and in secured offices in the Washington Central Offices.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Records are purged annually for those employees no longer participatingin the program.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:(1) Files are maintained in NCUA's six Regional Offices (see Appendix Bfor Regional Office's locations).(2) Office of Examination and Insurance, National Credit Union Administration,1776 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20456. At the end of the training periodin the Region, the records are transferred to the Personnel Office.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.CONTESTING RECORDS PROCEDURES:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above.Record Source Categories: Individual on whom the record is maintained; on-the-job trainers; supervisors;Office of Personnel Management. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-7 </ITAG>System name: Region I Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA. system location: Region I Regional Office, National Credit Union Administration, 9 WashingtonSquare, Washington Avenue Extension, Albany, New York 12205. categories of individuals covered by the system: NCUA Region I employees. categories of records in the system: The system contains information on NCUA examiners and professional staffrelated to some or all of the following areas: Work performance appraisals;district management; chartering efforts; reactions from FCU officials;personal development plans; copies of personnel records; supply and equipmentinformation; training; work performance; suggestions; awards; travel vouchers;and data on leave and pay activities. Also, the system contains informationon NCUA clerical staff related to: Work performance and development activities,which may include work product samples; memos or notations from professionalstaff; personal development plans; evaluations by superiors; copies ofpersonnel records; and data on pay and leave activity. authority for maintenance of the system: 5 U.S.C. 301; 44 U.S.C. 3301. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: (1) The information in this system is used for recording time and attendance,controlling equipment inventories, training staff, evaluating employeework performance, and conducting general administrative matters. (2) Standardroutine uses as set forth in Appendix A. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system: storage: Records are maintained on paper hard copy. retrievability: Records are indexed alphabetically by name. safeguards: Physical security consists of maintaining records in locked metal filecabinets within secured offices. retention and disposal: Current and relevant information is maintained generally for a period ofat least one to two years. Obsolete material is maintained in the samefile cabinets and is periodically destroyed or returned to the originator.system manager(s) and address: Administrative Officer, Region I Regional Office, National Credit UnionAdministration, 9 Washington Square, Washington Avenue Extension, Albany,New York 12205. notification procedure: An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the RegionalDirector where the system is located. If there is no record on the individual,the individual will be so advised. record access procedure: Upon request, the Regional Director will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. contesting record procedures: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the RegionalDirector. record source categories: Sources may include the individual whom the record concerns, supervisorsof the individual, fellow employees, credit union officials, administrativeofficer or office assistant, and other persons whom the individual mayencounter in the course of work performance. For payroll- and personnel-relatedinformation, the sources may include the General Service Administrationand Office of Personnel Management.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-8</ITAG>system name:Region II Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.system location: Region II Regional Office, National Credit Union Administration, EighthFloor, 1776 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20006. categories of individuals covered by the system: NCUA Region II employees. categories of records in the system: The system contains information on NCUA examiners and professional staffrelated to some or all of the following areas: Work performance appraisals;district management; chartering efforts; reactions from FCU officials;personal development plans; copies of personnel records; supply and equipmentinformation; training; work performance; suggestions; training awards;travel vouchers; and data on leave and pay activities. Also, the systemcontains information on NCUA clerical staff related to: Work performanceand development activities, which may include work product samples; memosor notations from professional staff; personal development plans; evaluationsby superiors; copies of personnel records; and data on pay and leave activity.authority for maintenance of the system: 5 U.S.C. 301; 44 U.S.C. 3301. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: (1) The information in this system is used for recording time and attendance,controlling equipment inventories, training staff, evaluating employeework performance, and conducting general administrative matters. (2) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system: storage: Records are indexed alphabetically by name. safeguards: Physical security consists of maintaining records in locked metal filecabinets within secured offices. retention and disposal: Current and relevant information is maintained generally for a period ofone to two years. Obsolete material is maintained in the same file cabinetsand is periodically destroyed or returned to the originator. system manager(s) and address: Director, Division of Administration, Region II Regional Office, NationalCredit Union Administration, Suite 800, 1700 G Street NW., Washington,DC 20006. notification procedure: An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the RegionalDirector where the system is located. If there is no record on the individual,the individual will be so advised. record access procedure: Upon request, the Regional Director will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. contesting record procedures: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the RegionalDirector. record source categories: Sources may include the individual whom the record concerns, supervisorsof the individual, fellow employees, credit union officials, and otherpersons whom the individual encounters in the course of work performance.For payroll- and personnel-related information, the sources may includethe General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-9 </ITAG>System name: Region III Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA. system location: Region III Regional Office, National Credit Union Administration, 7000Central Parkway, Suite 1600, Atlanta, GA 30328. categories of individuals covered by the system: NCUA Region III employees. categories of records in the system: The system contains information on NCUA examiners and professional staffrelated to some or all of the following areas: Work performance appraisals;district management; chartering efforts; reactions from FCU officials;personal development plans; copies of personnel records; supply and equipmentinformation; training; work performance; suggestions; awards; travel vouchers;and data on leave and pay activities. Also, the system contains informationon NCUA clerical staff related to: Work performance and development activities,which may include work product samples; memos or notations from professionalstaff; personal development plans; evaluations by superiors; copies ofpersonnel records; and data on pay and leave activity. authority for maintenance of the system: 5 U.S.C. 301; 44 U.S.C. 3301. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: (1) The information in this sysem is used for recording time and attendance,controlling equipment inventories, training staff, evaluating employeework performance, and conducting general administrative matters. (2) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system: storage: Records are maintained on paper hard copy. retrievability: Recordsd are indexed alphabetically by name. safeguards: Physical security consists of maintaining records in locked metal filecabinets within secured offices. retention and disposal: Current and relevant information generally for a period of one to two years.Obsolete material is maintained in the same file cabinets and is periodicallydestroyed or returned to the originator. system manager(s) and address: Administrative Officer, Region III Regional Office, National Credit UnionAdministration, 7000 Central Parkway, Suite 1600, Atlanta, GA 30328. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the RegionalDirector where the system is located. If there is no record on the individual,the individual will be so advised.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:Upon request, the Regional Director will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the RegionalDirector.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Sources may include the individual whom the record concerns, supervisorsof the individual, fellow employees, credit union officials, and otherpersons whom the individual encounters in the course of work performance.For payroll- and personnel-related information, the sources may includethe General Service Administration and the Office of Personnel Management.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-10</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Region IV Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.SYSTEM LOCATION:Region IV Regional Office, National Credit Union Administration, 300 ParkBoulevard, Itasca, IL 60143.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:NCUA Region IV employees.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:The system contains information on NCUA examiners and professional staffrelated to some or all of the following areas: Work performance appraisals;district management: Chartering efforts; reactions from FCU officials;personal development plans; copies of personnel records; supply and equipmentinformation; training; work performance; suggestions; awards; travel vouchers;and data on leave and pay activities. Also, the system contains informationon NCUA clerical staff related to: Work performance and development activities,which may include work product samples; memos or notations from professionalstaff; personal development plans; evaluations by superiors; copies ofpersonnel records; and data on pay and leave activity.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:5 U.S.C. 301: 44 U.S.C. 3301.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:(1) The information in this system is used for recording time and attendance,controlling equipment inventories, training staff, evaluating employeework performance, and conducting general administrative matters.(2) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A.POLICES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Records are maintained on paper hard copy.RETRIEVABILITY:Records are indexed alphabetically by names, NCUA employee numbers, andNCUA property inventory (decal) numbers.SAFEGUARDS:Physical security consists of maintaining records in metal file cabinetswithin secured offices.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Current and relevant information is maintained generally for a period ofone to two years. Obsolete material is maintained in the same file cabinetsand periodically destroyed or returned to the originator.SYSTEM MANAGER(s) AND ADDRESS:Director of Administration, Region IV Regional Office, National CreditUnion Administration, 300 Park Boulevard, Itasca, IL 60143.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the RegionalDirector where the system is located. If there is no record on the individual,the individual will be so advised.RECORDS ACCESS PROCEDURE:Upon request, the Regional Director will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:Records to amend or correct a record should be directed to the RegionalDirector.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Source may include the individual whom the record concerns, supervisorsof the individual, fellow employees, credit union officials, and otherpersons whom the individual encounters in the course of work performance.For payroll- and personnel-related information, the sources may includethe General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-11</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Region V Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA.SYSTEM LOCATION:(1) Region V Regional Office, National Credit Union Administration, 4807Spicewood Springs Road, Building 5, Austin, Texas 78759.(2) Region V, Austin Suboffice, 320 6th Street, Room 202, Sioux City, Iowa51101(3) Development files on the examiners are maintained by the SupervisoryExaminers in their home offices, not in the Regional Office.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:NCUA Region V employees.categories of records in the system:The system contains information on NCUA examiners and professional staffrelated to some or all of the following areas: Work performance appraisals;district management; chartering efforts; reactions from FCU officials;personal development plans; copies of personnel records; supply and equipmentinformation; training; work performance; suggestions; awards; travel vouchers;and data on leave and pay activities. Also, the system contains informationon NCUA clerical staff related to: Work performance and development activities,which may include work product samples; memos or notations from professionalstaff; personal development plans; evaluations by superiors; copies ofpersonnel records; and data on pay and leave activity. authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 301: 44 U.S.C. 3301.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) The information in this system is used for recording time and attendance,controlling equipment inventories, training staff, evaluating employeework performance, and conducting general administrative matters. (2) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Records are maintained on paper hard copy. retrievability:Records are indexed alphabetically by name. safeguards:Physical security consists of maintaining records in metal file cabinetswithin secured offices. Cabinets may be locked depending on the natureof the information which they contain. retention and disposal:Current and relevant information is maintained generally for a period ofone to two years. Obsolete material is maintained in the same file cabinetsand is periodically destroyed or returned to the originator. system manager(s) and address:Regional Director, Region V Regional Office, National Credit Union Administration,4807 Spicewood Springs Road, Building 5, Austin, TX 78759.notification procedure:Examiners may inquire as to whether the system contains a development recordpertaining to the individual by addressing a request in person or by mailto the examiner's supervisory examiner at the supervisory examiner's homeoffice. All other individuals may inquire as to whether the system containsa record pertaining to the individual by addressing a request in personor by mail to the Regional Director where the system is located. If thereis no record on the individual, the individual will be so advised. record access procedure:Upon request, the Regional Director or the appropriate supervisory examinerwill set forth the procedures for gaining access to available records.contesting record procedures:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the RegionalDirector. record source categories:Sources may include the individual whom the record concerns supervisorsof the individual, fellow employees, credit union officials, and otherpersons whom the individual encounters in the course of work performance.For payroll- and personnel-related information, the sources may includethe General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-12</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:Region VI Employee Development/Correspondence Records, NCUA. SYSTEM LOCATION:(1) Region VI Regional Office, National Credit Union Administration, 2890N. Main Street, Suite 101, Walnut Creek, CA 94596.(2) Development files on the examiners are maintained by the supervisoryexaminers in their home offices, not in the Regional Office.categories of individuals covered by the system:NCUA Region VI employees.categories of records in the system:The system contains information of NCUA examiners and professional staffrelated to some or all of the following areas: Work performance appraisals;district management; chartering efforts; reactions from FCU officials;personnel records; supply and equipment information; training; work performance;suggestions; awards; travel vouchers; and data on leave and pay activities.Also, the system contains information on NCUA clerical staff related to:Work performance and development activities, which may include work productsamples; memos or notations from professional staff; personal developmentplans; evaluations by superiors; copies of personnel records; and dataon pay and leave activity.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 301; 44 U.S.C. 3301routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) The information in this system is used for recording time and attendance,controlling equipment inventories, training staff, and conducting generaladministrative matters.(2) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Records are maintained on paper hard copy.retrievability:Records are indexed alphabetically by name.safeguards:Physical security consists of maintaining records in metal file cabinetswithin secured offices. Cabinets may be locked depending on the natureof the information which they contain.retention and disposal:Current and relevant information is maintained generally for a period ofone to two years. Obsolete materials are maintained in the same file cabinetsand are periodically destroyed or returned to the originator.system manager(s) and address:Administrative Officer, Region VI Regional Office, National Credit UnionAdministration, 2890 N. Main Street, Suite 101, Walnut Creek, CA 94596.notification procedure:Examiners may inquire as to whether the system contains a development recordpertaining to the individual by addressing a request in person or by mailto the examiner's supervisory examiner at the supervisory examiner's homeoffice. All other individuals may inquire as to whether the system containsa record pertaining to the individual by addressing a request in personor by mail to the Regional Director where the system is located. If thereis no record on the individual, the individual will be so advised.record access procedures:Upon request, the Regional Director or the appropriate supervisory examinerwill set forth the procedures for gaining access to available records.record source categories Sources may include the individual whom the record concerns, supervisorsof the individual, fellow employees, credit union officials, and otherpersons whom the individual encounters in the course of work performance.For payroll- and personnel-related information, the sources may includethe General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-13</ITAG>system name:Emergency Information (Employee) File, NCUA.system location:Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street,NW, Washington, DC 20456.of records in the system This system contains personal information on an employee, i.e., height,weight, hair color, eye color, current address, and telephone number. Also,this system identifies the individual to contact in case of an emergencyinvolving the employee.authority for maintenance of the system:5 U.S.C. 301.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) The Personnel Office uses certain personal information for preparingthe employee ID cards. (2) The information on the individual to contactin cases of emergency is used by Personnel and others on a need-to-knowbasis. (3) The Security Officer maintains a list of all employees, withtheir addresses and telephone numbers. This list is updated monthly. Thelisted information is used when there is a national emergency. (4) Standardroutine uses as set forth in Appendix A.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Records are stored on paper hard copy.retrievability:Records are indexed alphabetically by name.Safeguards:Records are maintained in locked file drawer.retention and disposal:Records are disposed of after an employee is separated from the agency.system manager(s) and address:(1) Director, Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456. (2) Security Officer, AdministrativeOffice, at the same address above.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the appropriatesystem manager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, theindividual will be so advised.record access procedure:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.contesting record procedures:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the appropriatesystem manager listed above.record source categories:Individual on whom the record is maintained.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-14</ITAG>System name:Employee Injury File, NCUA.system location:Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street,NW., Washington, DC 20456.categories of individuals covered by the system:Any employee who has sustained a job-related injury or disease.categories of records in the system:Copies of reports submitted by individual who has sustained a job-relatedinjury or disease. Copies of any further claims made regarding the sameinjury or disease or any other material required for documenting and adjudicatingthe claim.authority for maintenance of the system:Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29 CFR Part 1960.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and purposes of such uses: (1) Information is maintained to provide appropriate data to the Departmentof Labor, when needed, for adjudication of a claim, (2) Further, informationis used for reporting purposes as required by the Department of Labor ona recurring basis. (3) Use of information is limited to the Personnel Office.(4) Standard routine use as set forth in Appendix A.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Records are stored on paper.retrievability:Records are indexed by NCUA Region, and date of injury.safeguards:Records are maintained in locked file drawer.retention and disposal:Records are disposed of five years after the year to which they relate.system manager(s) and address:Director, Personnel Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456.notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, then individualwill be so advised. record access procedures:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.contesting record procedures:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above.record source categories:Individual on whom the record is maintained; superiors of individual; individual'sphysician; hospital attending individual; Department of Labor.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-15</ITAG>System name:Investigative Reports Involving Any Crime or Suspected Crime Against aCredit Union, NCUA.system location:Office of Examination and Insurance, National Credit Union Administration,1776 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456.categories of individuals covered by the system:This system covers credit union members, credit union employees, or otherindividuals involved or suspected of involvement in criminal activitiesagainst a federally-insured credit union.categories of records in the system:Investigative reports relating to possible felonies.authority for maintenance of the system:12 U.S.C. 1789.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) Information is used to determine if any further agency action shouldbe taken. (2) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A.policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage: Records are maintained on paper hard copy and computer readable magneticmedia.  retrievability: System is indexed by credit union name and suspect name.  safeguards: Records are maintained in a separate locked cabinet accessible only tothe Director, Office of Examination and Insurance, and designated assistants.The records are further secured by computer passwords accessible only bydesignated assistants.  retention and disposal: Records are stored indefinately on computer media. Paper copies are heldon site, then transferred to long-term storage.  system manager(s) and address: Director, Office of Examination and Insurance, National Credit Union Administration,1776 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456.  notification procedure: An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised.  record access procedure: Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.  contesting record procedures: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above.  record source categories: Credit union officials, NCUA examiners, and other Federal agencies.  systems exempted from certain provisions of the act: This system is subject to a specific exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 522a(k)(2),as the system of records is investigatory material compiled for law enforcementpurposes.  <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-16 </ITAG>System name: Freedom of Information Act Bills Delinquent 30-Days or More, NCUA.  system location: Administrative Office, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street,NW., Washington, DC 20456.  categories of individuals covered by the system: This system of records includes information pertaining to any Freedom ofInformation Act (FOIA) requestor who has an outstanding payment of at least30 days due NCUA as a result of processing their FOIA request.  categories of records in the system: The system contains the following information for any person or organizationhaving an outstanding bill of 30 days or more for FOIA services: requestor'sname, company name or organization, address, date of invoice, invoice number,amount due, phone number.  authority for maintenance of the system: 12 U.S.C. 1789.  routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: Records in this system are used to identify requestors who are at least30 days delinquent in their payments. These records will be used by theNCUA for collection of the amount due, as well as to identify subsequentrequests made by the same individuals. The information may also be disclosedto a consumer reporting agency. The information disclosed to a consumerreporting agency is limited to: (1) Information necessary to establishthe identity of the individual, including name, address, and taxpayer identificationnumber; (2) the amount, status, and history of the claim; and (3) the agencyor program under which the claim arose.  policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system: storage: Records are maintained on paper hard copy and computer disk.  retrievability: Records in this system are retrievable by requestor's name, company nameor organization, date of invoice, and invoice number.  safeguards: Physical security consists of storing records on a password protected floppydiskette and a hard copy secured in a metal file cabinet which is accessibleonly to those individuals responsible for collecting outstanding payments. retention and disposal:Records are retained until payment is received. Once payment is received,all information is deleted from the system. system manager(s) and address:Freedom of Information Officer, Administrative Office. National CreditUnion Administration, 1776 G Street, NW., Washington DC 20456. notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised. record access procedure:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. contesting record procedures:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above. record source categories:The source of records for this system of records is the FOIA request files.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-17</ITAG>System name:Acquired Assets and Share Payout Records System, NCUA. system location:Records within this system of records are located at one of two NCUA LiquidationCenters: Region II (Capital) and Region V (Austin) for a period of timenecessary to answer inquiries of credit union members and to transfer shareand loan record information to the Director, Department of Insurance, NationalCredit Union Administration, 1776 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456 oran outside purchaser or a loan collection servicer. After such time, theremaining records are transferred for storage to one of twelve GeneralServices Administration record storage centers. For liquidations occurringin Regions I, II or III records are located in Region II. For liquidationsoccurring in Regions IV, V or VI, records are located in Region V, (seeAppendix B for states covered by each Regional Office). categories of individuals covered by the system:Members of liquidating federally-insured credit unions. categories of records in the system:Share and account balances; personal data regarding income and debts; paymenthistory. authority for maintenance of the system:12 U.S.C. 1787. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) Data used for payment of insurance claims to shareholders in liquidatingfederally-insured credit unions. (2) Also, data is used in the collectionof outstanding loans, which may include referral of information to theGeneral Accounting Office or the Department of Justice. (3) Generally,information is used for all purposes necessary to close out the affairsof the liquidated credit union and carry out all appropriate liquidations-relatedfunctions of NCUA, including referral of necessary information to facilitatea purchase of the credit union's assets by NCUA or sale to a third party(before or after such purchase), referral of noncredit information addresslocators, or referral of information to a surety company in pursuit ofa fidelity bond claim. (4) Standard routine uses as set forth in AppendixA. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Information is initially compiled on data conversion sheets prepared byNCUA examiners acting as on-site liquidators. This data is stored on computerdisks, from which loan registers may be prepared and furnished to NCUARegional Offices or prospective purchasers of the assets of closed creditunions. In addition to data stored on computer disks, the following recordsare maintained on paper hard copy; data conversion sheets, loan registers,essential share and loan documents, and members' filed claim forms. Copiesof share and loan documents, incoming payments, and loan portfolios mayalso be maintained on microfilm copy. retrievability:Records are indexed by name of member and by name of closed insured creditunion. safeguards:Records are maintained in secured offices. retention and disposal:Information is disposed of five years after date of charter cancellation.system manager(s) and address:(1) NCUA Region II Regional Office, Eighth Floor, 1776 G Street, NW., Washington,DC 20006. (2) NCUA Region V Regional Office, Spicewood Springs Road, Building5, Austin, TX 78759. notification procedure:An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised. Written inquiries should include name of inquirer,name of closed insured credit union of which inquirer was a member, andshare and loan account numbers, if known, in addition to any requirementsof Part 790 of NCUA Rules and Regulations (12 CFR Part 790). record access procedure:Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. contesting record procedures:Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above. record source categories:Individual on whom the record is maintained; outside address locators;and share and loan account files of the liquidating credit union of whichthe individual was a member. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-18</ITAG>System name:Member Accounts; Credit Unions Closed for Involuntary Liquidations, NCUA.system location:Records within this system of records are located at one of two NCUA LiquidationCenters: Region II (Capital) and Region V (Austin) for a period of timenecessary to answer inquiries of credit union members and to transfer shareand loan record information to the Director, Examination and Insurance,National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street, NW., Washington, DC20456 or an outside purchaser or a loan collection services. After suchtime, the remaining records are transferred for storage to one of twelveGeneral Services Administration record storage centers.categories of individuals covered by the system:Information is maintained on those individuals who were members or employeesof a federally-insured credit union closed for liquidation and for whichthe Board served as liquidating agent pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 1787. Recordsin this system are subject to the provisions of the Privacy Act only uponcompletion of the liquidation of a closed federally-insured credit unionand three years after the cancellation of the credit union charter. Priorto such time, records of a closed insured credit union which are held bythe Board, only in its capacity as liquidating agent for the closed creditunion, are not ``agency records'' within the meaning of the Privacy Act,and thus the provisions of the Act have no applicability.categories of records in the system:This system contains information concerning an individual's membershipin and share and loan transactions with the credit union which has beenclosed for liquidation; membership card; individual share and loan ledgers;notes; security documents; promissory notes and extension agreements, ifany. Also included are employee payroll records and data. As further explainedabove, in the ``Categories of Individuals * * *'' portion of this descriptivesystem notice, records of a closed insured credit union are generally subjectto the provisions of the Privacy Act after completion of the liquidationof the credit union and three years after the cancellation of the creditunion charter.authority for maintenance of the system:12 U.S.C. 1766(c) and 1787.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:(1) Actions necessary to close out the affairs of liquidating federally-insuredcredit union, including: (a) Referral of information to affected creditunion members, the NCUA Loan Management System, and any purchasers of theclosed credit union's assets; (b) referral of information to the creditunion's surety in pursuit of fidelity information to any appropriate agencyor official in the course of collecting a claim of the United States. (2)Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A. (While it is the fullintent to comply with the spirit of the Privacy Act with regard to recordsmaintained within this described system, it should again be noted thatthe provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974, including a limitation of routineuses to those described herein, do not technically apply to the recordsuntil they become ``agency'' records, i.e., until such time as they revertto NCUA three years after the cancellation of the charter of a closed creditunion.)policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system:storage:Records on individual credit union members or employees in this systemof records are maintained on member account documents as compiled by individualcredit unions prior to entering liquidation.retrievability:Member and employee records are generally ordered or indexed by accountnumber.SAFEGUARDS: Records within this system are maintained under the control of a designatedagent for the liquidating agent who makes only such disclosures from therecords as are necessary or part of responsibilities under the FederalCredit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1751-1795). RETENTION AND DISPOSAL: The records are maintained in one of the two liquidation centers indicatedunder the lcoation section of this notice, for a period necessary to answerinquiries of credit union members and transfer appropriate share and loaninformation. The records are disposed of five years after charter cancellation.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS: The system managers for this system of records are the two Regional Directorslocated at the Regional Offices at which the liquidation centers are located.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE: If an individual wants to find out whether the records of a closed creditunion within this system inlude records pertaining to that individual,the individual should contact by mail or in person, the Regional Directorfor Region II if the closed credit union was located in Region I, II orIII, or the Regional Director of Region V if the closed credit union waslocated in Regions IV, V or VI, (see address in Appendix B). The inquiryshould contain the name of the closed credit union, the inquirer's creditunion account number (if known), a description of the records sought, theapproximate dates covered by the record, and the name of the system ofrecords. If there is no record on the individual, the individual will beso advised. RECORDS ACCESS PROCEDURES: Upon request, the Regional Director will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the RegionalDirector for Region II if the closed credit union was located in RegionsI, II or III, or the regional Director for Region V if the closed creditunion was loacted in Region IV, V or VI. RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES: The sole source of information for this system or records is the member-relatedfiles and accounting records of federally-insured credit unions which havebeen closed for liquidation and for which the Board, or its designee, servesas liquidating agent. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-19 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Trusteed Account Records System, NCUA. SYSTEM LOCATION: Records within this system of records are located at one of two NCUA LiquidationCenters: Region II (Capital) and Region V (Austin) for a period of timenecessary to answer inquires of credit union members and to transfer shareand loan record information to the Director, Office of Examination andInsurance, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street, NW., Washington,DC 20456 or an outside purchaser or a loan collection services. After suchtime, the remaining records are transferred for storage to one of twelveGeneral Services Administration record storage centers. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: Share balance and last known addresses of individuals by whom or on whosebehalf insured share account payout claims have been filed. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 12 U.S.C. 1787.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:  (1) Information is used to ensure proper payment of all trusteed accountfunds. (2) Standard routine uses as set forth in Appendix A.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:  Records are maintained on computer printout forms or accounting work papersand members account statements.RETRIEVABILITY:  Records are retrievable by individual name, credit union name, or a combinationthereof.SAFEGUARDS:  Records are stored in secured offices.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:  Records are maintained until processing of claims is completed and, thereafter,are escheated to the appropriate state agency.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:  The system managers for this system of records are the two regional Directorslocated at the liquidation centers listed in ``SYSTEM LOCATION'' above.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:  An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURE:  Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:  Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:  Files of federally-insure credit unions which are closed for liquidation.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-20</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:  Investigation Files, NCUA.SYSTEM LOCATION:  Office of Internal Auditor, National Credit Union Administration, 1776G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456.CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY HE SYSTEM:  Employees of the NCUA.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:  Investigative reports.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:  12 U.S.C. 1766(i)(1) and 1799(a)(7).ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:  (1) Information gathered is used for intra-agency purposes. (2) Standardroutine uses as set forth in Appendix A.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:  Reports are maintained on paper hard copy.RETRIEVABILITY:  This system is indexed by name of complainant.SAFEGUARDS:  Records are maintained in a locked file cabinet and are accessible onlyto the Director, Office of Internal Audit and designated assistants.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:  After the report is reviewed by the Board and has served its intended purpose,it is retained for ten years and then destroyed unless otherwise directed.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:  Director, Office of Inernal Auditor, National Credit Union Administration,1776 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20456.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:  An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:  Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:  Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:  The sources of records maintained in the system of records are the individualabout whom the record is maintained, supervisors, other NCUA employees,credit union employees, members of the public and files maintained withinNCUA.<ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-21</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:  Consumer Complaints Against Federal Credit Unions, NCUA.SYSTEM LOCATION:  Information is maintained in NCUA's six Regional Offices (see AppendixB for Regional Offices' locations).CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:  Persons who submit complaints concerning operating Federal credit unions.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Complaint letters, investigation reports, and related correspondence concerningthe complainants and the involved Federal credit union. authority for maintenance of the system: 12 U.S.C. 1766(i)(1) and 1789(a)(7); 5 U.S.C. 301; 15 U.S.C. 1601-1693.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: (1) Information may be disclosed to officials of Federal credit unionsand other persons mentioned in a complaint or identified during an investigation.(2) Disclosures may be made to the Federal Reserve Board, other Federalfinancial regulatory agencies, the Federal Financial Institutions ExaminationCouncil, the White House Office of Consumer Affairs, and the Congress orany of its authorized committees in fulfilling reporting requirements orassessing implementation of applicable laws and regulations. (Such disclosureswill be made in a nonidentifiable manner when feasible and appropriate.)(3) Referrals may also be made to other Federal and nonfederal supervisoryor regulatory authorities when the subject matter is a complaint or inquirywhich is more properly within such agency's jurisdiction. (4) Standardroutine uses as set forth in Appendix A. policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, anddisposing of records in the system: storage: Records are stored on paper or computer media. retrievability: Records are retrievable from files by Federal credit union name, by complainantname, or assigned control number. safeguards: Records are maintained in secured offices in either a file cabinet or oncomputer media. retention and disposal: Records are retained for three years, then destroyed. Consumer's name,Federal credit union's name, subject of complaint, date received, and dateresolved are kept indefinitely. system manager(s) and address: The information is maintained in NCUA's six Regional Offices (see AppendixB for Regional Offices' location). notification procedure: An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised. record access procedure: Upon request, the system manager will set forth the procedures for gainingaccess to available records. contesting record procedures: Request to amend or correct a record should be directed to the system managerlisted above. record source categories: Complaintant (and his or her representative, which may include, e.g., amember of Congress or an attorney); Federal credit union officials; employeesand members of the credit union involved; and NCUA examiners and centralfiles on Federal credit unions. <ITAG tagnum="66">NCUA-22 </ITAG>System name: Litigation Case Files, NCUA. system location: Office of General Counsel, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 GStreet, NW., Washington, DC 20456. categories of individuals covered by the system: Records are maintained in files by the case name of individuals who are:The subject of NCUA investigations made in contemplation of legal action;involved in civil litigation with NCUA; involved in administrative proceedings;involved in litigation of interest to NCUA; or pursuing tort claims. categories of records in the system: Records in case files include: Investigative reports relating to possiblefelonies or violations of the Federal Credit Union Act; transcripts oftestimony or affidavits; documents and other evidentiary matter, pleadingsand other documents filed in court; orders filed or issued in civil, administrativeor criminal proceedings; correspondence relating to investigatory or litigationmatters; information provided by the individual under investigation orfrom a Federal credit union; and other memoranda gathered and preparedby staff in performance of their duties. authority for maintenance of the system: 12 U.S.C. 1766, 1786, 1787, and 1789; 28 U.S.C. 2671-2680. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: (1) The staff of the Office of General Counsel may use such records torender legal advice concerning investigations or courses of legal action;to represent NCUA in all judicial and administrative proceedings in whichNCUA or any of its employees who, within the scope of employment and inan official capacity, is a party; or to intervene as an amicus curiae.(2) Standard routine uses set forth in Appendix A. system manager(s) and address: General Counsel, National Credit Union Administration, 1776 G Street, NW.,Washington, DC 20456. notification procedure: An individual may inquire as to whether the system contains a record pertainingto the individual by addressing a request in person or by mail to the systemmanager listed above. If there is no record on the individual, the individualwill be so advised. record access procedure: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above. contesting record procedures: Requests to amend or correct a record should be directed to the systemmanager listed above. record source categories: Record source categories vary depending upon the legal issue but generallyare obtained from the following: NCUA staff and internal agency memoranda;Federal employees and private parties involved in torts; contracts; Federalcredit union files or officials; general law texts and sources; law enforcementofficers; witnesses and others; administrative and court pleadings, transcriptsor judicial orders/decisions; evidence gathered in connection with thematter involved; and from individuals to whom the records relate. systems exempted from certain provisions of the act: This system is subject to the specific exemption provided by 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2),as the system of records is investigatory material compiled for law enforcementpurposes. <ITAG tagnum="85">Appendix A_Standard Routine Uses Applicable to NCUA Systems of Records</ITAG>1. In the event that a system of records maintained by this Agency to carryout its functions indicates a violation or potential violation of law,whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether arising bygeneral statute or particular program statute, or by regulation, rule,or order issued pursuant thereto, the relevant records in the system orrecords may be referred, as a ``routine use,'' to the appropriate agency,whether Federal, State, local, or foreign, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or charged with enforcingor implementing the statute, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuantthereto. 2. A record from a system of records may be disclosed as a ``routine use''to a Federal, State, or local agency which maintains civil, criminal, orother relevant enforcement information or other pertinent information,such as current licenses, if necessary, to obtain information relevantto an agency decision concerning the hiring or retention of an employee,the issuance of a security clearance, the letting of a contract, or theissuance of a license, grant, or other benefit. 3. A record from a system of records may be disclosed as a ``routine use''to a Federal agency, in response to its request, for a matter concerningthe hiring or retention of an employee, the issuance of a security clearance,the reporting of an investigation of an employee, the letting of a contract,or the issuance of a license, grant, or other benefit by the requestingagency, to the extent that the information is relevant and necessary tothe requesting agency's decision in the matter. 4. A record from a system of records may be disclosed as a ``routine use''to an authorized appeal grievance examiner, formal complaints examiner,equal employment opportunity investigator, arbitrator or other duly authorizedofficial engaged in investigation or settlement of a grievance, complaint,or appeal filed by an employee. Further, a record from any system of recordsmay be disclosed as a ``routine use'' to the Office of Personnel Managementin accordance with the agency's responsibility for evaluation and oversightof Federal personnel management. 5. A record from a system of records may be disclosed as a ``routine use''to officers and employees of a Federal agency for purposes of audit. 6. A record from a system of records may be disclosed as a ``routine use''to a member of Congress or to a congressional staff member in responseto an inquiry from the congressional office made at the request of theindividual about whom the record is maintained. 7. A record from a system of records may be disclosed as a ``routine use''to the officers and employees of the General Services Administration (GSA)in connection with administrative services provided to this Agency underagreement with GSA. 8. It shall be a routine use of the records maintained by this agency todisclose them to the Department of Justice when(a) The Agency, or any component thereof; or(b) Any employee of the Agency in his or her official capacity; or(c) Any employee of the Agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or(d) The United States, where the Agency determines the litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the Agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, provided, however, that in each case, the Agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information contained in the records that is compatible with the purposefor which the records were collected.9. It shall be a routine use of records maintained by this Agency to disclosethem in a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body before which theagency is authorized to appear, when(a) The Agency, or any component thereof; or(b) Any employee of the Agency in his or her official capacity; or(c) Any employee of the Agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Agency has agreed to represent the employee; or(d) The United States, where the Agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the Agency determines that useof such records is relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided,however, that in each case, the Agency determines that disclosure of therecords to the Department of Justice is a use of the information containedin the records that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected.<ITAG tagnum="85">Appendix B_List of Regional Offices (Addresses and States Coveredby Each Region)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">I. NCUA Region I Regional Office: 9 Washington Square, WashingtonSquare Extension, Albany, NY 12205, Phone: (518) 472-4554.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">States covered: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virgin Islands.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">II. NCUA Region II Regional Office: Eighth Floor, 1776 G Street, Washington,DC 20006, Phone: (202) 682-1900.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">States covered: District of Columbia, Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania,Virginia, West Virginia.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">III. NCUA Region III Regional Office: 7000 Central Parkway, Suite1600, Atlanta, GA 30328, Phone: (404) 396-4042.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">States covered: Arkansas, Alabama, Republic of Panama, Florida, Georgia,Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee, South Carolina.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">IV. NCUA Region IV Regional Office: 300 Park Boulevard, Suite 155,Itasca IL 60143, Phone: (312) 250-6000.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">States covered: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri,North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, Wisconsin.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">V. NCUA Region V Regional Office: 4807 Spicewood Springs Road, Building5, Austin, TX 78759, Phone: (512) 482-4500.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">States covered: Arizona, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Nebraska,New Mexico, North Dakota, South Dakota, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah, Wyoming.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">VI. NCUA Region VI Regional Office: 2890 N. Main Street, Suite 101,Walnut Creek, CA 94596, Phone: (415) 486-3490.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">States covered: Alaska, California, Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana,Nevada, Oregon, Washington.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-21813 Filed 9-23-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7535-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>