<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88915-0037 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-15-88.f2.A1036</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 179 / Thursday, September 15,1988 / Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Occupational Safety and Health Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">29 CFR Part 1926</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. S-301B]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Concrete and Masonry Construction Safety Standards; Lift Slab Construction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed rulemaking; Availability of new informationon lift-slab construction.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This Notice announces that the Occupational Safety andHealth Administration (OSHA) is reproposing its Construction Safety Standardsfor Lift-Slab Operations. Specific requirements for lift-slab operationswere originally proposed for revision as part of the Notice of ProposedRulemaking (NPRM) for Concrete and Masonry Construction. The purpose ofthe reproposal is to update the specific lift-slab requirements which havebeen incorporated by reference from the American National Standard SafetyRequirements for Concrete Construction and Masonry Work, ANSI A10.9-1970.In addition, OSHA proposes to promulgate and codify directly into the OSHAstandards, new requirements to protect the safety and health of workersengaged in lift-slab operations. By this revision, OSHA will eliminateany ambiguities caused by incorporating standards by reference and willalso strengthen the lift-slab requirements by eliminating weaknesses orgaps in coverage that exist through the reference to the outdated ANSIstandard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments on this proposal must be postmarked by November14, 1988. Hearing requests must be postmarked by November 14, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments and requests for a hearing are to be sent tothe Docket Officer, Docket No. S-301B, U.S. Department of Labor, Room N3670,200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mr. James Foster, OccupationalSafety and Health Administration, Room N3637, U.S. Department of Labor,200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Telephone (202) 523-8148.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>Congress amended the Contract Work Hours Standards Act [40 U.S.C. 327 etseq.] in 1969 by adding a new section 107 (40 U.S.C. 333) to provide employeesin the construction industry with a safer work environment and to reducethe frequency and severity of construction accidents and injuries. Theamendment, commonly known as the Construction Safety Act [Pub. L. 91-54;August 9, 1969], significantly strengthened employee protection by providingfor occupational safety and health standards for employees of the buildingtrades and construction industry in Federal and Federally-financed or Federally-assistedconstruction projects. Accordingly, the Secretary of Labor issued Safetyand Health Regulations for Construction in 29 CFR Part 1518 (36 CFR 7340,April 17, 1971) pursuant to section 107 of the Contract Work Hours andSafety Standards Act.The Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act) (84 Stat. 1590; 29 U.S.C.651 et seq.), which was enacted by Congress in 1970, authorized the Secretaryof Labor to adopt established Federal standards issued under other statutes,including the Construction Safety Act, as occupational safety and healthstandards. Accordingly, the Secretary of Labor adopted the ConstructionStandards, which were issued under the Construction Safety Act in 29 CFRPart 1518, under section 6(a) of the OSH Act (36 FR 10466, May 29, 1971).The Safety and Health Regulations for Construction, Part 1518, were redesignatedas Part 1926 at the end of 1971 (36 FR 25232, December 30, 1971). The standardentitled Concrete, Concrete Forms, and Shoring, andSection;andSection; 1926.700through .702, was adopted as an OSHA standard as part of this process.As discussed below, this standard was partially revised on June 16, 1988,based on an earlier proposal.On September 16, 1985, OSHA proposed to revise its construction industrysafety standard addressing concrete and masonry construction (50 FR 37543).One section of the proposed standard contained specific requirements forlift-slab construction operations. Comments on the proposed standard werereceived by OSHA through December 16, 1985. A public hearing was held inWashington, DC, to discuss the proposed rule on June 17-18, 1986. A finalrule was published on June 16, 1988 (53 FR 22612). In that final rule,OSHA indicated that it was not revising the existing requirements for lift-slaboperations until the record could be reopened on that issue and new informationand evidence entered into the record. That new information would then beused as a basis for promulgating revised standards for lift-slab operations.The reopening of the record was necessitated by a tragic accident involvingthe lift-slab method of construction. Specifically, on April 23, 1987, a 13-story, two-tower building (the L'AmbiancePlaza) under construction in Bridgeport, Connecticut, collapsed. The L'AmbiancePlaza building was being erected using the lift-slab construction method.Twenty-eight construction workers were killed and 10 injured in that collapse,making it the highest death toll from a workplace accident in the UnitedStates since 15 employees were killed in 1978 during construction of acooling tower at Willow Island, West Virginia. OSHA immediately began aninvestigation with the assistance of the National Bureau of Standards (NBS)of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The following excerpt is taken fromthe NBS Report entitled, ``Investigation of the L'Ambiance Plaza BuildingCollapse in Bridgeport, Connecticut, NBSIR 87-3640'' (Ex. 34).<ITAG tagnum="21">The most probable cause of the collapse was determined to be lossof support at a lifting jack in the west tower during placement of an upperlevel package of three floor slabs. The loss of support was likely dueto excessive deformation of the lifting angle in a shearhead followed bya lifting nut slipping off the lifting angle of the shearhead. The postulatedfailure mechanism was duplicated in laboratory experiments. The local failurepropagated as loads were redistributed. The remaining jack rods along columnline E supporting the package of floor slabs slipped off the lifting anglesand the slabs failed in flexure and shear. These slabs fell causing thelower levels slabs to fail.</ITAG>During the course of the investigation, OSHA began to question the completenessof its proposed safety standards for concrete and masonry constructionas they pertained to lift-slab construction operations. A review of therecord indicated that OSHA had very little information from comments receivedin response to the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, or as a result of thehearings that had been held. In fact, only one comment was directly relatedto lift-slab construction. OSHA's Advisory Committee on Construction Safetyand Health (ACCSH), at its meeting of November 30-December 1, 1982, atwhich the draft concrete standard was discussed, had not made any specificrecommendations to OSHA with regard to the lift-slab provisions. To ensure that the regulations would provide a proper level of safety toworkers engaged in lift-slab construction operations, and to ensure thatthe L'Ambiance Plaza information would be properly evaluated and consideredbefore revising the lift-slab regulations, OSHA decided to reopen the recordwhich had been closed on December 8, 1986, to receive the L'Ambiance Plazainformation and evidence now available, as well as any other informationpertaining to lift-slab construction that may be forthcoming. As stated above, when OSHA published the Final Rule for Concrete and MasonryConstruction, it announced that andSection; 1926.705, Lift-Slab Operations,would not be revised as part of that Final Rule. OSHA also announced thatthe existing standards (which reference the ANSI A10.9-1970 standards)specific to lift-slab construction operations would continue in effectuntil completion of the reproposed action. As a first step in the new rulemaking process for lift-slab operations,OSHA met with its Advisory Committee on Construction Safety and Health(ACCSH). (A copy of the transcript of that discussion can be found at Exhibit35-2). At the March 30, 1988, ACCSH meeting, OSHA received several recommendations.Specifically, the ACCSH recommended that OSHA include the building columnsamong the items that must be designed with a safety factor of at least2.5. ACCSH was referring to the existing ANSI standard that requires that``. . . the threaded rods and other members which transmit loads to thejacks shall have a minimum safety factor of 2.5.''The ACCSH also supported a motion put forth by the ACCSH representativefrom the Building and Construction Trades Department. The motion was thatOSHA require that ``Lift-slab operations shall be designed, planned, andsupervised by a professional engineer or architect, licensed in the statewhere the work is being performed.'' Finally, ACCSH members discussed their thoughts with regard to employeesworking under loads including working under slabs which were not secured,passing a motion which stated that as a general rule they did not endorseemployees working under any loads. Further discussion on these issues appearsin the <T3>Specific Issues </T3>section of this document, where OSHA solicitsinformation on issues which have already generated special attention byaffected parties. Before beginning a summary and explanation of the proposed rule, OSHA feelsit is important for readers to have a basic understanding of the lift-slabconstruction technique. OSHA believes that one of the possible reasonsthat commenters failed to address lift-slab operations in the originalproposal was that this technique is not widely used, accounting for onlya small percentage_probably less than one percent_of all building constructionactivity. The National Bureau of Standards in their study entitled, <T3>Investigation of L'Ambiance Plaza Building Collapse in Bridgeport,Connecticut </T3>(NBSIR 87-3640) described the lift-slab method as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21">In the lift-slab method of construction, floor and roof slabs arecast one on top of the other at ground level. The floors are usually two-waypost-tensioned flat plates of either regular or lightweight concrete. Afterpost-tensioning, the slabs are lifted to their positions by hydraulic jacksand are secured to the columns.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">NBS goes on to say that ``By casting the slabs at ground level, lift-slabconstruction can eliminate 90 percent of the formwork required for cast-in-placeconstruction and reduce labor requirements. Cost savings and speed of constructionare two primary advantages claimed for lift-slab construction.'' (Ex. 34,p. 1). OSHA invites readers to compare this technique with other constructiontechniques, such as cast-in-place construction. During cast-in-place construction,formwork is used to support the weight of freshly placed concrete and continuesto provide support until the concrete has achieved the strength necessaryto support itself and all superimposed loads. Workers are not prohibitedfrom working in buildings under such loads during the time that the concreteis gaining its strength. However, OSHA does require that the formwork becapable of supporting without failure all loads that may reasonably beanticipated to be applied to the formwork. In contrast, in the lift-slab method of construction, OSHA is proposingto continue the existing requirement that workers not be permitted to workunder slabs which have not been secured, neither would they be permittedto work under slabs that have been secured if other slabs on upper levelswere being lifted, a process described in the proposed regulations as ``jackingoperations.'' Of course, the proposed requirement would not prohibit essentialworkers_those workers who have the task of controlling the jacking operationsand securing the slabs_from working under slabs. Prior to the L'Ambiance Plaza collapse, according to one lift-slab contractor,it was common practice for employees to work in buildings being constructedby the lift-slab method just as long as the floor slab immediately abovethem had been secured. This meant that ``jacking operations'' may havebeen in progress on upper levels, and those floors were thus ``suspendedon the jacks.'' A failure of any component of the jacking system, not unlikea failure of the formwork system in cast-in-place work, could result inother components being overloaded or in the dropping of a suspended floorwhich could, in turn, result in total collapse of the building. Such failureshave occurred in both cast-in-place and in the lift-slab method of construction.OSHA observes, however, that it has limited data on building failures wherethe lift-slab method of construction was used. OSHA is only aware of onelift-slab-constructed building failure since its inception in 1971_the1987 L'Ambiance Plaza failure. Published materials, however, describe severalfailures that occurred in the years 1952, 1954, 1956, 1961, and 1962. (Reference:Feld, Jacob, <T3>Construction Failure, </T3>John Wiley andamp; Sons, Inc., New York; 1968)(Ex. 35-1). At the March 30, 1988, ACCSH meeting, a representative of a lift-slab constructionfirm addressed the Committee and spoke on the subject of employees workingunder slabs while jacking operations were in progress. (Ex. 35-2, p. 150).Specifically, the representative stated:<ITAG tagnum="21">Another very important area of disagreement is our position that othertrades be allowed to work inside a building under secured slabs while liftingis in progress on upper floors. This has been the normal practice aroundthe world and really is not different than what is normal practice of otherstructural methods. Similar conditions exist on multi-story, cast-in-placeconcrete frames, during the pouring and curing of an upper floor.</ITAG>The representative further stated:<ITAG tagnum="21">On precast frames or masonry frames, the same thing applies duringthe erection of those precast members. On steel frames, during the erectionof the steel members and the pouring of the decks up above, workmen areallowed to do their trades below. We really do not see why our methodsshould be restrained in the way proposed, from competing with other structuralsystems.</ITAG>The public commenter in comparing the risks of precast with lift-slab constructionremarked, ``. . . some of the precast members are very, very heavy andvery large on multi-story buildings; there are trades working below. Godforbid, one lets go, there is going to be a catastrophe, there is no questionabout it . . .'' (Ex. 35-2, p. 154). This statement prompts OSHA to ask for public comment, in the SpecificIssues section of this preamble, on whether or not employees working onprecast or cast-in-place sites are exposed to the same type of hazard thatis being regulated for the lift-slab technique. (See Question andplusmin;12in the Specific Issues section below). <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Summary and Explanation of Proposal</ITAG>References to an ANSI standard in this section are to the provisions ofthe ANSI A10.9-1970 standard, except where noted. The ANSI standard containsa section specific to lift-slab operations. That section has been incorporatedby reference in the OSHA standards, thereby serving as the existing standard.Section 1926.700(b) Definitions.In paragraph (b)(9) of andSection;1926.700, OSHA proposes to add a definitionof the term ``jacking operations.'' OSHA defines jacking operations asthe task of lifting a slab (or group of slabs, sometimes referred to asa ``package'' or ``pick'') from one location to another, e.g., from thecasting location to a temporary (parked) location, or from a temporarylocation to another temporary location, or to the final location of theslabs in the structure. The existing standard does not contain a definitionfor this term, however, OSHA believes it is necessary to define this termso that employers will completely understand the provisions where thisterm is used.In paragraph (b)(10) of andSection;1926.700, OSHA proposes to add a definitionfor the term ``qualified designer.'' OSHA defines qualified designer tomean a person who, by possession of a degree, certification, or professionalstanding, has demonstrated ability in design in the subject under regulation.In this standard, such an individual must be qualified in the design oflift-slab operations. The existing standard does not contain a definitionfor qualified designer. However, since the proposed standard contains aprovision which uses the term ``qualified designer,'' and because anotherprovision in the existing Concrete and Masonry Construction Standard alsocontains a provision using the term ``qualified designer,'' OSHA has proposedto define this term. The definition proposed by OSHA is based on the ANSIdefinition for qualified designer that is contained in the ANSI A10.9-1983,American National Standard for Construction and Demolition Operations_Concreteand Masonry Work_Safety Requirements. Since the requirements for lift-slaboperations are almost exclusively taken from the ANSI standard and theANSI standard is the consensus standard for Concrete and Masonry Work,OSHA believes it is appropriate to base its definition on the most recentANSI standard.OSHA invites specific comment (see Question andplusmin;1 in the SpecificIssues section below) on an issue related to this definition, which mayrequire OSHA to define additional terms or, perhaps, to delete the termdefined here. Specifically, OSHA is asking for information on whether ornot it should require the employer to have a professional engineer or architect,licensed in the state where the work is to be performed, to design andplan the lift-slab project instead of a ``qualified designer.'' OSHA isalso requesting comment on whether or not a person (a registered professionalengineer, for example) other than, or perhaps in addition to, the contractorshould supervise the construction operation.Section 1926.705 Lift-slab operations.Section 1926.705 of the proposed rule contains specific requirements forlift-slab construction operations and are in addition to the general requirementsfor all concrete construction contained in other sections of Subpart Q(Concrete and Masonry Construction) of 29 CFR Part 1926.Paragraph (a) would require that lift-slab operations be designed and plannedby a qualified designer (i.e. qualifed in lift-slab operations); that allplans and designs be implemented by the employer; and, that the plans anddesigns include detailed instructions and sketches indicating the prescribedmethod of erection. The existing rule, ANSI section 11.2, contains essentiallythe same provision except that it requires a <T3>``qualified professional engineer or architect'' </T3>to design andplan the lift-slab operations. OSHA is proposing to revise the existingrule to bring it in line with the most recent ANSI Standard, A10.9-1983,which in section 10.2, requires a <T3>``qualified designer'' </T3>to plan and design lift-slab operations.OSHA has received one recommendation with regard to this provision. Thatrecommendation came from the members of the ACCSH who recommended thatthe proposed paragraph (a) requirement for a qualified designer be changedto require that a professional engineeer or architect, licensed in thestate where the work would be done, plan, design, and supervise the erectionprocess. Specific public comment is requested on this point in Questionandplusmin;1 of the Specific Issues section below.Paragraph (b) of the proposed rule would require that jacks be marked toindicate the rated capacity established by the manufacturer. This is anexisting requirement in andSection;1926.305(a)(1) and it applies to all jacksused in construction activities. OSHA is not recommending any substantiverevision to this provision, but is simply repeating this provision in thelift-slab operation section in an effort to locate all requirements uniqueto lift-slab operations in the same section of the construction safetyand health standards. OSHA believes it is necessary for employers to ensurethat each jack has the rated capacity marked so there will be no questionas to what loads can be placed on the jacks.Paragraph (c) of the proposed rule would require that jacks not be loadedbeyond the rated capacity established by the manufacturer. This, too, isan existing requirement in andSection;1926.305(a)(1), and is being repeatedin the proposed lift-slab section for the same reasons discussed in (b)above. Again, OSHA is not recommending any substantive revision to thisexisting requirement.Paragraph (d) of the proposed rule would require that jacking equipmentnot be overloaded and that the threaded rods and other members that transmitloads to the jacks be capable of supporting at least two and one-half timesthe load to be applied. This provision is an existing requirement in section11.3.1 of the ANSI standard. The provision is also continued in the morerecent ANSI A10.9-1983 standard in section 10.3.1. OSHA is proposing tochange the existing requirement by including in the provision, the identityof some of the jacking equipment components which are subject to the 2.5factor of safety. Specifically, OSHA interprets, as recently clarifiedby the American National Standards Institute (Ex. 35-3), that the 2.5 safetyfactor applies to all the jacking equipment including, but not limitedto, jacks and other lifting units, lifting angles, lifting nuts, hook-upcollars, T-caps, shearheads, columns, and footings. OSHA realizes thatthere may be some disagreement over whether or not it is necessary to requirethe shearheads, columns, and footings to be designed with a 2.5 safetyfactor and has addressed this issue in Question andplusmin;2 of the SpecificIssues section below. OSHA has not attempted to identify every single componentthat would be considered jacking equipment because as new contractors enterthe lift-slab construction business, they may not identify their componentswith the same names used by other contractors. OSHA does not wish to createloopholes by failing to identify specifically every component that couldpossibly be a part of the jacking equipment nor does it want to be vagueabout which components must meet the 2.5 safety factor. OSHA is considering further revision of this provision and has asked commentabout it in Question andplusmin;4 of the Specific Issues section below. Paragraph (e) of the proposed rule would require that jacks be installedand designed so that they will neither lift nor continue to lift when theirrated capacity is exceeded. This proposed requirement is essentially thesame as the existing requirement found in section 11.3.2 of the ANSI A10.9-1970standard, and is also essentially the same as section 10.3.2 of the mostcurrent ANSI standard, A10.9-1983. OSHA observes that a similar provisionwas proposed in the NPRM of 1985, however, no comments were received onthe 1985 NPRM provision. Paragraph (f) of the proposed rule would require that jacks used in lift-slabconstruction be equipped with a safety device which will enable the jacksto support the load in any position in the event any jack malfunctionsor loses its lifting ability. OSHA observes that this proposed provisionis essentially the same as an existing requirement in andSection; 1926.305(b)(1)and is also identical to both a provision in section 11.3.3 of the ANSIA10.9-1970 standard and to section 10.3.3 of the updated ANSI A10.9-1983standard. OSHA notes that one comment received on the 1985 NPRM relatedto this provision. That comment was from the Washington Metropolitan AreaConstruction Safety Association (WMACSA) (Ex. 14-29) who suggested thatOSHA add a requirement to install the safety device as required by thisparagraph. WMACSA supported the need for this provision by pointing outthat the ANSI A10.9 standard contained such a provision in the lift slabsection. OSHA observes, as stated above, that the existing requirement in andSection;1926.305(b)(1), nearly identical to the ANSI requirement, already addressesthis hazard. However, because OSHA believes it is important to locate allprovisions unique to lift-slab construction in the same section of itsregulations, it has determined that this provision and another provisionspecifically related to lift-slab jacks in andSection; 1926.305(b)(2), shouldbe relocated to the lift-slab operations section of the Concrete and MasonryConstruction Standards. These two provisions are identified as paragraphs(f) and (h) of this proposed rule. OSHA proposes to remove the requirementsentirely from their present location_andSection; 1926.305(b)_to avoid furtherconfusion. Paragraphs (g), (h), and (i) contain three requirements which are essentiallythe same as existing requirements in section 11.4 of the ANSI A10.9-1970standard and essentially the same as the provisions in Section 10.4 ofthe ANSI A10.9-1983 standard, except that in the ANSI documents all threeof the requirements are combined into one paragraph. Also, as discussedabove, paragraph (h) of the proposal contains essentially the same requirementas the existing provision in andSection; 1926.305(b)(2). The intent of theserequirements is to prevent subjecting the slab to stresses beyond the engineeredlimits. OSHA observes that a failure in the slab could result in collapseof the building which most likely would be accompanied by injury and deathof workers. Paragraph (g) of the proposed rule would require the employer to synchronizejacking operations in a manner that will ensure all points of the slabsupport are kept within \1/2\ inch of that needed to maintain the slabin a level position. Paragraph (h) of the proposed rule would require that where leveling isautomatically controlled, the employer must install a device to stop theoperation when the \1/2\ inch leveling tolerance is exceeded or where thereis a malfunction in the jacking system. Paragraph (i) of the proposed rule would require that where leveling ismaintained by manual controls, the employer must locate such controls ina central location and have a competent person attend the controls whilelifting is in progress. OSHA proposes to separate the three distinctive requirements and proposeone change in paragraph (i). In particular, OSHA proposes that a <T3>competent person </T3>be required to attend the controls while liftingis in progress and leveling is maintained by manual controls. OSHA observesthat the 1970 ANSI standard prescribes that a ``trained operator'' attendthe manual controls, whereas the 1983 ANSI A10.9 standard prescribes thata ``qualified person'' attend the controls. OSHA believes a competent person,as defined in andSection; 1926.32(f), is the appropriate term to use in thisstandard to describe the qualifications of the person who attends the controls.Additionally, OSHA observes that the term ``competent person'' is usedin many provisions of the construction safety and health standards to describethe minimum level of experience and authority needed to provide an acceptablelevel of safety for workers.For these reasons, OSHA is proposing to revise the existing requirementby substituting the term ``competent person'' for the existing term, ``trainedoperator,'' so that the provision would require that a <T3>competent person </T3>attend the controls while lifting is in progress.OSHA notes that the term competent person is defined in andSection; 1926.32(f)to mean ``one who is capable of identifying existing and predictable hazardsin the surroundings or working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous,or dangerous to employees, and who has authorization to take prompt correctivemeasures to eliminate them.''OSHA also notes that it proposed an essentially similar requirement inits 1985 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. There were no comments on thisparticular provision of the 1985 proposal.Paragraph (j) of the proposed rule would require the employer to limitthe maximum number of manually controlled jacks on one slab to a numberthat will permit the operator to maintain the slab level within specifiedtolerances. This provision is similar to a provision in section 11.3.4of the ANSI standard, and also to the provision in section 10.3.4 of theANSI A10.9-1983 standard except that both of the ANSI standards specifythat the number of jacks should not exceed <T3>14</T3>. ANSI further prescribes that in no event should the numberof jacks be too great to permit the operator to maintain the slab levelwithin specified tolerances.However, in keeping with OSHA's efforts to develop more performance-orientedstandards, OSHA is proposing to revise the existing requirement to eliminatethe specific number ``14'' and instead require the employer to limit thenumber of jacks on one slab to a number that will permit the operator tomaintain the slab level within specified tolerances. OSHA notes that itis unaware of the reasons why both the 1970 and 1983 ANSI standards specifythe number 14 since OSHA believes that common industry practice is to operateall jacks automatically, except in limited situations such as when settingwedges. During the wedge setting phase, automatic jacking operations maycease while individual jacks are operated manually, as needed, to completethe wedge setting operation. This process normally involves the manualcontrol of only one or two jacks. Thus, OSHA has proposed to revise theexisting requirement as stated above. OSHA invites comments on whether or not it should continue to specify themaximum number of jacks as the ANSI standards do. Specifically, OSHA wouldlike to know if employee safety would be enhanced if OSHA specified a maximumnumber of jacks that could be used on one slab? OSHA also questions whether``14'' is the appropriate number. If not, what is the appropriate numberand what are the reasons for recommending a number that differs from ANSI?Paragraph (k) of the proposed rule would require the employer to prohibitemployees (except those essential to the jacking operation) from beingin the building while any jacking operation is taking place. OSHA wouldexplain in this provision that a jacking operation begins when a slab (orgroups of slabs) is lifted and ends when such slabs are secured with eithertemporary or permanent connections.The proposed provision is based on provisions in both the 1970 and the1983 versions of the ANSI A10.9 standard. OSHA notes that ANSI has recentlyprovided an interpretation of these provisions. (Ex. 35-3). Specifically,ANSI interpreted the provisions to mean that no one is permitted anywherebelow any slab being jacked, noting that the restriction prohibits employees(except those essential for the jacking operation and to secure the slabs)from working below lower floor slabs which are secured temporarily or permanentlyif any upper floor slab is being jacked.The proposed provision is somewhat different from the existing standardas interpreted by ANSI in that the proposed provision prohibits employeesfrom being ``in the building'' rather than just ``below any slabs duringjacking operations''_the language used in ANSI's interpretation. The proposedprovision is intended to clarify those situations where a building hasbeen divided into sections or portions for the purpose of carrying outlifing operations. For example, a building may be so large that ratherthan lift the entire floor in one jacking operation, the floors may becast and lifted in two sections. Thus, it is possible that using the ANSIlanguage, employers could misunderstand the provision to mean that whileone section was being lifted, employees would be permitted to work in anothersection as long as no jacking operations were being carried out in thatsection. However, a review of the disaster at L'Ambiance Plaza in Bridgeport,Connecticut, (where the Plaza was constructed as two towers) shows thatemployees are at risk if they are allowed to remain in one portion of astructure or building while another portion is being lifted. Thus, OSHAbelieves that in order to afford a proper level of safety, all nonessentialemployees must be removed from the entire building while any jacking operationis taking place. OSHA observes that compliance with this proposed provisionmay have saved many of the lives lost in the Bridgeport disaster.  Additionally, OSHA notes that using the lift-slab construction technique,floor slabs are cast at ground level and later lifted to their final position.OSHA has determined that if a slab(s) being lifted were to fall, even whereit is several floors above where employees are located, it has the potentialto continue its descent until reaching ground level, with possible catastrophicconsequences. This is essentially what happened in the Bridgeport collapse.Therefore, in order to protect employees from this hazard, OSHA believesnonessential employees must leave the building whenever any jacking operationsare taking place. Employees would not be permitted to reenter any suchbuilding until jacking operations have ended, i.e., all the slabs are secured.To facilitate compliance with this provision, employers may need only toschedule their jacking operations at times when other trades are not present,e.g., at night or on weekends.  Paragraph (1) of the proposed rule would require that when making temporaryconnections, the wedges must be secured by tack welding or an equivalentmethod of securing. This would be a new provision which OSHA is proposingbecause it has come to OSHA's attention that there is some confusion withregard to how wedges need to be secured before releasing the load fromthe lifting unit (i.e., jack). In particular, OSHA staff on at least oneoccasion has had discussions with a lift-slab contractor regarding thecontractor's intent to use chicken wire and other unacceptable materialsto secure the wedges when making temporary connections of floor slabs tocolumns. OSHA believes that it is vitally important for the safety of workersthat temporary connections be secured by tack welding or other equivalentmethod.  Paragraph (m) of the proposed rule would require that all welding on temporaryand permanent connections be performed by a certified welder who is familiarwith the welding requirements specified in the lift-slab plan and specifications.This would be a new provision which OSHA believes would afford a degreeof safety which is not afforded by the existing standard. In particular,the existing standard does not address welding of connections and OSHAfeels very strongly that only certified welders should be allowed to performthese critical welding tasks. OSHA notes that in order to be classifiedas a certified welder, the welder must have demonstrated welding ability,and the capability to perform critical welding tasks that would be requiredto make temporary and permanent connections. It is OSHA's belief that welderswho have not demonstrated such abilities (that is, are not ``certified'')should not perform critical welding tasks when the lives of themselvesand other workers are at risk. OSHA observes that a failure of a weld couldresult in losing support for a slab and ultimate collapse of the building. Additionally, OSHA observes that in its conversations with two U.S. constructionfirms who use the lift-slab technique, both stated that only certifiedwelders were hired for critical welding tasks. Apparently both these firmsrecognize, as OSHA does, the critical role that these welding tasks playwith regard to worker safety. (Note that OSHA seeks additional informationon certified welders in Question andplusmin;13 in the Specific Issues sectionbelow).  Paragraph (n) of the proposed rule would prohibit load transfer from thejacks to the building columns until the welds on the column shear platesare cooled to air temperature. This would be a new provision. It is basedon a provision in section 10.6 of ANSI A10.9-1983. OSHA believes that theANSI provision appropriately addresses the hazard of transferring loadsonto welds that have not yet cooled.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Specific Issues</ITAG>The public is invited to comment on the following issues. The commentsshould contain adequate information and evidence, when available, to supportthe position of the writer.1. OSHA is proposing in andSection; 1926.705(a) that lift-slab operationsbe designed and planned by a ``qualified designer.'' Would employees beafforded a greater level of protection if OSHA revised this provision torequire the work to be done by an ``engineer'' or ``architect?'' If so,what particular classification of engineer would afford the appropriatelevel of protection (e.g., structural, registered professional engineer)?As mentioned above, OSHA has received a recommendation from its AdvisoryCommittee on Construction Safety and Health (ACCSH) that the term ``qualifieddesigner'' be replaced with the phrase ``professional engineer or architect,licensed in the state where the work is to be done.'' The ACCSH also recommendedthat the provision be expanded so that the professional engineer or architectwould be required to ``supervise'' the lift-slab project in addition tothe designing and planning requirements proposed by OSHA. OSHA solicitscomment on the recommendation. 2. OSHA is proposing in andSection; 1926.705(d) that threaded rods and othermembers that transmit loads to the jacks be capable of supporting at leasttwo and one-half times the load to be applied. OSHA interprets the words``other members'' in this provision to include the shearheads, columns,and footings. There have been indications that some parties disagree withthis interpretation, arguing that there is no need to include these componentsin this provision. In particular, a public participant at the March 30,1988, ACCSH meeting said (Ex. 35-2, p. 150) that he disagreed with theapplication of the 2.5 safety factor to columns, shearheads and footingsbecause ``these three items are more than adequately covered during normaldesign practices using standards put forth in the American Institute ofSteel Construction, American Concrete Institute, and the Post-TensioningInstitute.'' OSHA requests comments on whether or not the shearheads andthe building columns and footings should be considered ``other members''for the purpose of this provision?3. OSHA believes that it may be appropriate to require employers to preparea certification record, which they would sign and keep on file for reviewat the time of an OSHA inspection. The certification record would containthe name of the person or organization that determined that the jackingequipment met the 2.5 safety factor and the date that such determinationwas made. OSHA invites comments on the benefits to employee safety thatwould result if OSHA required such an assurance from employers. 4. As discussed in the summary and explanation of this provision, OSHAinvites comments on rewording andSection; 1926.705(d) (which as proposedreads essentially the same as the ANSI A10.9-1983 provision) to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="21">(a) Jacking equipment shall not be overloaded. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(b) Jacking equipment (such as, but not limited to the following:lifting units (e.g., jacks), threaded rods, lifting angles, lifting nuts,hook-up collars, T-caps, shear plates, shearheads, columns, and footings)shall be capable of supporting at least two and one-half times the loadto be applied.</ITAG>As mentioned above, OSHA is concerned that if it fails to identify allcomponents which are part of jacking equipment, employers will mistakenlybelieve that not all components must be able to support at least 2.5 timesthe load to be applied to them. On the other hand, as new employers enterthe lift-slab construction business, OSHA is concerned they will renameparts or use parts which are commonly identified by other names, and againmistakenly believe that those components are not subject to the 2.5 safetyfactor. OSHA notes that existing lift-slab contractors do not always identifyjacking equipment components by the same terms, yet the function of theequipment may be essentially the same. OSHA requests comment on how toword this provision to avoid any such misunderstanding. 5. OSHA solicits information on whether or not specific requirements forlateral stability should become a part of the final rule. In particular,OSHA wishes to know whether or not the building plans and specificationstypically address lateral stability. And, if so, are such plans and specificationsroutinely kept at the construction site; are these plans and specificationsfollowed; and who does the employer designate (e.g., a professional engineer,a competent person, or itself) as the person responsible for overseeingcompliance with the building plans and specifications? If the buildingplans and specifications do not address lateral stability, who determineswhat action will be taken to ensure that lateral stability is provided?6. OSHA solicits comments on the need to require employers to maintainthe building plumb during jacking operations. What is the current industrypractice with regard to keeping the building plumb?7. OSHA requests comments on the need to include requirements in the finalrule that address employee access and egress during the erection of lift-slabbuildings. OSHA requests information on how employees gain access to upperlevel slabs (1) to erect scaffolds; (2) to set wedges and make temporaryconnections; (3) to make permanent connections; and (4) to perform otheractivities (such as electrical, plumbing, etc.). OSHA also wishes to knowwhat means of rapid escape from upper slabs are presently being used foremergency situations such as fire, explosion or structural failure. 8. When are stairways or ladders installed to provide access and egressto upper floor levels? 9. OSHA frequently uses the term ``jacks'' in the proposed requirements.Since other lifting units (not always referred to as jacks) can be usedin lift-slab operations, is there a need for OSHA to substitute the term``lifting units'' for the term ``jacks'', or is the term ``jacks'' commonlyunderstood to include such other equipment?10. OSHA is considering promulgating a specific requirement that jacks(or possibly ``lifting units'') be secured to building columns so thatthey will not become dislodged or dislocated. What is the current industrypractice with regard to securing jacks to columns?11. In andSection; 1926.705(k), OSHA is proposing to continue the existingrequirement that allows only employees essential to jacking operationsto be in the building during jacking operations. OSHA has two concernson which it seeks comment with regard to this provision. (a) OSHA is aware that controversy exists with regard to the existing andproposed provisions in that some individuals believe the evacuation ofnonessential employees during jacking operations is not necessary. OSHA,of course, will consider all submitted suggestions for alternative solutionsto the prohibition of nonessential employees in the building during jackingoperations. In particular, OSHA would like to evaluate any engineeringcontrols or solutions that may be used or are available to protect employees.For example, would the use of shoring systems to support the floors besufficient protection to allow nonessential employees to work under slabsin the event of a collapse? Such suggested solutions must be discussedin detail and demonstrate how the solution offers employee protection equivalentto keeping nonessential workers out of the building during jacking operations.(b) OSHA is considering identifying, by job function, employees who wouldbe considered the ``essential'' employees. OSHA requests comment on whichjob functions employers consider essential to jacking operations and howfar away from the building should nonessential employees be during jackingoperations. 12. Is there a need to revise other regulations in the Construction Safetyand Health Standards to prohibit workers from being in buildings whileprecast members are being positioned and secured, or while cast-in-placeconcrete is being cured? 13. The National Bureau of Standards has recommended to OSHA that fracturetoughness values should be specified for rods used in lift slab construction.NBS pointed out that fracture toughness values are presently specifiedfor steels used in bridges, pressure vessels, ship structures and othertransportation applications (Ex. 35-4). OSHA solicits comment on whetherit should specify a particular value for the rods and, if so, what shouldthat value be and why? 14. OSHA is proposing in andSection;1926.705(m) that all welding of temporaryand permanent connections be performed by a certified welder. As statedabove, OSHA believes that it is the current practice of lift-slab constructionfirms to hire only certified welders for critical welding tasks. However,OSHA solicits information on whether or not there is a need to define whatconstitutes a ``certified welder.'' OSHA believes this may be necessaryin order to assure that welders are indeed qualified to perform criticalwelds on the structural members. As an example, should the provision requireconnections to be welded by a person who possesses a valid certificationgranted by the State or local licensing board? Or, should certificationby <T3>any</T3> authority be acceptable? How many organizations certify welders,particularly for structural welding operations? Are welders provided withcertification cards that can be displayed to employers or others in authority?15. The NBS in their report on the L'Ambiance Plaza investigation concludesthat excessive deformations occurred in the lifting angle of the shearheadwhich was followed by one of the jack rods in the lifting assembly slippingoff the lifting angle, initiating a chain reaction. (Ex. 34, p. v). ShouldOSHA require employers to institute measures (such as the use of lockingnut caps, wedges or boards) to insure that the rods and nuts cannot slipout of position? Are such methods in use now? If so, please describe them.16. To assist OSHA in gathering information related to the cost of theproposed lift-slab requirements, the following questions are asked: a. How many companies are involved in lift-slab construction? What percentageof their revenues are derived from lift-slab construction? b. What is the number of construction projects built annually using thelift-slab technology and what is the annual square footage of lift-slabprojects? c. What is the average value of these projects? d. What is the current industry practice regarding keeping workers outfrom under slabs while lifting is occurring? If workers were not allowedin the building while slabs were being lifted, how would this affect theeconomics of using lift-slab? Would it be possible to schedule work suchthat productivity is not affected? Are there any additional economic factorsthat would make the lift-slab method more attractive compared to cast-in-placeconstruction even though workers were not allowed in the building duringthe lifting operation? e. How long (in hours, days, or weeks) does it take to lift a slab or groupsof slabs from their casting location to their parked position? How longdoes it take to lift from the temporary position to the final or permanentposition? f. Once lifting starts, is there any reason that lifting would be stopped,with the load suspended on the jacks, prior to the slabs reaching theirtemporary or permanent positions? g. Are permanent connections ever made as soon as floors are lifted intoplace, or does this always occur at a later stage in the construction process?If later, how much later? <ITAG tagnum="85">IV. Preliminary Regulatory Impact, Regulatory Flexibility and EnvironmentalImpact Assessments </ITAG>Introduction The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has prepared thisPreliminary Regulatory Impact Assessment (PRIA) in compliance with ExecutiveOrder 12291 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-353,94 Stat. 1164 [5 U.S.C. 60 <T3>et seq.</T3>]) OSHA has made a preliminary determination that the proposedrevisions to the lift-slab provisions of the Concrete and Masonry Standardwill not constitute a ``major rule'' as its net effect will be less than$100 million. In addition, it will not cause major increases in consumerprices or have a significant adverse effect on competition, employment,investment, productivity, innovation or on international trade. OSHA hasalso determined that the proposed revisions are technologically and economicallyfeasible, and that the potential environmental impacts of the proposedrequirements would not be significant. Industry Profile The lift-slab construction technique has been used in over 50 countriessince its development in 1948 (Ex. 36-2, p. 169). The total worldwide volumeconstructed using this method is estimated to exceed half a billion squarefeet. Other than the L'Ambiance Plaza collapse in Bridgeport, Connecticut,on April 23, 1987, OSHA is aware of no other fatal accidents involvingthis construction technique. Lift-slab methods can be more economical than cast-in-place methods, particularlyfor buildings where the framing is similar on all floors. Because the floorand roof slabs are all cast at ground level and jacked into position, thelift-slab technique eliminates the need for 90 percent of the formworkused in cast-in-place methods. Reducing the highly labor-intensive erectionof formwork reduces costs and increases speed of construction (Ex. 36-14).As a result, the use of lift-slab can be a cost-effective alternative tocast-in-place methods, particularly in geographical areas having high laborcosts.Texstar Construction Corporation (Texstar) is the company involved in thegreatest volume of lift-slab construction, having completed 800 buildingson 600 projects over the course of the 37 years that they have used thistechnology. These buildings have accounted for approximately 62 millionsquare feet of lifted slab. Most recently, Texstar has been lifting about2 million square feet of lift-slab per year on about 20 buildings in 10-15projects. Of these projects, 40 percent are residential (apartments, condominiums,hotels, etc.), 50 percent are office buildings, 5 percent are parking structuresand 5 percent are specialty buildings (Ex. 36-7).Lift Plate International, a Florida construction company, has erected anumber of 2- and 3-story buildings and is the only other company knownto OSHA to do the actual lifting. Lift Plate International lifted about600,000 square feet on about 10 buildings during the last year (Ex. 36-8).The two systems currently used by these respective companies vary primarilyin the manner in which the columns are erected. This difference in turndetermines the maximum height of the building. Lift-Plate Internationalerects columns that are the full height of the building before liftingslabs; overall building height is limited to 10 stories. Texstar uses aseries of three-story column extensions allowing for tall buildings (Ex.36-17).The lift-slab method of construction constitutes only a small fractionof all construction projects in the United States. Although published estimatesof the amount have ranged from between 3 and 10 percent of all commercialprojects (Exs. 36-3 and 4), these estimates appear too high. Based on dataindicating the amount of floor space constructed by Texstar and Lift-PlateInternational, the lift-slab technique accounts for less than one percentof the 1,004 million square feet of commercial and industrial space constructedduring 1987 (Ex. 36-11). (Although for certain building types and in certainregions the lift-slab method enjoys a cost advantage over other methods,industry representatives explain its relatively small market share primarilyby lack of familiarity on the part of owners, designers and contractors).This projection is consistent with the view of Clifford Freyermuth, theexecutive director of the Post Tensioning Institute who reports that thelift-slab method of construction has declined in popularity over the years,accounting for no more than one percent of all construction (Exs. 36-10and 12). He attributed this decline to the fact that, at one time, lift-slabheld a cost advantage due to the relatively costly nature of formwork;but in the intervening years, innovative formwork systems such as flyingforms or whole floor systems, have declined in cost and become more widelyused.Costs of ComplianceThe proposed revisions to that portion of the concrete and masonry constructionstandard addressing lift-slab operations are for the most part taken directlyfrom ANSI A10.9 (1983), and are essentially the same as the ANSI A10.9(1970) provisions referenced in the original standard. The cost of theseprovisions was a part of the costs calculated for the ANSI referenced standardsin the Concrete and Masonry RIA. The proposal prohibits all workers butthose essential to the jacking operation from being in the building during``jacking operations.'' This is consistent with OSHA's interpretation ofthe recent ANSI clarification that ``non-essential employees shall notwork under or on top of the load that is not temporarily or permanentlysecured to columns'' and with OSHA's current enforcement guideline forthis provision of the standard.This interpretation, however, is not universally accepted. Industry representativesand at least one federal judge (Ex. 36-18) have interpreted this provisionto mean that non-essential workers had to be out from under only the immediatefloor or floors being lifted. This distinction may make a difference inthe economics of a project, particularly for buildings of five floors ormore. Since lifting operations can occur over a period of several weeks,depending upon factors such as building size, weather, and other activities,excluding other craftsmen during this time could result in considerabledelay to the construction schedule.Officials of Texstar have estimated that imposition of this requirementalone would result in the loss of 75 percent of their business (95 percentof which is related to lift-slab activities) as it would no longer be cost-effectiveto use the lift-slab technique for buildings of more than four floors inheight. It appears likely therefore that this provision would drasticallyreduce their volume of work and could conceivably force the company outof business. Texstar indicated that they have already cut their staff backfrom 24 to 7 employees as a result of a drop-off in business (Ex. 36-7).In addition, they have filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 as a resultof the OSHA fines resulting from the L'Ambiance Plaza collapse and potentialliability claims (Ex. 36-16).Looked at from another perspective, lift-slab's cost advantage, althoughvariable by region and size of building, averages about $2 per square foot(Ex. 36-7). If 75 percent of Texstar's current volume of business shiftsto other construction methods in the future, this would translate intoan increased annual cost of $3 million (2 million sq. ft. x .75 x $2) tobuilding owners. Contrary to the potential problem faced by Texstar, Lift-PlateInternational has indicated that this requirement would have absolutelyno impact on their business or their ability to compete for jobs. Thisfirm primarily builds structures of 3 and 4 stories, where they lift fora week to a week-and-a-half and finish before the other trades enter.A second requirement in the proposal addresses the loading of jacking equipment.It is clarified to ensure that the 2.5 safety factor applies to <T3>all </T3>jacking equipment, including columns, footings, and shearheadsin addition to the actual jacks, lifting angles, lifting nuts, etc. Apparentlythis requirement had not been interpreted by everyone to include the columns,footings and shearheads. Both companies currently doing lifting have indicatedthat their components now meet the 2.5 safety factor (Exs. 36-7 and 8).Although columns were not always fabricated with a 2.5 safety factor, compliancewill not be a substantial burden (Exs. 36-7, 8, and 9). The cost differentialof moving from the previous safety factors to 2.5 varied from 2 percentto 10 percent, depending on the building. The relative cost impact of the2.5 safety factor is actually greater for low rise than for high rise buildingswhere the columns constitute a larger part of the cost of the structure.A third requirement in the proposal specifies that all welding on temporaryand permanent connections be performed by a certified welder. Both companiesreport that the welds are so critical to the overall integrity of the structurethat well-qualified welders are essential. Thus, both lifting companieshave indicated that they currently use only ``welders with papers''or ``certifiedwelders'' and that this requirement would not affect them in any way (Exs.36-7 and 8). This provision therefore has been determined to be currentindustry practice and no costs of compliance are anticipated.The remaining provisions in the proposal are existing requirements in thecurrent referenced ANSI A10.9 (1970) standard and there has been no indicationfrom either industry or OSHA compliance staff that these requirements areother than current industry practice. Benefits The uncertainty surrounding the risks associated with the lift-slab methodmakes it difficult to estimate the benefits that would be attributableto changes in the standard. It can certainly be postulated that the deathsof many of the 28 workers killed in the L'Ambiance Plaza collapse wouldhave been prevented if non-essential workers had been barred from the buildingduring jacking operations. This incident, however, is the only known fatallift-slab-related accident to occur over the 39 years the method has beenin use. Thus, the determination of the likelihood of future incidents andthe number of potential fatalities that would be avoided as a result ofthis standard is problematical. Some of the hazards that workers are exposed to while performing lift-slaboperations are the same as those found in conventional cast-in-place techniques.Texstar has indicated that lift-slab is a safe method as reflected by theirlost workday injury rate of 8.2 days lost per 10,000 days worked and theirworkers' compensation experience modifier of 0.8 for the period from 1976to 1987. This does not include the injuries and fatalities of the L'AmbiancePlaza collapse at Bridgeport. (Ex. 36-2). This translates into an annualrate of 20.5 lost workdays per 100 full-time workers as compared to a rateof 122.5 lost workdays per 100 full-time workers for all of the constructionindustry during this same time period and 124.3 for SIC 1770_Concrete Work(Ex. 36-5). Moreover, Lift-Plate International has indicated that theyhave had no recordable injuries related to lift-slab activities (Ex. 36-8).These company records, however, do not represent the total risk picturefor lift-slab operations because they do not account for injuries or deathsto employees of other firms. For example, Texstar is but one subcontractoron a jobsite and other subcontractors' employees may also be exposed torisk. Of the 28 workers killed in the Bridgeport collapse, there were 7carpenters, 7 ironworkers, 7 laborers, 3 plumbers, 1 electrician, 1 operatingengineer, 1 bricklayer and 1 supervisor (Ex. 36-19). Texstar had only 17workers on site and of these, 8 were killed and 2 were injured (Ex. 36-20).This catastrophe accounts for 24% of the fatalities (28/117) that resultedfrom the 5 major concrete building collapses during the last 15 years.(See the Final Regulatory Impact Assessment of the Standard on Concreteand Masonry Construction, p. IV-5, Ex. 13A of Docket S-301A). Nevertheless, industry commenters vigorously contend that restricting theavailability of lift-slab methods would serve to increase the level ofwork-related risk by forcing workers who now work on lift-slab jobs atground level to be exposed to the more severe hazards associated with erectingformwork systems at heights (Exs. 36-7, 8, 9, and 15). For example, inJanuary 1988, two workers were killed and two were seriously injured whenthe topping lift pulled free of the boom on a mobile crane carrying forwork lumber to the second level of a building under construction (Ex. 36-13).The lift-slab method had reportedly been considered for this project butwas rejected due to safety concerns following the Bridgeport failure. In an ongoing analysis of structural failures, John Loss at the Universityof Maryland's Architectural and Engineering Performance Information Centerhas looked at many structural failures covering the period 1965 to thepresent and has found none that involved the lift-slab method of construction(Ex. 36-6). He states that ``all construction is unsafe'' and that ``duringconstruction, the buildings are in their most critically unstable mode.''In sum, the available data indicate that where lift-slab operations cancomply with the standard while remaining cost effective, the proposed provisionswill enhance worker safety by significantly reducing worker exposure topotentially catastrophic incidents. Where the standard causes life-slabmethods to be discontinued in favor of other construction methods, suchas cast-in-place methods, the effect on worker risk levels remains uncertain,and may either decrease or increase. Clearly, OSHA's mission is to protectworkers by reducing the risk. OSHA requests additional public comment onthis issue. Other Economic Effects <ITAG tagnum="81">Environmental Impacts </ITAG>The proposed revisions to the lift-slab requirements have been reviewedin accordance with the requirements of the National Environmental PolicyAct (NEPA) of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4231 <T3>et seq.</T3>), the Regulations of the Council on Environmental Quality(CEQ) (40 CFR Part 1500), and DOL's NEPA Procedures (29 CFR Part 11). Asa result of this review, the Assistant Secretary for OSHA has determinedthat the proposed revision would have no significant environmental impact.Although safety standards rarely influence air, water, or soil quality,plant or animal life, or the use of land or other aspects of the environment,it is appropriate to examine whether the proposed lift-slab requirementswill alter the environment external to the workplace. Examination of theproposed revisions show that they consist primarily of clarifications inwork practices and procedures and therefore will have no significant environmentaleffects. <ITAG tagnum="81">Regulatory Flexibility Certification </ITAG>Although the firms that will be most affected by this revised regulationare best described as small businesses, only two firms will be impacted.Therefore, OSHA has determined that this regulation, if promulgated, willnot have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of smallentities. <ITAG tagnum="85">References to Section IV_Preliminary Regulatory Impact, RegulatoryFlexibility and Environmental Impact Assessments_Exhibit 36</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">1. Frank A. Randall, Jr., ``New Developments in Lift-Slab Construction''<T3>Concrete Construction,</T3> Feb. 1986, p. 117.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">2. Construction Advisory Committee Meeting, 3/30/88 transcript p.144 testimony of Mr. Russillo, Vice President of Texstar.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">3. ``All Construction is Unsafe,'' Billings Gazette, 4/2/87.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">4. Occupational Safety and Health Reporter, the Bureau of NationalAffairs, 8/5/87, pp. 407-408.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">5. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, <T3>Occupational Injuries and Illnesses by Industry, 1986,</T3> unpublisheddata.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">6. ``Collecting Data on Building Disasters'', <T3>newspaper article.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">7. Personal communication, Chris Geckler, Executive Vice Presidentand Michael Russillo, Engineer, Texstar Construction Corporation, withMarilyn Schuster, OSHA, Washington, DC, May 5 and 10, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">8. Personal communication, Peter Vanderklaauw, President, Lift PlateInternational, with Marilyn Schuster, OSHA, Washington, DC, May 9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">9. Personal communication, William Rogers, President, Rogers InternationalCorporation, with Marilyn Schuster, OSHA, Washington, DC, May 6, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">10. Personal communication, Clifford Freyermuth, Executive Director,Post Tensioning Institute, with Barbara Bielaski, OSHA, Washington, DC,May 9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">11. U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee, <T3>Economic Indicators,</T3> Government Printing Office, Washington, DC,April 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">12. ``Lift-Slab Method No More Risky Than Other Techniques,'' BridgeportTelegraph, April 24, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">13. ``Topping Lift Blamed in Mishap,'' <T3>Engineering News Record,</T3> January 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">14. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, <T3>Investigation of L'Ambiance Plaza Building Collapse in Bridgeport,Connecticut,</T3> NBSIR 87-3640, Gaithersburg, MD, September 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">15. Written correspondence from Marshall Long, President, InternationalLift-Slab Corporation to Ralph Geckler, President, Texstar ConstructionCorporation, December 10, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">16. ``Lift-Slab Builder Bankrupt'', <T3>Engineering News Record,</T3> April 7, 1988, p. 17.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">17. ``Recent Construction Disaster Raises Questions About Practices,''<T3>Multi-Housing News,</T3> N.Y., NY, July 1987, pp. 37 and 38.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">18. William Brock vs. S andamp; S Realty Trust, U.S. District Court,District of Massachusetts, CA 87-2175-WD, September 2, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">19. ``Reagan Safety Policy Draws Council's Fire'', <T3>AFL-CIO News,</T3> May 9, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">20. OSHA press release package for 10/22/87 News Conference.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">V. OMB Approval Under the Paperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>There are no collections of information proposed in this section. Therefore,approval by OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act is not necessary.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Public Participation</ITAG>Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and argumentswith respect to this proposal and all issues involved therein. The commentsmust be postmarked on or before November 14, 1988, and submitted in quadruplicateto the Docket Officer, Docket No. S-301B, U.S. Department of Labor, 200Constitution Avenue NW., Room N-3670, Washington, DC 20210. Written submissionsmust clearly identify the provisions of the proposal which are addressedand the position taken with respect to each issue.The data, views, and arguments that are submitted will be available forpublic inspection and copying at the above address. All timely writtensubmissions received will be made a part of the record of this proceeding.Additionally, under section 6(b)(3) of the OSHA Act (29 U.S.C. 657), section107 of the Construction Safety Act (41 U.S.C. 333) and 29 CFR 1911.11,interested persons may file objections to the proposal and request an informalpublic hearing. The objections and hearing request should be submittedin quadruplicate to the Docket Officer at the address above and must complywith the following conditions:1. The objections must include the name and address of the objector;2. The objections must be postmarked on or before November 14, 1988 andsubmitted to the Docket Office at the aforementioned address;3. The objections must specify with particularity the provision(s) of theproposed rule to which objection is taken, and must state the grounds therefor;5. The objections must be accompanied by a detailed summary of the evidenceproposed to be adduced at the requested hearing.If objection and request for a hearing are timely filed, a hearing willbe scheduled pursuant to section 6(b)(3) of the Occupational Safety andHealth Act of 1970.OSHA recognizes that there may be interested persons who, through theirknowledge of safety or their experience in the operations involved, wouldwish to endorse or support certain provisions in the standard. OSHA welcomessuch supportive comments, including any pertinent accident data or costinformation which may be available, in order that the record of this rulemakingwill present a balanced picture of the public response on the issues involved.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. State Plan Requirements</ITAG>The 25 States and territories with their own OSHA-approved occupationalsafety and health plans must revise their existing standards within sixmonths of the publication date of the final standard or show OSHA why thereis no need for action, e.g., because an existing State standard coveringthis area is already ``at least as effective'' as the revised Federal standard.These States and territories are: Alaska, Arizona, California, Connecticut,(State and local government workers only), Hawaii, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky,Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, (State andlocal government workers only), North Carolina, Oregon, Puerto Rico, SouthCarolina, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Virgin Islands, Washingtonand Wyoming.<ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Federalism</ITAG>The proposed standard has been reviewed in accordance with Executive Order12612 (52 FR 41685; October 30, 1987) regarding Federalism. This Orderrequires that agencies, to the extent possible, refrain from limiting Statepolicy options, consult with States prior to taking any actions that wouldrestrict State policy options, and take such actions only when there isclear constitutional authority and the presence of a problem of nationalscope. The Order provides for preemption of State law only if there isa clear Congressional intent for the agency to do so. Any such preemptionis to be limited to the extent possible.Section 18 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act), expressesCongress' clear intent to preempt State laws relating to issues with respectto which Federal OSHA has promulgated occupational safety or health standards.Under the OSH Act a State can avoid preemption only if it submits, andobtains Federal approval of, a plan for the development of such standardsand their enforcement. Occupational safety and health standards developedby such Plan-States must, among other things, be at least as effectivein providing safe and healthful employment and places of employment asthe Federal standards.The Federally proposed lift-slab standard is drafted so that constructionworkers in every State would be protected by general, performance-orientedstandards. To the extent that there are State or regional peculiaritiesthat could alter construction methods, States with occupational safetyand health plans approved under section 18 of the OSH Act would be ableto develop their own State standards to deal with any special problems.Moreover, the performance nature of this proposed standard, of and by itself,allows for flexibility by States and contractors to provide as much safetyas possible using varying methods consonant with conditions in each State.In short, there is a clear national problem related to occupational safetyand health of construction workers. While the individual States, if allacted, might be able collectively to deal with the safety problems involved,most have not elected to do so in the seventeen years since the enactmentof the OSH Act. Those States which have elected to participate under section18 of the OSH Act would not be preempted by this proposed regulation andwould be able to deal with special, local conditions within the frameworkprovided by this performance-oriented standard while ensuring that theirstandards are at least as effective as the Federal standard. State commentsare invited on this proposal and will be fully considered prior to promulgationof a final rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 1926</ITAG>Construction safety, Concrete construction, Lift-slab construction, Occupationalsafety and health, Precast concrete.<ITAG tagnum="84">IX. Authority</ITAG>This document was prepared under the direction of John A. Pendergrass,Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210.Accordingly, pursuant to sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safetyand Health Act of 1970 (84 Stat. 1593, 29 U.S.C. 653, 655, and 657); section107 of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (83 Stat. 96, 40U.S.C. 333); Secretary of Labor's Order No. 9-83 (48 FR 35736); and 29CFR Part 1911, it is proposed to amend Part 1926 of Title 29 of the Codeof Federal Regulations as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 9th day of September, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John A. Pendergrass,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1926_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 1926 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 107, Contract Work Hours and Safety StandardsAct (Construction Safety Act) (40 U.S.C. 333); Secs. 4, 6, and 8, OccupationalSafety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, and 657); Secretaryof Labor's Order No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), or 9-83 (48FR 35736), as applicable; and 29 CFR Part 1911.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1926.305</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>2. By proposing to amend andSection; 1926.305 to remove and reserve paragraph(b).3. By proposing to amend paragraph (b) of andSection; 1926.700 to add definitions(b) (9) and (10) for two terms as follows.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart Q_Concrete and Masonry Construction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1926.700</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope, application and definitions applicable to this Subpart.</ITAG>(a) * * *(b) <T3>Definitions applicable to this subpart.</T3><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(9) ``Jacking operation'' means the task of lifting vertically, a slab(or group of slabs) from one location to another (e.g., from the castinglocation to a temporary (parked) location, or from a temporary locationto another temporary location, or to its final location in the structure),during the construction of a structure where the lift-slab process is beingused.(10) ``Qualified designer'' means a person who, by possession of a degree,certificate, or professional standing, has demonstrated ability in designin the subject under regulation.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>4. By proposing to revise andSection; 1926.705 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1926.705</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Lift-slab operations.</ITAG>(a) Lift-slab operations shall be designed and planned by a qualified designer_qualifiedin lift-slab operations. Such plans and designs shall be implemented bythe employer and shall include detailed instructions and sketches indicatingthe prescribed method of erection.(b) Jacks shall be marked to indicate the rated capacity established bythe manufacturer.(c) Jacks shall not be loaded beyond the rated capacity established bythe manufacturer.(d) Jacking equipment shall not be overloaded and the threaded rods andother members (such as, but not limited to the following: jacks and otherlifting units, lifting angles, lifting nuts, hook-up collars, T-caps, shearheads,columns, and footings) that transmit loads to the jacks shall be capableof supporting at least two and one-half times the load to be applied.(e) Jacks shall be designed and installed so that they will neither liftnor continue to lift when they are loaded in excess of their rated capacity.(f) Jacks shall have a safety device installed which will cause the jacksto support the load in any position in the event any jack malfunctionsor loses its lifting ability.(g) Jacking operations shall be synchronized in such a manner to ensureeven and uniform lifting of the slab. During lifting, all points of theslab support shall be kept within \1/2\ inch of that needed to maintainthe slab in a level position.(h) If leveling is automatically controlled, a device shall be installedthat will stop the operation when the \1/2\ inch tolerance set forth inparagraph (g) is exceeded or where there is a malfunction in the jackingsystem.(i) If leveling is maintained by manual controls, such controls shall belocated in a central location and attended by a competent person whilelifting is in progress.(j) The maximum number of manually controlled jacks on one slab shall belimited to a number that will permit the operator to maintain the slablevel within specified tolerances.(k) No employees (except those essential to the jacking operation) shallbe permitted in the building while any jacking operation is taking place.For the purpose of this provision, a jacking operation begins when a slabor group of slabs is lifted and ends when such slabs are secured (witheither temporary connections or permanent connections).(l) When making temporary connections to support slabs, wedges shall besecured by tack welding or an equivalent method of securing before theload is released from the lifting unit.(m) All welding on temporary and permanent connections shall be performedby a certified welder, familiar with the welding requirements specifiedin the lift-slab plan and specifications.(n) Load transfer from jacks to building columns shall not be executeduntil the welds on the column shear plates are cooled to air temperature.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-21023 Filed 9-14-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-26-M  </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>