<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88610-0041 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-10-88.f2.A1040</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Department of the Navy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Record of Decision To Develop Five Hundred Units of United StatesNavy Family Housing at the Naval Weapons Station, Earle, New Jersey </ITAG>Pursuant to section 102(2)(c) of the National Environmental Policy Act(NEPA) of 1969 and the Counsel on Environmental Quality Regulations (40CFR Part 1500), the United States Navy announces the decision to develop500 units of military family housing to support the Naval Weapons Station(NWS), Early, New Jersey. Specific siting criteria are discussed in theDraft and Final Environmental Impact Statements (DEIS/FEIS) prepared forthis project and are summarized below. While implementation of this proposedaction will not completely satisfy the housing deficit anticipated forthe Naval Weapons Station, it will make available a proportionally greaternumber of affordable units than are currently available within a reasonablecommuting distance.  The proposed 500 units encompass two separate development projects, a 200unit Military Construction ``turn-key'' project (referred to as the 200unit MCON project) and a 300 unit development authorized pursuant to theSection 801 Housing Leasing program (referred to as the 300 unit Section801 project). Both the 200 unit MCON project and the 300 unit Section 801project will be constructed on government property at the Main Stationsite as discussed in the FEIS. In fact, this decision is to continue theconstruction of the 200 units which began in March 1986 pursuant to a Findingof No Significant Impact and subsequently halted pursuant to a court orderon 25 March 1987. Included in this decision is the creation of approximately10 acres of wetlands in mitigation for the 3.2 acres of wetlands inadvertentlyfilled when the construction of the 200 unit MCON project commenced. Thedesign for this wetland creation plan is set forth in the FEIS and theNavy has applied for an Army Corps of Engineers (COE) Clean Water Act Section404 permit. No construction will begin on those areas that were identifiedas wetlands or are subject to the pending Clean Water Act Section 404 application(Public Notice 13041-87-0851-J1) until the permit has been issued. In theevent that the COE final decision is to deny the Section 404 permit, theNavy will comply with all applicable rules, regulations, and administrativeorders. Existing Congressional funding authority, the considerable effort and moneyalready expended to develop 200 units of MCON housing at the Main Stationsite, and the ability to mitigate environmental impacts combine to makecontinues development of those 200 units at that site preferred from amongall the alternatives. An evaluation of potentially available sites on non-government propertyconcluded that no sites provided better physical, environmental, or socioeconomicconditions than the Main Station Section 801 site for which Congressionalapproval had been received. Based on that analysis and the inability tosolicit and select a contractor to develop the housing units in time tomeet the Navy's needs, those alternatives which considered sites not onfederally owned property are not considered adequate to fulfill the purposeof the proposed project. The United States Army owned Camp Evans alternative was dismissed as aviable alternative during the comment period for the DEIS. The Navy wasnotified by the Army that the area is being planned for consolidation ofexisting Army research and development activities and is no longer availableto NWS Earle. Development of the Wayside alternative for the 300 unit Section 801 projectwas not selected for a number of reasons. Given the existing communitysupport facilities at the Main Station site, Wayside cannot provide ashigh a quality of life to the service members or their families as theMain Station site. The existing traffic, noise, and dust from the alreadycongested roadway in the Wayside area, the physical difficulty in obtainingutilities, and the lack of legislative authority to provide these utilitiescombine to make the Wayside site unsuitable to fulfill the current Navyrequirement for this project in a timely fashion.  The DEIS and FEIS discussed a number of short term environmental impactsresulting from construction at the Main Station site. These minor impactsto air quality and noise level which are typical to any construction siteare not expected to continue after the actual construction ceases. Allpractical mitigation measures have been adopted. These measures included,but are not limited to, the use of prudent and proper engineering designprocedures.  There were three major physical environmental issues raised during theNEPA process. Those issues included wetlands loss, the potential endangermentto the underlying aquifer, and preservation of the environmental qualityof the Hockhockson Brook area.As previously discussed, construction of the 200 unit MCON project willresult in the permanent loss of 3.2 acres of palustrine wetlands. Thesewetlands have already inadvertently been filled and the Navy is currentlyawaiting regulatory approval to create wetlands in mitigation. The wetlandmitigation plan and associated Clean Water Act Section 404(b)(1) analysiswere incorporated into the FEIS. No construction will begin on those areasthat were identified as wetlands or are subject to the pending Clean WaterAct Section 404 application until the permit has been issued.Erosion control and stormwater management plans will be implemented aspart of this decision. Summaries of these plans are discussed in the FEIS.The use of potable water by any or all of the 500 units constructed atthe Main Station site will not have an impact on the aquifer underlyingNWS Earle. The Navy will not draw on that aquifer underlying NWS Earle.The Navy will not draw on that aquifer to service the units. Instead, itis planned that the 500 units will be supplied potable water from a commercialsurface water source that does not draw from the aquifer designated ascritical by the State of New Jersey.The ability of the NWS Earle Sanitary Sewage Treatment Plant to treat theincreased sewage flow from the new housing units and maintain the qualityof Hockhockson Brook has been considered. Based on current effluent limitations,the plant now has the functional capacity to adequately treat 250,000 gallonsper day, sufficient to accommodate 340 new family housing units. Therefore,concomitant with the decision to construct 500 units at the Main Stationsite, is the decision to increase the functional capacity of the stationsewage treatment plant. In that regard, the Navy has been working withthe State of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection to obtainany necessary approval to upgrade the plant and increase its capacity.Specifically, the Navy will not expand the treatment plant or increaseits discharge without first gaining such approval. Similary, the Navy willnot connect the sewer extension of the proposed units or occupy any ofthose units until the required permits or approvals have been issued.Once the housing is occupied, minor unavoidable impacts will include increasedtraffic on local roads, slight increases in air pollution from this traffic,and increased human activity in adjacent forest lands.In regards to the potential socioeconomic impacts resulting from the constructionof the 500 units of family housing, the principal issues demonstrated bythe greatest expression of public concern involved the ability of the adjacentschool districts to educate the Navy dependent children expected to beresiding at NWS Earle. Recently, the State of New Jersey enacted speciallegislation to allow Navy dependent children residing on NWS Earle to attendthe Tinton Falls School District. The legislation also provides that thefamilies already residing on NWS Earle at the time of enactment have theoption to continue sending their children to the Township of Colts NeckSchool District or transfer them to the Tinton Falls School District.The impact to the Tinton Falls School District is expected to be negligibledue to the increased amount of federal and state aid becoming availableas a result of the influx of Navy dependent children over the next fewyears. However, the Navy has determined that until all of the units areoccupied, there are insufficent funds available to Tinton Falls SchoolDistrict to expend for suitable free public education of these Navy dependents.In order to minimize this short term fiscal impact, the Navy, subject tothe limits of current statutory authortity, intends to provide limitedsupplemental economic assistance necessary to allow Tinton Falls to educatethe Navy dependents. It is therefore anticipated that there will be noadverse impact on any of the school districts adjacent to NWS Earle resultingfrom this decision.Throughout implementation of this project the Navy will continue its closeworking relationship with the various interested Federal, state, and localregulatory agencies. Continuing coordination with other agencies will include,but may not be limited to, the following:andbullet; Section 404 Permit (Clean Water Act) administered by New YorkDistrict of the Army Corp of Engineers (COE), andandbullet; New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit for theStation Sewage treatment plant along with requisite approvals for upgradeof the facility administered by the New Jersey Department of EnvironmentalProtection (NJDEP), andandbullet; Coordination with the Tinton Falls School District, and andbullet; Coordination with NJDEP, Army COE, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Servicefor issues involving the proposed wetland mitigation effort.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: June 8, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jane M. Virga,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Lt. JAGC, USNR, Assistant Federal Register Liaison Officer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-13208 Filed 6-9-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3810-AE-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>