<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88502-0043 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-02-88.f2.A1042</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Export Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 7102-01]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Actions Affecting Export Privileges; Joseph P.M. d'Haens</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Summary</ITAG>Pursuant to the March 25, 1988 Decision and Order of the AdministrativeLaw Judge, which Decision and Order is attached hereto and affirmed byme, Joseph P.M. d'Haens, with an address at Amerikalei 96, 2000 Antwerp,Belgium, is denied for a period of twenty (20) years from the date hereofall privileges of participating, directly or indirectly, in any manneror capacity, in any transaction involving commodities or technical dataexported from the United States in whole or in part, or to be exported,or that are otherwise subject to the Regulations (15 CFR Parts 368-399).<ITAG tagnum="84">Procedural Background</ITAG>On March 25, 1988, the Administrative Law Judge entered his Decision andOrder, which has been referred to me for final action pursuant to section2412(c)(1) of the Export Administration Act of 1979, as amended (50 U.S.C.App. 2401-2420 (1982 and Supp. III 1985)). The parties have made certainfilings with me following the March 25, 1988 date, in particular, the filingof new counsel for the Respondent requesting a remand of the matter tothe Administrative Law Judge (or an extended period of consideration bythis office) for the purposes of: (1) Providing documentary evidence concerningmatters already considered at the previous hearing and (2) providing ``additionalevidence which counsel is not presently prepared to detail.'' I find nocompelling reason to grant the requested relief. Respondent had ample opportunityto present evidence on issues raised in the hearing before the AdministrativeLaw Judge, yet failed to do so. With respect to any additional evidence,it may well be that Respondent is entitled to a reopening of these proceedingsin accordance with section 388.18 of the Regulations; however, such a requestmust be made in accordance with the provisions of that section.<ITAG tagnum="84">Order</ITAG>Having examined the record, and based on the facts of this case, I affirmthe findings, conclusions and penalties made and imposed by the AdministrativeLaw Judge in his Decision and Order of March 25, 1988, which Decision andOrder is attached hereto and made a part hereof by express reference.This constitutes final agency action in this matter.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: April 25, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Paul Freedenberg,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Under Secretary for Export Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Decision and Order</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In the Matter of Joseph P.M. d'Haens, Respondent, Docket No. 7102-01.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Appearance for Respondent: Joseph P.M. d'Haens, Amerikalei 96, 2000Antwerp, Belgium.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Appearance for Agency: Thomas C. Barbour, Esq., Attorney-Advisor,Office of the Deputy Chief Counsel for Export Administration, U.S. Departmentof Commerce, Room H-3329, Washington, DC 20230.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>On April 15, 1987, the Office of Export Enforcement (OEE), issued a chargingletter to Respondent Joseph P.M. d`Haens, (hereinafter referred to as ``Respondent'').The charging letter alleges that Respondent violated andSection;andSection;387.2, 387.3 and 387.5 of the Export Administration Regulations (25 CFRParts 368-399), (the Regulations). The charging letter, dated April 15,1987, was served on Respondent on or about May 5, 1987.Respondent's answer to the charging letter was received in the Office ofthe Administrative Law Judge on May 11, 1987. Neither party has requesteda hearing in this matter. However, both parties have made written submissionsover the pst 10 months in support of their respective positions. This decisionis rendered pursuant to andSection; 388.14 of the Regulations, which providesfor adjudication on the record without a hearing.The April 15, 1987 charging letter alleges that Respondent committed threeviolations of the Regualtions.First, Respondent is alleged to have unlawfully conspired with Franz Traxler,doing business as Airfo GmbH, Munich, West Germany, and Michael Kolleczek,doing business as Airfo International, New York, New York. The allegedpurpose of the conspiracy was to obtain a U.S.-orgin semiconductor manufacturingsystem (the GCA Mann 4800) on the representation that an academic institutionin Belgium was the intended ultimate destination. The conspirators arealleged to have intended to, and did in fact, cause the system to be shippedto Hungary without the required reexport authorization, in violation ofsection 387.3 of the Regulations.Second, Respondent allegedly violated andSection; 387.5 of the Regulationsby representing to GCA, the domestic manufacturer of the equipment, andindirectly to the Office of Export Administration (OEA), that he was purchasingthe GCA Mann 4800 System on behalf of Stedelijke Industriele HogeschoolAntwerpen (I.H.A.M.), including his obtaining a Belgium Import Certificatereflecting I.H.A.M. as the ultimate consignee, when he knew that the representationwas materially false and misleading, in violation of andSection; 387.5 ofthe Regulations.Third, Respondent is alleged to have caused, aided and abetted a violationof the Regulations by participating in the conspiracy with Traxler andKolleczek to effect the reexport of the GCA Mann 4800 System from Switzerlandto Hungary without the required reexport authorization, in volation ofandSection; 387.2 of the Regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Respondents Contention</ITAG>Respondent argues that he did not violate the Regulations, and that hedid not illegally conspire with others with respect to the acquisitionand disposition of the equipment. He claims that his representations inobtaining the export license and Belgium export certificate were not falseand that he did not participate in a conspiracy with others to reexportthe semiconductor manufacturing system from Switzerland to Hungary withoutthe required reexport authorization.<ITAG tagnum="84">The Participants </ITAG>1. Joseph P.M. d'Haens is a Belgian citizen and a parttime instructor atStedelijk Instituut voor Hogere Technische Studien (SIHTS) Municipal Institutefor Higher Technological Studies. This is the evening division of the StedelijkeIndustriele Hogeschool Antwerpen (Municipal College for Technology of Antwerp).The acronym I.H.A.M. is used to describe either or both the College andthe Institute in Antwerp, Belgium. 2. Airfo International, Inc. is a freight forwarding company with officesat 161-15 Rockaway Blvd., Jamaica, New York and 200 Park Avenue, Suite4401, New York, New York. 3. Michael A. Kolleczek was the manager of Airfo International, Inc. andwas associated with ASL International Freight Forwarding Corp., J.F.K.International Airport, in Jamaica, New York. 4. Airfo GmbH was a West German Company engaged in the freight forwardingbusiness, with offices at Flughafen Riem, Munich, West Germany. It wasassociated with Airfo International, Inc. 5. Franz Traxler was an employee of Airfo GmbH in Munich, West Germany.6. GCA Corporation was an American corporation engaged in the businessof manufacturing and selling semiconductor manufacturing equipment. ItsBurlington Division was located at 209 Burlington Road, Bedford, Massachusetts.7. GCA International was a corporation and affiliate of GCA Corporation,marketing GCA products in foreign countries. Its Swiss offices were locatedin Kreuzlingen, Switzerland. 8. Emri J. Diosy was the Manager-Contracts at GCA Corporation, BurlingtonDivision. 9. Ed Baumann was an employee of GCA International in Kreuzlingen, Switzerland.<ITAG tagnum="84">Facts </ITAG>The essential facts recited hereafter are not materially contraverted.On February 9, 1982, utilizing stationery with the letterhead ``StedelijkeIndustriele Hogeschool Antwerpen'' (I.H.A.M.), Respondent placed an orderwith GCA/Burlington Division in Bedford, Massachusetts for a GCA Mann 4800DSW Step on Wafer system, including various parts and accessories. Thisorder was a follow up to respondent's earlier discussions concerning thepurchase of a GCA Mann 4800 with the Swiss subsidiary of the American manufacturer.The GCA Mann 4800 is a semiconductor manufacturing equipment system whichis on the controlled commodity list because of the high technology it utilizes.On or about February 17, 1982, GCA/Burlington Division filed an exportlicense application with OEA seeking authorization to export a GCA Mann4800 DSW Direct Step on Wafer System, including parts and accessories,to I.H.A.M. The applicant sought exemption from the requirement that animport certificate be filed on the grounds that the ultimate consigneewas an institute of higher learning. Shipment of the system from Boston was arranged through Airfo International,a freight forwarding firm in New York, New York, and its West German parent,Airfo GmbH. While shipping arrangements were being made, OEA advised GCA/Burlingtonon March 12, 1982, that I.H.A.M. was not considered an institute of higherlearning and, thus, an import certificate was required from the ultimateconsignee. On March 17, 1982, the Swiss subsidiary of GCA forwarded toits U.S. parent a cable it received from the Respondent explaining I.H.A.M.'sacademic program. In addition, in that telex, Respondent also stressedthe need for delivery before the end of March because of the budgetarycycle of the academic institution. By letter dated March 19, 1982, after receiving a facsimile copy of anImport Certificate from Belgium identifying ``Joseph d'Heans/I.H.A.M.,Paardenmarket 94, 2000 Antwerpen'' as the intended importer of a GCA Mann4800 DSW System, GCA/Burlington resubmitted its export license applicationto OEA. Following receipt of the Belgian Import Certificate, export licenseA603641 was issued, authorizing the export of a GCA Mann 4800 DSW System,with parts and accessories, to I.H.A.M. On March 23, 1982, Michael A. Kolleczek, of Airfo International in NewYork, forwarded to GCA/Burlington Division a letter which included thenecessary documents for the shipment of the GCA Mann 4800 System. In accordancewith the instructions contained in that letter, GCA transported the systemto the Boston airport, from which it was shipped to the intermediate consignee,Pro Air AG, in Zurich, Switzerland, on March 29, 1982. The documents accompanyingthe shipment identified GCA/Burlington Division as the exporter, AirfoInternational as the agent of the exporter, Pro Air, Zurich, Switzerlandas the intermediate consignee and I.H.A.M. as the ultimate consignee. Threepieces of equipment that missed the March 29 flight were shipped on March30. The system was never shipped from Zurich to I.H.A.M. in Belgium. Itwas transshipped to Hungary, an unauthorized destination. The record reflects that on March 1, 1982, a request for a quote for insuringthe shipment of the system from Boston to Zurich by air and then on to``BUD'' (Budapest) by truck, was made by the Airfo office in Munich, tothe Airfo office in New York. Prior to shipping the system, Airfo Internationalhad obtained insurance covering the shipment of the GCA Mann 4800 Systemby air from Boston to Pro Air in Zurich, and then from Zurich, via truck,to Budapest, Hungary. <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion</ITAG>The record establishes that Respondent ordered the GCA Mann 4800 Systemon I.H.A.M. stationery. The original order and subsequent representationsreflect that the equipment was to go to I.H.A.M., an academic institutionin Belgium. It is now clear that, contrary to the respresentations made,the system was never intended to be shipped to Belgium. Instead, as allegedin the charging letter, the true ultimate consignee was in Budapest, Hungary.Despite his protestations to the contrary, the evidence, including statementsin Respondent's answer, establish that the Respondent was an active participantin the diversion scheme from the outset. Conspiracy is inherently secretive by nature, and is often proved onlyby circumstantial evidence. ``Inferential proof may be controlling wherethe offense charged is so inherently secretive in nature as to permit themarshalling of only circumstantial evidence.'' <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Pelfrey, </T3>822 F.2d 628, 632 (6th Cir. 1987). As another CircuitCourt has stated:<ITAG tagnum="21">For it is most often true, especially in broad schemes calling forthe aid of many persons, that after discovery of enough to show clearlythe essence of the scheme and the identity of a number participating, theidentity and the fact of participation of other remain undiscovered andundiscoverable. Secrecy and concealment are essential features of successfulconspiracy. The more completely they are achieved, the more successfulthe crime. Hence. the law rightly gives room for allowing the convictionof those discovered upon showing sufficiently the essential nature of theplan and their connections with it, without requiring evidence of knowledgeof all its details or of the participation of others.</ITAG><T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Donsky, </T3>825 F.2d 746, 753 (3rd Cir. 1987), citing <T3>Blumenthal </T3>v. <T3>United States, </T3>332 U.S. 539, 556-7 (1947). It is also well settledthat each conspirator does not have to know all of the details of the conspiracyor participate in every phase of the scheme. <T3>See, e.g., United States </T3>v. <T3>Carter, </T3>760 F.2d 1568 (11th Cir. 1985). As counsel for the Office of Export Administration urges, the sum totalof the evidence and the inferences to be drawn, clearly demonstrate anillegal conspiracy. For example, the March 1, 1982, telex from Airfo GmbHto Airfo International requesting a quote for insurance for a shipmentof a GCA Mann 4800 System from Boston to Budapest via Zurich demonstratesthat the intent to ship the system to Hungary existed at the time Respondenttold the U.S. exporter that the system was being purchased for end-useby I.H.A.M. in Belgium. While Respondent has sought to distance himselffrom the illegal diversion which took place with respect to the GCA Mann4800 System, upon close examination, Respondent's answer show that it washis representation and action that gave an appearance of legitimacy tothis transaction. In that answer Respondent admits that he was purchasingthe GCA equipment for a Mr. H. Range, the Managing Director of RacommerzAF, a Swiss company. Respondent claims that Range asked him to set up andmanage a semiconductor plant in Belgium. He also asserts that Range requestedhim to order the equipment for immediate delivery, even though the projectedplant would not be ready for some time. Respondent also attempts to distancehimself somewhat from I.H.A.M., stating that since I.H.A.M. ``acceptedthat the equipment, after installation in Belgium, would be accessiblefor educational purposes intimates that I.H.A.M. was the purchaser of theGCA Mann 4800 System.'' He also asserts that the import certificate whichhe obtained from the Belgian government correctly shows that he, ratherthan I.H.A.M., is to receive the U.S.-origin goods in Belgium. Affidavitsfrom officials of I.H.A.M. were submitted in an effort to establish thathe was authorized to utilize I.H.A.M. letterhead in ordering the equipment.Respondent's actions at the time reflect the intent to show I.H.A.M. asthe purchaser and user. Now it is clear that neither he nor I.H.A.M. wasthe purchaser or the end user, and he well knew that. The evidence, whenconsidered in total, shows Respondent's ``defense'' is a sham. He consistentlysought to convince the U.S. manufacturer that I.H.A.M. was the purchaserof the GCA Mann 4800 system. His communications to GCA were on I.H.A.M.letterhead and purportedly on behalf of I.H.A.M. In his March 17, 1982cable to GCA's Swiss subsidiary, Respondent sought to provide a basis forwhy an institute such as I.H.A.M. would order a GCA Mann 4800 System. Thatcable clearly reflects that it was the school, and not the Respondent,which purportedly was purchasing the equipment. His recent statement (attachedas document 3 to Respondent's answer) clearly establishes that I.H.A.M.was <T3>not </T3>purchasing the equipment (``I want to add that it occurredfrequently that school stationery was used by professors for the purchaseof equipment, <T3>as far as this transactions </T3>[sic] <T3>did not have any influence whatsoever on the budget of the school</T3>* * *.'' (Emphasis added.)) That I.H.A.M. did not order the GCA Mann 4800 System, and could not haveplaced an order for that system because of its cost, is also establishedby the statement of Mr. Broeckhove, another official of the school. Respondentsimply used the letterhead stationary he obtained from I.H.A.M. in an attemptto give an appearance of legitimacy to the purchase of the GCA Mann 4800System. His representations of urgency respecting the annual budget cycleand present fund availability were also totally false and made with thedeliberate intent to mislead, since, in fact, the institution had no money'savailable nor proposed for the acquisition of such manufacturing equipment.By admitting that he was purchasing the equipment at the request of Mr.H. Range of Racommerz AG, not at the request of I.H.A.M. Respondents ownevidence shows that he caused OEA to be provided with materially falseand misleading information of the intended end-user of the GCA Mann 4800System. His false representations prevented the Export control mechanismsfrom determining the eligibility of the purchaser and/or end-user to acquiresuch equipment. Despite his implicit admission to providing false information concerningthe intended end-use of the GCA Mann 4800 System, Respondent claims thathe was not involved in any conspiracy. The evidence leads to a differentconclusion. A crucial aim of the conspiracy was to provide the appearanceof an apparently legitimate end-user for the GCA Mann 4800 System. As shownabove, Respondent went to great lengths during the time that the systemwas being ordered to make it appear that I.H.A.M. was its intended end-user.It was only long after the diversion took place that respondent acknowledgedthat, I.H.A.M. was not the true purchaser of the system. Simply put, Respondent'smisleading representations and subsequent lack of candor materially assistedhis associates in the diversion of the subject equipment. That his hands-onparticipation in the actual diversion from Zurich is not shown, does notrelease him from responsibility from all acts taken in fulfillment of theconspiracy, up to and including the transhipment to Budapest, Hungary.The intent to have the system shipped to Budapest, Hungary, not Antwerp,Belgium, was clearly evidenced by the conspirators Kolleczek and Traxleron March 1, 1982. This date is important for, as the chronology reflects,on several occasions thereafter Respondent sought to convince both theU.S. exporter and OEA that the GCA Mann 4800 System was intended for end-useat I.H.A.M. Indeed, at no time during the ordering or shipping of the systemdid Respondent reveal that he was working on behalf of anyone other thanI.H.A.M. Yet he had to know how the equipment was to be shipped, paid for,etc. Documents created contemporaneously with the ongoing conspiracy areentitled to much greater weight than the after-the-fact rationalizationsattempted by Respondent. It was only after the scheme was uncovered thatRespondent sought to distance himself from the various representationshe made regarding the involvement of I.H.A.M. in this transaction. Contraryto his statements, Respondent was a knowing participant in the conspiracy.Indeed, Respondent's answer includes several incomplete and otherwise misleadingstatements which cast question on his credibility. For example, one submissionstates that Respondent never provided any transportation instructions toAirfo's <T3>New York</T3> office. However, while Respondent may not have discussedthe shipment with Airfo in New York, an exhibit shows that he discussedthe shipment with Airfo's West German office. Respondent's suggestion that he did not know what Range was advising Airfoalso appears to be misleading. On March 19, 1982. Respondent provided theBelgian Import Certificate he had obtained to the Swiss subsidiary of GCA,which in turn telexed that document to its U.S. parent. On that same date,Range told Airfo that the Belgian Import Certificate had been sent to theUnited States. Simply put, the ``coincidence'' involving these two nearlysimultaneous documents, containing information which was central to theoverall purposes of the conspiracy, cannot be overlooked. Only one setof inferences can be drawn from the pattern of conduct. It is that Respondentwas working with Range and the others in the diversion scheme. Respondent's final defense is that he believed the GCA Mann 4800 Systemwas exported from the U.S. to GCA International in Switzerland and thatin March 1982 Range told him the system was to be stored in Switzerland.By letter dated June 18, 1982, reference was made to ``recent telephoneconversations and also to several telexes sent to your office * * *''.What GCA International sought there was a written commitment from the Respondentfor the installation of the GCA Mann 4800 System that had been shippedin April. On November 11, 1982 and January 26, 1983, GCA Internationalagain sought a response from the Respondent to its request for installationinstructions. It was not until February 18, 1983, that Respondent evenagreed to meet with GCA International to discuss installation of the system.Respondent's failure to respond to these numerous requests from GCA Internationalis in marked contrast to his ``latter day'' assertions that he believedthe system was under the control of the manufacturer and that he was waitingfor installation in Belgium. Once again, Respondent's after-the-fact attemptsto provide a justification for his actions, in connection with this illegaldiversion scheme, simply do not comport with the evidence. <ITAG tagnum="84">Findings </ITAG>1. On or about February 5, 1982, the Respondent misrepresented to GCA Internationalthat he was a Professor of Digital Electronics at Stedelijke IndustrieleHogeschool, Paardenmarkt 94, 2000 Antwerpen, Belgium and that he was requestingon the said school's behalf a price quotation from GCA for a Mann 4800DSW (Direct Step on Wafer) System.2. On or about February 9, 1982, the Respondent signed and caused to besent a letter, dated February 9, 1982, to GCA Corporation, Bedford, Massachusetts,on the stationery of Stedelijke Industriele Hogeschool Antwerp (``I.H.A.M.''),ordering one Mann 4800 DSW (Direct Step on Wafer) System and accessoryequipment for the said school at a price of U.S. $608.100.3. On or about February 12, 1982, the Respondent caused Emri J. Diosy,GCA Corporation to file an application for export license (No. A603641)with the OEA stating that the commodity to be exported, the Mann 4800 DSW,would be sold and shipped to Stedelijke Industriele Hogeschool, Antwerp,Belgium.4. On or about March 1, 1982, Franz Traxler, Airfo GmbH, sent a telex datedMarch 1, 1982 to Respondents co-conspirators Michael A. Kolleczek and AirfoInternational, Inc., instructing them to make out the House Air Waybill(``HAWB'') to Stedelijke Industriele Hochshul, Attn: Dr. D'Haens, Antwerp,Belgium, but to make out the Master Air Waybill (``MAWB'') to Pro Air AGin Zurich, Switzerland and in the same telex Traxler requested that theco-conspirators Michael A. Kolleczek and Airfo International, Inc., obtaina quote for insuring the shipment from Boston to Zurich, then to Budapest,Hungary by truck.5. On or about March 17, 1982, the respondent made and caused to be madeand sent to Emri J. Diosy, GCA Corporation in Bedford, Massachusetts, andfrom Diosy to OEA, a telex, dated March 17, 1982, explaining the academicnature of Stedelijke Industriele Hogeschool and its relationship to ``I.H.A.M.''.6. On or about March 18, 1982, the Respondent caused the Ministry of EconomicAffairs of Belgium to prepare International Import Certificate No. USA-681,and caused the certificate to be sent to Emri J. Diosy, GCA Corporationin Bedford, Massachusetts, by misrepresenting to the Belgian authoritiesthat the Mann 4800 DSW System would be imported into Belgium and that thetotal value of the import was 608.100 Belgian Francs.7. On or about March 19, 1982, Franz Traxler, Airfo GmbH, Respondent MichaelA. Kolleczek and Airfo International, Inc., caused Emri J. Diosy, GCA Corporationto resubmit the application for export license, A603641, to OEA, togetherwith International Import Certificate No. USA-681 from the Belgian Ministryof Economic Affairs and the telex dated March 17, 1982, from the Respondent.8. On or about March 23, 1982, the co-conspirators Michael A. Kolleczekand Airfo International, Inc., prepared, signed and caused to be sent toEmri Diosy, GCA Corporation in Bedford, Massachusetts a letter dated March23, 1982, together with the Shipper's Export Declaration, and other Exportdocuments advising that he (Kolleczek) had booked the shipment to the Mann4800 DSW System on Swissair Flight SR 129 on March 29, 1982, from Bostonto Zurich.9. On or about March 26, 1982, the co-conspirators Michael A. Kolleczekand Airfo International, Inc., applied for and caused an insurance company,in New York, to issue cargo insurance for the Mann 4800 DSW System coveringits transportation from Boston to Pro Air A.G., Zurich, Switzerland, andfrom Zurich, by truck, to Elektromodul, Abt. in Budapest, Hungary.10. On or about March 30, 1982, the Respondent, Michael A. Kolleczek andAirfo International, Inc., caused the OEA, to issue Export License A603641(expiration date_April 30, 1982) to GCA/Burlington Division in Bedford,Massachusetts for the export of a Mann 4800 DSW System and other itemsfrom the United States to Stedelijke Industriele Hogeschool in Antwerp,Belgium.11. On or about March 29 and 30, 1982, ASL International Freight ForwardingCorp., Respondent Michael A. Kolleczek, and Airfo International, Inc.,caused Swissair Airlines to transport the Mann 4800 DSW from Boston, Massachusettsto consignee Pro Air A.G., Zuerich Airport, Switzerland under Air WaybillNo. 085-5976-3130. 12. On or about March 29, 1982, the Respondent, Michael A. Kolleczek, andAirfo International, Inc., caused GCA Corporation to prepare and send aninvoice with the shipment of the Mann 4800 DSW System, noting on it ImportCertificate No. USA 681 and the name Stedelijke Industriele Hogeschoolas the buyer. 13. On or about March 29, 1982, the Respondent, Michael A. Kolleczek, andAirfo International, Inc., caused Emri J. Diosy, GCA Corporation to filewith U.S. Customs Service in Boston, Massachusetts a Shipper's Export Declarationfalsely representing that the ultimate destination of the Mann 4800 DSWSystem was the country of Belgium and that the ultimate consignee for theexport was Stedelijke Industriele Hogeschool in Antwerp, Belgium. 14. On or about March 30, 1982, Respodent, Michael A. Kolleczek, and AirfoInternational, Inc., agreed to arrange for and cause the shipment fromBasel to Zurich, Switzerland of accessory equipment including an environmentalchamber for use with the same GCA Mann 4800 DSW System. 15. On or about Aprill 9, 1982, the co-conspirators, Michaiel A. Kolleczekand Airfo Internaitonal, Inc., sent invoice nos. 087 and 087-a to AirfoGmbH in Munich, West Germany, billing Airfo GmbH for the shipment of theMann 4800 DSW System from Boston, Massachusetts to Pro Air A.G. in Zurich,Switzerland and for the cost of insuring the same cargo from Boston, Massachusettsto Elektromodul in Budapest, Hungary. 16. As a part and in furtherance of the conspiracy, the Respondent orderedthe semiconductor manufacturing equipment from GCA Corporation, allegedlyfor export to and use in Antwerp, Belgium. 17. It was part of the conspiracy that the Respodent made and caused tobe made false statements and representations on documents and forms whichwere sent and submitted by GCA Corporation from Bedford, Massachusettsto the Office of Export Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, toinfluence action by OEA and to obtain a validated export license from OEA.18. It was a further part of the conspiracy that the Respondent and theother co-conspirators made and caused to be made false statements and representationsin documents and forms which were sent and submitted by GCA Corporationto U.S. Customs Service in Boston, to influence action by the U.S. CustomsService and to effect the export of the semiconductor manufacturing equipment.19. Respondent made and caused to be made, false statements to the Ministryof Economic Affairs, Belgium, in order to influence action by such Ministryof Economic Affairs and by the Office of Export Administration, U.S. Departmentof Commerce. 20. As part of the conspiracy the Respondent caused to be exported semiconductormanufacturing equipment to an intermediate consignee Pro Air A.G., a freightforwarder, in Zurich, Switzerland, for further transport by truck to Budapest,Hungary. 21. In 1982, the President of the United States was authorized by Congressto further United States foreign policy and to maintain national securityby restricting and controlling the commercial export of goods which wouldmake a significant contribution to the military potential of any othercountry or combination of countries, such goods being designated in theCommodity Control List, Title 15, Code of Federal Regulations (``CFR''),andSection;399.1, and by delegating the responsibility for administeringthe commercial export of the goods on the Commodity Control List to theOffice of Export Administration in the Department of Commerce. 22. In 1982, the Office of Export Administration (``OEA''), InternationalTrade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce was an agency of theUnited States charged with the authority to issue validated export licensesfor the export of certain commodities to controlled countries under theExport Administration Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C. App. 2401 <T3>et seq.</T3>), as extended by Act of Congress, Pub. L. 98-108 (October1, 1983). 23. At that time a person desiring to export commodities contained on theCommodities Control List was required to obtain a validated license issuedby OEA before exporting the commodity from the United States, except wherethe export was authorized under a general license. 24. The Mann 4800 DSW (Direct Step on Wafer) system was a high technologysystem, with application to military uses, and was included on the CommodityControl List; the export of this commodity from the United States to acountry other than Canada was not authorized under general license, andbefore any such export could be made, a validated license to the ultimatedestination, (Budapest, Hungary) was required but was not obtained. Based on the foregoing; I find that the Respondent acting in conspiracy with others obtained U.S.semiconductor manufacturing system (a GCA Mann 4800) and a license to exportsame by falsely representing its destination and end users and did thereaftereffect its diversion to Hungary without the required validated licenseto that country in violation of andSection;387.3 of the Regulations. I further find that Respondent falsely represented he was purchasing asemiconductor manufacturing system on behalf of Stedelijke IndustrieleHogeschool (I.H.A.M.) Antwerp, Belgium and falsely obtained and filed animport certificate from the Belgium government, representing that I.H.A.M.was the ultimate consignee, what he knew to be materially false, all inviolation of andSection;387.5 of the Regulations.I also find that Respondent in furtherance of the conspiracy, aided andabetted the violation whereby the semiconductor manufacturer system wasreexported from Zurich, Switzerland to Budapest, Hungary, contrary to theterms' of the export license and in violation of andSection;387.2 of theregulations.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion  </ITAG>Though this Respondent asserts that he was not a party to the alleged diversionof the identified controlled equipment, to Hungary. The evidence demonstratesotherwise. His after the fact disclaimers are at odds with reality. Thepurchase of sophisticated semiconductor equipment of a value in excessof one-half million dollars was not a casual hardware store type purchase.The school had no such resources available and its pre-approval processeshad not been utilized. Clearly the school never contemplated the purchasethat was represented by Respondent. The use and verification of the schoolas the purchaser was a fraud perpetrated by Respondent. It was also theprincipal and first step in the diversion. His failure, or more properly,his refusal, to communicate with the manufacturer for almost a year afterdelivery in Europe indicates continuing guilty knowledge and participationby him. The criminal conviction after a trial by jury of the co-conspiratorsMichael A. Kolleczek and Airfo International, Inc., is also appropriatelyfor consideration here, for the Respondent here was an indicated co-defendantand is a fugitive in that criminal conspirarcy proceeding (USDC, Districtof Massachusetts Criminal andplusmin;83-002249MC).  The bare representation that Respondent was acquitted by a Belgium courtof charges based upon the same acts is of interest but is not relied uponbecause it is an unsupported representation. Like the conviction of theco-conspirators it wouldl be appropriate to consider if there were somesupporting records. In any event the result here is based on this recordwhich compels the findings of misconduct as charged, by more than a preponderanceof the evidence.   It is unfortunate that there has been extensive unexplained delay here,particulatly from the May, 1984 criminal conviction to the April 1987 chargingletter. In other cases I have railed against such unnecessary delay whichI will not reiterate here. The Respondent has shown no prejudice from suchcontinuations.  Respondents submissions showing of his background as a researcher, scientistacademician and military officer serve for naught in the face of what hasbeen shown and admitted here. He is neither the first nor the last to sellhimself and his reputation of a handful of silver. He must suffer the consequencesof his own deception. In light of the fact that the GCA Mann 4800 Systemis controlled for reasons of national security and would not be licensedfor export to Hungary, it is appropriate to impose a long term denial ofRespondent's export privileges as a sanction for these violations.\1\<NOTE/>  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\Historically, the term ``indefinite'' which agency counselrequests meant until questions were answered on some conditions corrected.``Permanent'' was the term used for those to be barred for all time. Thatlatter term has caused problems in managing the list of denied parties.Twenty years should serve the interest of justice here.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Order  </ITAG>I. For a period of 20 years from the date of the final Agency action, Respondent:Joseph P.M. d'Haens, Amerikalei 96, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium. <ITAG tagnum="10">and all successors, assigness, officers, partners, representatives,agents, and employees hereby are denied all privileges of participating,directly or indirectly, in any manner of capacity, in any transaction involvingcommodities or technical data exported from the United States in wholeor in part, or to be exported, or that are otherwise subject to the Regulations.II. Participation prohibited in any such transaction either in the UnitedStates or aboard, shall include, but not be limited to, participation: (i) As a party or as a representative of a party to a validated exportlicense application;  (ii) In preparing or filing any export license application or reexportauthorization or any document to be submitted therewith;  (iii) In obtaining or using any validated or general export license orother export control document;  (iv) In carrying on negotiations with respect to, or in receiving, ordering,buying, selling, delivering, storing, using, or disposing of, in wholeor in part, any commodities or technical data exported from the UnitedStates, or to be exported; and  (v) In the financing, forwarding, transporting, or other servicing of suchcommodities or technical data.  Such a denial of export privileges shall extend to matters which are subjectto the Act and the Regulations.  III. After notice and opportunity for comment, such denial of export privilegesmay be made applicable to any person, firm, corporation, or business organizationwith which the Respondent is now or hereafter may be related by affiliation,ownership, control, position of responsibility, or other connection inthe conduct of export trade or related services.  IV. All outstanding individual validated export licenses in which Respondentappears or participates, in any manner or capacity, are hereby revokedand shall be returned forthwith to the Office of Export Licensing for cancellation.Further, all of Respondent(s)'s privileges of participating, in any manneror capacity, in any special licensing procedure, including, but not limitedto, distribution licenses, are hereby revoked.  V. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other business organization,whether in the United States or elsewhere, without prior disclosure andspecific authorization from the Office of Export Licensing, shall, withrespect to U.S.-origin commodities and technical data, do any of the followingacts, directly, or indirectly, or carry on negotiations with respect thereto,in any manner or capacity, on behalf of or in any association with anyRespondent or any related person, or whereby any Respondent or relatedperson may obtain any benefit therefrom or have any interest or participationtherein, directly or indirectly:   (a) Apply for, obtain, transfer, or use any license, Shipper's Export Declaration,bill or lading, or other export control document relating to any export,reexport, transshipment, or diversion of any commodity or technical dataexported in whole or in part, or to be exported by, to, or for any Respondentor related person denied export privileges, or   (b) Order, buy, receive, use, sell, deliver, store, dispose of, forward,transport, finance or otherwise service or participate in any export, reexport,transshipment or diversion of any commodity or technical data exportedor to be exported from the United States.  VI. This Order as affirmed or modified shall become effective upon entryof the Secretary's final action in this proceeding pursuant to the Act(50 U.S.C.A. App 2412(c)(1)).<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 25, 1988.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Hugh J. Dolan,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrative Law Judge.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-9572 Filed 4-29-88; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-DT-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>