<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88614-0025 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-14-88.f2.A1024</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4702"/><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 113 / Monday, June 13, 1988 /Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 53, No. 113</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Monday, June 13, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Agricultural Marketing Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Part 1126 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. AO-231-A55] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Milk in the Texas Marketing Area; Tentative Decision on Proposed Amendmentsand Opportunity To File Written Exceptions to Tentative Marketing Agreementand to Order </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This tentative decision would provide transportationcredits to handlers for hauling excess producer milk to nonpool plantslocated outside the State of Texas. The credits would represent a partialreimbursement of hauling costs from the order's marketwide pool. Such creditswould apply during the months of March-June and the last half of Decemberand would be limited to milk going into Class II and Class III uses. Thecredits would be computed at a rate of 2.4 cents per 10 miles. Creditswould be limited to handlers who transfer milk from plants located in Zone1 of the marketing area while credits on milk that is moved directly fromfarms to nonpool plants would be limited to milk produced in northern Texasand southern Oklahoma. Handlers would also receive a credit to recognizecosts associated with hauling milk from higher- to lower-priced areas.The amount of milk to which transportation credits apply would be reducedto the extent that a handler or affiliate of the handler caused milk fromoutside the State of Texas to be received at plants in the marketing area.The changes to the order, which are based on proposals considered at apublic hearing held on February 2-3, 1988, in Irving, Texas, are necessaryto partially compensate handlers for transportation costs incurred in clearingthe market of surplus milk production that exceeds local manufacturingcapacity.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments are due on or before July 13, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments (four copies) should be filed with the HearingClerk, Room 1079, South Building, United States Department of Agriculture,Washington, DC 20250.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>John F. Borovies, Marketing Specialist,USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968, South Building,P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-2089.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This administrative action is governedby the provisions of sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291. The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires the Agency toexamine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to 5U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The amendments would promoteorderly marketing of milk by producers and regulated handlers and partiallycompensate handlers for costs incurred in providing a service of marketwidebenefit. Prior document in this proceeding: <T3>Notice of Hearing: </T3>Issued December 30, 1987; published January6, 1988 (53 FR 256). <ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement </ITAG>Notice is hereby given of the filing with the Hearing Clerk of this tentativedecision with respect to proposed amendments to the tentative marketingagreement and the order regulating the handling of milk in the Texas marketingarea. This notice is issued pursuant to the provisions of the AgriculturalMarketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and theapplicable rules of practice and procedure governing the formulation ofmarketing agreements and marketing orders (7 CFR Part 900). Interested parties may file written exceptions to this decision with theHearing Clerk, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, 20250, bythe 30th day after publication of this decision in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Four copies of the exceptions should be filed.All written submissions made pursuant to this notice will be made availablefor public inspection at the office of the Hearing Clerk during regularbusiness hours (7 CFR 1.27(b)). The proposed amendments and findings and conclusions set forth below arebased on the record of a public hearing held at Irving, Texas, on February2-3, 1988, pursuant to a notice of hearing issued December 30, 1987 (53FR 256). The material issues on the record of hearing relate to: 1. Credits to handlers for transporting surplus producer milk; and 2. Whether emergency marketing conditions exist with respect to issue number1. <ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions </ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof: 1. <T3>Credits to handlers for transporting surplus producer milk. </T3>TheTexas order should be amended to provide transportation credits to handlersfor hauling (transferring or diverting) surplus producer milk to nonpoolplants located outside the State of Texas for Class II and Class III useduring the months of March-June and the last half of December. The creditswould represent a partial reimbursement of hauling costs from the order'smarketwide pool. Such credits should be computed at a rate of 2.4 centsper hundredweight for each 10 miles, or fraction thereof, for the shortesthard-surfaced highway distance to nonpool plants, as determined by themarket administrator, from the nearer of several locations. A transfercredit should apply to bulk fluid milk products transferred by a handlerfrom a pool plant located in Zone 1 of the marketing area for the distancebetween the transferor pool plant and the transferee nonpool plant. A creditfor diverted milk should apply to milk produced in Zones 1, 1-A, or 3 ofthe marketing area or 19 southern Oklahoma counties that is diverted froma pool plant to a nonpool plant that is in excess of 100 miles from thenearer of the city hall in Dallas, Texas, the pool plant of last receiptfor the major portion of the milk on the load, or the courthouse of thecounty where the major portion of the milk on the load was produced. Inaddition, a credit for diverted milk should also include an amount perhundredweight equal to the difference between the location adjustment (excludingany plus adjustments) applicable in the area where the milk was producedand any greater minus location adjustment applicable at the location ofthe nonpool plant where the milk was received. No credit should apply tothe total quantity of milk moved to a given nonpool plant by a handlerduring the month if any portion of the milk is assigned to Class I. Also,the amount of milk to which a credit would be applicable during the monthshould be reduced by the amount of milk that the handler or any affiliateof the handler causes to be received at plants in the marketing area fromoutside the State of Texas during the month. Such offset should be appliedin sequence beginning with the nonpool plant at which the greatest creditwould have applied. The order provisions contained herein to provide transportation creditsto handlers are patterned after the proposals that were contained in thehearing notice with modifications that were supported at the hearing tolimit the application of any such credits. The modifications are necessaryso that Texas order producers would not be inordinately burdened with thecost of disposing of surplus milk associated with other markets, or costsassociated with inefficient marketing practices that might be encouragedby the implementation of such credits. The provisions are contained ina new section of the Texas order and carry out the major objectives ofthe proposals to partially compensate handlers for costs incurred in performinga service of marketwide benefit for producers, namely, the additional costof hauling surplus milk to distant nonpool plants that is in excess oflocal manufacturing capacity.Associated Milk Producers, Inc. (AMPI), a cooperative association thatrepresents about two-thirds of the producers who supply the Texas market,proposed that the order be amended to provide for a change in the locationat which diverted milk is priced and to reimburse handlers from the producer-settlementfund for costs incurred in transporting surplus milk supplies to alternativeoutlets during certain months. Specifically, AMPI proposed that milk divertedfrom farms of producers located in Zone 1 or 3 of the marketing area tononpool plants located outside the State of Texas be priced as if suchmilk were received at Dallas, Texas (Zone 1). For milk diverted from farmsof producers located in Zone 1-A of the marketing area or in any of 19southern Oklahoma counties to nonpool plants located outside Texas andsouthern Oklahoma, AMPI proposed that such milk be priced as if such milkwere received at a plant in southern Oklahoma (28 cents less than ClassI and blend prices announced in Zone 1 of the Texas order.) The proposedchange in the point of pricing for diverted milk would apply during allmonths of the year. AMPI also proposed that transportation credits be provided to handlersfrom the producer-settlement fund for hauling excess milk to nonpool plantsoutside Texas for Class II and Class III uses during the months of March-Juneand December of each year. Under the proposals, a transportation creditwould apply to the pounds of bulk fluid milk products transferred froma pool plant or diverted from farms of producers located in Zone 1 or 3of the marketing area to nonpool plants outside Texas at the rate of 3.3cents per hundredweight for each 10 miles that the nonpool plant is locatedmore than 90 miles from Dallas. AMPI also proposed that such credit applyto the pounds of producer milk diverted from farms located in Zone 1-Aof the marketing area or 19 southern Oklahoma counties to nonpool plantslocated outside Texas and southern Oklahoma that are in excess of 110 milesfrom the nearer of Burkburnett, Texas or Sulphur, Oklahoma. AMPI testified that the purpose of the proposed amendments is to providefor a greater degree of equity among all producers in the sharing of thehigh costs associated with handling surplus milk under the Texas order.AMPI testified that, under current provisions, its producer members beara disproportionate share of the costs of balancing the fluid milk needsof the market in that its members represent two-thirds of the producermilk while AMPI handles over 80 percent of the Class III producer milkon the market. AMPI testified that of the 30 distributing plants on themarket, 14 are totally supplied by the cooperative, 13 are partially suppliedby it and three are not supplied by AMPI. In some cases AMPI is a partialsupplier on a year-round basis while in other instances AMPI supplies supplementalmilk only during the fall months of the year. In total AMPI claims thatit balances, to various degrees, the milk supplies of all pool distributingplants on the Texas market. AMPI also testified that substantial increases in production during thelast half of 1987 have resulted in supplies far in excess of the capacityof all plants in the marketing area, which has increased the cost of handlingsurplus milk. For example, AMPI referred to data released by the marketadministrator concerning production increases for the State of Texas. Forthe months of July through December 1987, Texas production (about 94 percentof which is pooled on the Texas market) averaged 10.1 percent above a yearearlier. For December 1987, Texas production was up 14.8 percent whilemilk production in the top ten milk producing counties was up by 20.5 percent.AMPI noted that such counties represented 58 percent of total state productionand 62 percent of the Texas production pooled under the order and thatall of these counties are located in Zone 1, 1-A or 3 of the marketingarea. In addition to including the major milk producing areas in the marketingarea, AMPI testified that 19 southern Oklahoma counties also should beincluded within the scope of its proposals. AMPI testified that milk producedin such area has historically been associated with the Texas market. Forexample, AMPI testified that for 1985, 71 percent of the 115 million poundsof milk originating in such area was received at pool plants while 29 percentwas diverted to nonpool plants outside Texas. The monthly proportion deliveredto pool plants ranged from a high of 96 percent to a low of 47 parcentduring the year. In 1986, 58 percent of 112 million pounds from this areawas received at pool plants, ranging from a high of 90 percent to a lowof 35 percent on a monthly basis. In 1987, 48 percent of 113 million poundswas received at pool plants, ranging from 79 percent to 20 percent monthlyduring the year. AMPI testified that when milk must be diverted off themarket, usually milk produced in southern Oklahoma would be the first tobe moved and that the producers would receive either a Dallas (Zone 1)or Burkburnett (Zone 1-A) location blend price for their milk. AMPI testified that its balancing functions and the increases in productionhave resulted in an increasing volume of surplus milk to be handled byAMPI. For example, AMPI testified that for 1985, it handled 503 millionpounds of surplus milk produced in southern Oklahoma and Zones 1, 1-A and3 of the marketing area. Of this total, 92 percent was processed at AMPI'spooled manufacturing plants located in Zone 1 at Muenster and Sulphur Springs,Texas (Zone 1), while the remaining 39 million pounds was diverted to nonpoolplants outside Texas, mainly to other AMPI plants at Oklahoma City andTulsa, Oklahoma. AMPI testified that during 1986 the amount of surplusmilk increased to 576 million pounds (14 percent increase) with 488 millionpounds being processed at Muenster and Sulphur Springs (85 percent) andthe remainder being diverted or transferred from the manufacturing plantsto nonpool plants outside Texas. For 1987, the amount of the surplus increasedto 775 million pounds (a 35 percent increase) with 75 percent being processedat its two Texas manufacturing plants and 155 million pounds being diverted(double that of the previous year) and 35 million pounds (a fourfold increase)being transferred to nonpool plants outside Texas. AMPI testified thatlarge increases in production during the spring are normal, but, that thesubstantial increase during the fall months of 1987 is of major importancein the volume processed at Muenster and Sulphur Springs and in milk divertedand transferred off the market during such period when the Texas marketis usually deficit. AMPI testified that the increasing volume of milk handled by the cooperativehas resulted in substantial increases in the cost of surplus disposal thatis borne by the producer members of the association. AMPI testified thatthe increased costs are a result of the pricing of surplus milk at theplant to which it is diverted and the additional transportation costs ofhauling milk to distant outlets. For example, AMPI testified that losseson milk diverted from southern Oklahoma averaged just over 45 cents perhundredweight for 1986 and just over 49 cents per hundredweight during1987. About two-thirds of such losses were a result of the minus locationadjustments that applied at the nonpool plants to which the milk was divertedand one-third from additional hauling costs to such outlets. Losses onmilk diverted from the three zones in the Texas marketing area averaged$1.44 per hundredweight in 1986 and just under $1.45 per hundredweightduring 1987 with about one-half of such losses being attributed to locationadjustments and one-half to extra hauling costs. In total, AMPI testifiedthat its losses on diverted milk were about $254 thousand in 1985, $677thousand in 1986, and over $1.6 million for 1987. In addition, AMPI testifiedthat it lost an additional $108 thousand in 1986 on milk transferred fromits Zone 1 pooled manufacturing plants to nonpool plants outside Texasand about $503 thousand for 1987. AMPI testified that such losses wereborne exclusively by its producer members while the benefits of such marketclearing activities accrued to all producers and handlers.AMPI testified that the proposed revision of the producer milk definitionto change the pricing point on diverted milk during all months of the yearwould partially restore equity among all producers who supply the market.AMPI indicated that the value of negative location adjustments (which currentlyapply at the nonpool plants to which AMPI diverts milk) on producer milkis added to the total pool value of milk in computing the Zone 1 announceduniform price. AMPI testified that the uniform price is thus enhanced becauseof the minus location adjustments and nonmember producers receive a highervalue for their milk. AMPI noted that its member producers also benefitfrom such higher price, but that they carry the total losses and thereforereceive a lower than average return for their milk. AMPI also testified that the underlying assumptions that provide the basisfor pricing milk at the plant to which it is diverted are no longer applicable.According to AMPI, the basis for the lower value of milk at distant manufacturingplants in the production area is that the producers whose milk is shippedto such plants would incur a lesser hauling cost than if their milk wereshipped further to distributing plants. AMPI contends that such situationno longer exists since there are no savings in hauling costs when milkmust be diverted from Texas and southern Oklahoma to manufacturing plantsoutside the State of Texas. AMPI contends that the cost of hauling milkthat must be diverted to distant nonpool plants is greater than the costof hauling milk from farms to Texas distributing plants. AMPI also testifiedthat it makes every effort to minimize transportation losses by utilizingthe milk of producers located nearest to distributing plants to fulfillthe needs of such plants while diverting the milk of more distant producersto manufacturing plants. However, AMPI testified that it is prevented fromdoing this in certain instances by the terms of other order provisions.In particular, AMPI noted that during the months of September through Januaryat least 15 percent of each producers milk must be delivered to pool plantsduring the month in order to qualify milk diverted to nonpool plants asproducer milk. AMPI testified that during the months of March-June and December the productionof milk within the Texas marketing area exceeds the requirements of distributingplants and that the resulting surplus is beyond the capacity of surplusprocessing plants in the marketing area. Thus, AMPI testified that duringsuch months handlers should receive a reimbursement out of the producer-settlementfund for costs incurred in transporting such surplus production to nonpoolplants outside Texas. AMPI further testified that the Food Security Actof 1985, which amended the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937,as amended, provides specific authority for such action. AMPI further testifiedthat the proposal would result in a more equitable sharing among all producersof the costs of handling excess milk supplies. AMPI testified that it wouldbe unfair to make only those producers whose milk must be moved, or thoseproducers whose milk must be moved greater distances because of a lackof nearby plant capacity, to bear the entire additional hauling cost whenall producers contribute to the amount of surplus milk. Thus, AMPI concludesthat the proposal would be an extension of marketwide pooling whereby allproducers share in the proceeds from the sale of milk for fluid uses andthe burden of maintaining the reserve supply of milk that is necessaryto meet fluid milk needs. Under current conditions of excess supply, AMPImaintains that marketwide pooling does not achieve equity among producersand that therefore disorderly marketing conditions exist. In support of its proposed rate for determining the amount of the creditto handlers, AMPI introduced the actual hauling costs incurred during 1986and 1987. Such costs ranged from $1.50 to $1.80 per loaded mile which reflectsrates from 3.2 to 3.9 cents per hundredweight per 10 miles. AMPI testifiedthat the lower rates were for hauls with its own equipment while the higherrates were for contract haulers. AMPI testified that it is expected thatthe use of contract haulers would increase because of the greater amountof surplus milk that must be handled. Nevertheless, AMPI revised its originallyproposed 3.6-cent per hundredweight rate to 3.3 cents. AMPI testified that the credit be calculated on the mileage involved thatexceeds the normal farm-to-market distance when supplying the Class I outlets.In this regard, AMPI referred to statistics provided by the market administratorconcerning the weighted average distances of milk movements to fluid milkplants located in the pricing zones of the marketing area during two monthsof 1987. AMPI testified that since milk was moved an average of about 84miles to supply Zone 1 distributing plants, handlers should receive a creditfor milk produced in Zones 1 and 3 to the extent that such milk is transportedto nonpool plants located more than 90 miles from Dallas. For milk producedin Zone 1-A or southern Oklahoma, AMPI revised its original 75-mile limitationupward to 110 miles for credit purposes because the weighted average distanceof milk shipments to the distributing plant in Zone 1-A (Burkburnett) exceeded116 miles. Also, AMPI testified that most of the supply for the distributingplant in Zone 1-A originates in Oklahoma at distances from 101 to 150 milesaway from the plant and that milk originating in southeastern Oklahoma(Sulphur) is about 110 miles from Dallas. By incorporating such mileagelimitations in the proposal AMPI testified that handlers would be reimbursedonly for costs incurred in hauling milk in excess of the costs normallypaid by producers to haul milk to their Class I outlet. AMPI testified that credits should apply to handlers for bulk fluid milkproducts transferred or diverted to nonpool plants located outside thenormal delivery area for Class II or Class III use, rather than only ClassIII use as would be provided by an alternative proposal. AMPI testifiedthat some of the nonpool plants available have both Class II and ClassIII operations and that if the alternative proposal was adopted a creditcould apply to part of the milk on a load and not to the rest, dependingon the classification at the receiving plant. AMPI testified that the costof hauling the milk would be the same, regardless of the classification.AMPI further testified that the order permits milk diverted to an otherorder plant to remain pooled under the Texas order so long as all of themilk is classified as Class II or Class III and, thus, the same criteriashould apply in determining the amount of hauling credit allowed. AMPI's proposals were supported by Mid-America Dairymen, Inc., a cooperativeassociation that represents about 15 percent of the producers who supplythe Texas market. Southern Milk Sales, Inc., another cooperative associationthat represents producers who supply the market, testified that if haulingcredits are adopted they should apply to milk moved to any location outsideTexas. Such testimony was directed to a proposal by handlers that wouldlimit the credit to only northward movements of milk. One proprietary fluidmilk handler also supported the proposals in its brief so long as any amendmentwould assure that sufficient supplies of milk would first be made availableto distributing plants. A group of 10 handlers (Southland Corporation; Baker and Sons Dairy, Inc.;Borden, Inc.; Blue Bell Creameries, Inc.; Dairy Fresh, Inc.; Dean FoodsCompany; Hygeia Dairy Company; Kinnett Dairies, Inc.; Malone andamp; HydeDairy; and Southern Belle Dairy, Inc.) who operate plants in Texas andin various southeastern markets proposed alternatives to the AMPI proposals.The handler's proposals would provide for a lesser hauling credit rate(2.0 to 2.2 cents per 10 miles), a greater distance that milk would haveto move before a credit would apply along with the use of more northernbasing points to determine such distance, and the application of such creditsto only milk that is moved in a northern direction to plants outside Texas.The handlers also proposed that credits should not apply during the firsthalf of December, that credits should not apply to milk produced in Oklahomaand that credits should not apply to milk moved out of Texas if milk wasbeing received in Texas from outside areas during the same month.The handlers testified that the purpose of the more restrictive proposalsis to lessen potential abuses of a transportation credit and to addressequity considerations between Texas producers and producers under otherorders. They testified that the lower credit rate is intended to assurethat there would be no hauling profits that would encourage the haulingof milk further than necessary and to provide no greater hauling incentivefor surplus milk than what is provided for hauling milk for fluid use withinthe Texas marketing area. They also testified that the greater mileagebefore a credit applies, and the use of more northern basing points todetermine such mileage, is intended to prevent a hauling credit for a greaterdistance than the actual hauling distance. The handlers also testifiedthat a credit should apply only to northward movements of milk to preventTexas surplus milk from utilizing scarce manufacturing capacity in theSoutheast, with the result that displaced surplus milk in the Southeastwould then have to be shipped greater distances for disposal, and withouta transportation credit. The handlers further testified that a transportationcredit for only the last half of December is intended to recognize thatmilk production normally exceeds the fluid requirements of distributorsonly during the latter part of the month, while additional supplies arenormally needed by distributors during the beginning of the month in preparationfor the holiday sales period. The handlers also testified that transportationcredits should not apply to milk produced in Oklahoma or to milk shippedout of Texas while milk is being received from outside Texas to preventTexas producers from bearing the cost of disposing of surplus milk associatedwith other states and markets. The handlers are particularly concernedthat the implementation of any transportation credits for the Texas ordercould encourage uneconomic movements of milk from other areas to Texasthereby utilizing Texas manufacturing capacity and forcing Texas milk tobe hauled to distant manufacturing plants. Handlers contend that Texasproducers should not be required to bear the cost of such uneconomic movementsof milk. Handlers also proposed that the change in the point of pricing on divertedmilk be limited to those months for which a transportation credit was proposed(rather than year-round as proposed by AMPI), although there was littletestimony on this aspect of the proposal. Also, there was virtually notestimony on the handlers' proposal to apply transportation credits toonly Class III uses, rather than Class II and Class III uses as proposedby AMPI. Although handlers presented an alternative to AMPI's proposal, their primaryposition (expressed both in testimony and in post-hearing briefs) is thatno change should be made to the Texas order to accommodate the haulingof surplus milk. Handlers contend that the Texas order carries the reservemilk supplies for other Federal order markets and, as a result, the proposalsshould be denied for essentially the same reasons that marketwide servicepayment proposals were denied for several Federal order markets in theSoutheast. In this regard, official notice is taken of the Assistant Secretary'sfinal decision concerning the Georgia and certain other marketing areasissued on April 28, 1987 and published on May 1, 1987 (52 FR 15951). Also, in briefs filed by a number of parties, it is argued that AMPI hasbeen able to recover its seasonal balancing costs through over-order pricesand that AMPI does not carry a disproportionate share of the Class IIIuse on the market considering the amount of surplus associated with othermarkets that is pooled under the Texas order. Such parties argue that AMPIis transporting its own surplus to nonpool plants outside Texas and thatsuch activity is not a service of marketwide benefit to all producers and,therefore, it would not be appropriate to implement a transportation creditthat would require all producers to subsidize AMPI's marketing problem.Furthermore, a brief filed on behalf of three handlers argues that previousDepartment policy set forth in a previous decision to implement transportationcredits establishes that a demonstrated service of marketwide benefit isa prerequisite to implementing a transportation credit. In this regard,official notice is taken of the Assistant Secretary's final decision forthe Georgia and certain other marketing areas issued on March 30, 1983and published April 5, 1983 (48 FR 14604). Also, in their briefs, a number of parties argued that the proposed pricingchange on diverted milk would distort the location value of milk and resultin non-uniform prices to handlers. They further contend that such pricingis not consistent with the requirements of the Agricultural Marketing AgreementAct of 1937, as amended, since milk would be priced on the basis of whereit is produced or normally received rather than at the location where itis physically received. Two cooperative associations (the National Farmers Organization and theFarmers Union) that do not represent any producers under the Texas ordertestified in opposition to the adoption of any transportation credits.They contend that if the transportation of surplus milk is subsidized,such milk would displace other milk at northern manufacturing plants, wouldundercut prices at such plants, and would place downward pressure on manufacturingmilk values to the detriment of all producers. The cooperatives contendthat it would be inequitable for all producers to have to bear the costof disposing of Texas surplus milk while Texas producers are benefittingfrom a Congressionally-mandated higher Class I differential. They contendthat the increased returns from the significantly higher differential (whichthey also contend has encouraged excess milk production in Texas) shouldbe used by AMPI to offset its surplus disposal costs. In addition, in abrief filed on behalf of the National Farmers Organization it is arguedthat prior decisions of the Department establish that a regional view mustbe taken when evaluating the equity of proposals intended to compensatehandler expenses. In this regard, the brief refers to the previously officiallynoticed 1987 decision that denied credits for the performance of marketwideservices and a 1984 decision that denied a proposed credit for milk inClass III uses under the Texas order. Consequently, official notice istaken of the Assistant Secretary's final decision for the Texas marketissued on May 14, 1984 and published on May 17, 1984 (49 FR 20825). A brief was also filed on behalf of a number of producers under the Texasorder who market their milk independently to handlers who operate plantsunder the Texas order. The producers oppose the implementation of transportationcredits. They contend that they are already receiving a reduced blend pricebecause AMPI pools the surplus of other markets under the Texas order,that AMPI is already recovering its balancing costs, and that AMPI hasa cost advantage in disposing of surplus milk because its manufacturingpool plants are located near to the source of heavy milk production. There is no dispute on the record of the proceeding that the dramatic increasesin Texas production testified to by AMPI will mean market surpluses inexcess of the capacity of manufacturing plants located in the marketingarea, particularly during the months of March-June and December. Thesemonths have traditionally represented the period of the greatest ClassIII use of producer milk under the order. During the month of December1987, the most recent month for which data is included in the record thatillustrates the magnitude of the surplus problem, over 60 million poundsof milk produced in the major production areas of the Texas marketing areaand southern Oklahoma was processed at AMPI's two pooled manufacturingplants. During the same month, more than 28 million pounds of producermilk was transferred or diverted to nonpool plants outside Texas for surplusdisposal. With normal seasonal increases in production, it is likely thatthe amount of milk in excess of local plant capacity will exceed 45 millionpounds per month during the current flush production season. When milk production exceeds all available nearby plant capacity, suchexcess production must either be dumped or transported at handler expenseto alternative outlets. There is little way that AMPI, or any other handler,can recover the additional cost of hauling such milk to distant plantsfor surplus disposal. The Act authorizes a transportation credit to handlersfrom pool funds who perform this service if it is of marketwide benefit.Such service is of marketwide benefit to all producers on the Texas marketsince the amount of milk produced by all such producers contributes tothe amount of surplus milk that cannot be accommodated at existing plants.Thus, the implementation of the transportation credits included hereinwill result in all producers bearing a portion of the additional haulingcosts incurred by handlers in marketing surplus milk. The issuance of suchcredits is an extension of the marketwide pooling concept wherein all producersshare the benefits of the fluid milk sales and the costs of maintainingreserve milk supplies. As previously stated, a number of parties opposed the issuance of any transportationcredits, regardless of the marketing problems confronting Texas handlersas a result of the increases in production by producers. They contend thatthe proposals should be denied because: (1) The Texas market carries thereserve supplies for other markets; (2) AMPI is not performing a serviceof marketwide benefit; (3) issues of equity require that a broader, regionalview be considered and there is insufficient evidence in the record toaddress such issue; and (4) the issuance of transportation credits would,inequitably, depress returns to dairy farmers in other areas of the country.With respect to the first major issue of opposition, it is clear that theTexas market carries reserve supplies of milk for the Texas Panhandle,Lubbock-Plainview, and Rio Grande Valley Federal order markets, where virtuallyall the milk producers are AMPI members. Consequently, some of the costsof maintaining the reserve supplies for these other markets are being borneby Texas order producers who are not members of AMPI. Opponents thus contendthat the proposals should be denied for essentially the same reasons asset forth in the officially noticed 1987 decision. With respect to transportationcredits, opponents quote the following from such decision: ``Since reservemilk supplies are unevenly distributed among the seven orders, the producersin a market that carries more than its share of the reserve supply burdenwould be paying for balancing one or more other orders. At the same time,the producers in a market that carries less than its share of the reservesupplies would not pay their share of the necessary balancing costs.''The fact that the Texas market may carry some of the reserve supplies forother markets does not provide a basis for denying the implementation oftransportation credits to handlers under the Texas order. There are a numberof significant differences that distinguish the Texas situation from thatdescribed in the decision denying the issuance of such credits for theseveral southeastern markets. The primary differences are the geographicallimitation of the proposal and the fact that the reserve milk suppliesfor other markets are generally processed at El Paso, Texas, and do notdisplace Texas order producer milk at plants in the major production areasof northern Texas and southern Oklahoma. As previously indicated, the proposalfor the Texas order would limit transportation credits to milk shippedout of the major northern Texas and southern Oklahoma production areas.The excess surplus milk pooled on the Texas market that is associated withthe other markets is produced primarily in New Mexico and does not utilizethe manufacturing capacity that is available in the heavy milk-producingareas of the Texas market. Such milk is essentially New Mexico milk thatis pooled on the Texas market but diverted to AMPI's manufacturing plantat El Paso. The El Paso plant is pooled under the Rio Grande Valley orderand the milk normally transferred or diverted to such plant would not beeligible for a transportation credit under the Texas order. Consequently,Texas order producers would incur a blend price reduction only for transportationcosts that result from the hauling of milk produced in the major productionareas that is in excess of local plant capacity. At the same time, producerssupplying the Rio Grande Valley order would incur all of the transportationcosts that would result if such milk would have to be shipped to distantoutlets for surplus disposal. Consequently, the implementation of transportationcredits under the Texas order is not directly linked to the surplus ofother markets that is pooled under the Texas order. Opponents of transportation credits are concerned that New Mexico productioncould be received and processed at AMPI's Texas balancing plants, withmilk produced in the major Texas production areas then being shifted tononpool plants outside Texas and qualifying for a transportation credit.The distances that such milk would have to be shipped would tend to limitsuch activity. However, additional provisions are included in the regulatoryprovisions to deal with these and other similar movements of milk to preventTexas order producers from incurring a blend price reduction from unnecessarymovements of milk to nonpool plants outside Texas. On the second major point of opposition, opponents argue that AMPI is marketingits own surplus and, thus, is not performing a service of marketwide benefitthat warrants compensation from producers under the Texas order. They alsocontend that AMPI is not bearing a disproportionate share of balancingcosts since AMPI does not handle a disproportionate share of the market'sClass III use if the amount of other order surplus milk is excluded fromthe Texas pool. They also contend that AMPI has been able to recover thecost of balancing the needs of distributing plants through its over-orderpricing structure. With respect to this latter point, AMPI has been able to recover at leastsome of the costs of balancing the needs of some distributing plants throughits seasonal over-order pricing program. Under such plan, higher pricesare charged to handlers who purchase less milk during the flush productionmonths than was purchased during the previous fall months. However, suchpricing plan has not been geared to the recovery of costs associated withmarketing or hauling milk to distant outlets that is in excess of all thecapacity available at plants in the marketing area. Instead, such over-orderpricing is geared to recover costs associated with balancing the increaseddemand of fluid milk handlers for additional milk in the fall of each year.Contrary to opponents' views, AMPI does perform a balancing function andcarries a disproportionate share of the Class III use under the Texas order.The Texas order pools more than six times the amount of milk that is pooledunder the Rio Grande Valley, Texas Panhandle and Lubbock-Plainview orderscombined. Thus, only a relatively small amount of Class III use and producermilk would have to be removed from the Texas pool (10 to 13 million poundsper month) for the Texas market to reflect the four-market Class III useof 19 percent during 1987. Consequently, AMPI would still carry a disproportionateshare of the Class III use under the Texas order and, as a result, wouldbear a disproportionate share of the cost of handling such milk. This supportsa more equitable sharing of such costs among all producers on the marketthrough the implementation of transportation credits, as authorized bythe Act. In addition, even if there was not a substantial disproportionatesharing of Class III use among handlers, the Act provides the authorityto implement transportation credits to handlers who provide a service toproducers under marketing conditions where production exceeds all availablenearby plant capacity.  With respect to the third major point of opposition to the implementationof transportation credits, opponents contend that regional equity considerationsrequire the denial of the proposal since prior decisions establish a Departmentpolicy that a regional view must be taken in evaluating issues of equityamong producers. Opponents cite the 1987 decision that denied the issuanceof transportation credits for several southeastern markets and a 1983 decisionconcerning the denial of a proposed reduction to the Class III price (inthe form of a credit to handlers) for certain months under the Texas order.The distinctions between the 1987 decision and the present circumstanceswere set forth under the first major point of opposition to the implementationof transportation credits under the Texas order. With respect to the 1983decision, AMPI claimed that it was experiencing losses in operating itstwo manufacturing plants because of the excessive quantities of milk thathad to be processed during certain months of the year. Thus, the issuecentered on the profitability or losses associated with operating two manufacturingplants that perform a balancing function for the market. The proposal was denied for a number of reasons, including the uncertaintiesover the extent of the claimed losses and because substantial quantitiesof milk to which the credit would apply were diverted to other plants.There were no claimed manufacturing losses on such milk. Thus, it couldnot be concluded that the claimed losses at the two plants were a sufficientbasis for determining the extent of manufacturing losses in handling thesurplus milk associated with the Texas market. The present case involves transportation costs incurred by handlers onmilk that exceeds the capacity of plants in the market that must be hauledto distant outlets. There is no dispute over the costs that are incurredby AMPI, or any handler who hauls milk to distant outlets. The Act specificallyauthorizes the use of producer funds to compensate handlers for transportationexpenses incurred in performing a market-clearing service. The previous decision also indicated that it has been a longstanding policythat the costs of providing a balancing service should be recovered fromthe fluid milk handlers that benefit directly from the balancing functionand that over-order prices were a mechanism for such recovery of costs.However, the Act has been amended since that decision was written to specificallyprovide that handlers may be reimbursed by producers for costs incurredin performing a number of services, including the cost of hauling milkto outlets for surplus disposal. The last major point of opposition concerns the potential impact that surplusTexas production could have on dairy farmers in other areas of the country.Opponents contend that it would be inequitable for such dairy farmers tobear the cost of disposing of Texas surplus production. The basic impact of pool transportation credits under the Texas order willbe on producers who supply the Texas market. This will be through a loweringof their returns from the sale of milk to partially compensate handlersfor performing a marketing service of marketwide benefit. It is recognized,however, that surplus milk on the Texas market may result in a loweringof returns to dairy farmers in other areas as welI. Surplus productionin Texas, or anywhere in the country, places a downward pressure on allmilk prices since such milk must be processed into manufactured dairy productsthat compete for sales in a national market. National supply/demand conditionsthat establish lower milk values would exist with or without the applicationof transportation credits to handlers in the Texas market or in other markets.Any resulting decline in the ``Minnesota-Wisconsin price,'' which is anindicator of overall supply/demand conditions for milk in manufacturinguses, would have an impact on returns to all dairy farmers associated withFederal order markets, including those who supply the Texas market. Aspreviously stated, returns to Texas producers would also reflect the creditsprovided to handlers. The primary concern is that any transportation credits should not overcompensatehandlers for hauling costs. To do so would represent a charge to Texasproducers in excess of the value of the service and possibly create incentivesfor needless movements of milk to generate hauling profits. Consequently,the transportation credits established herein are intended to reimbursehandlers only for a portion of the costs incurred so as to discourage anyunnecessary movements of milk. Transportation credits should be applicable only to milk that is producedin the major production areas of northern Texas and southern Oklahoma,as proposed by AMPI. This territory represents the primary production areafor the Texas market. This northern milk supply is in excess of the fluidmilk needs of the northern population centers and moves as needed to supplythe fluid milk requirements of southern population centers located in deficitmilk producing areas. When the northern milk supply is not needed for fluiduse in either the northern or southern population centers, it is normallyprocessed at manufacturing plants located in Zone 1 of the marketing area.Zone 1, which contains the major Dallas-Ft. Worth population center, isthe heaviest milk producing area. The zone includes eight distributingplants, one supply plant, the two pooled, balancing, manufacturing plantsoperated by AMPI and a number of nonpool plants at which pooled milk isprocessed into Class II products. Zone 3 (Waco) is south of Zone 1 andis the second largest milk producing area. It contains only one distributingplant. Milk production in this area is located between the major Zone 1consumption center and other major consumption areas to the south in Zone8 (Houston) and Zone 9 (San Antonio). Zone 1-A (Burkburnett) is the thirdlargest milk producing area and is northwest of the population center inZone 1. There is also only one distributing plant in Zone 1-A. Combined,these three zones represent about 75 percent of the milk produced in Texasthat is pooled under the Texas order and more than 60 percent of all themilk pooled under the order. The three zones also include the top 10 milkproducing counties in Texas, which represented 58 percent of the totalTexas production and 62 percent of the Texas pooled milk during December1987. These counties experienced more than a 20 percent increase in productionfrom December 1986 to December 1987. The amount of Oklahoma production pooled on the Texas market decreasedfrom about 16 million pounds per month in 1986 to 15 million pounds permonth in 1987. Of the 15 million pounds, about 9.4 million pounds, or 63percent, was produced in the 19 southern Oklahoma counties located immediatelyto the north of Zones 1 and 1-A of the Texas marketing area. There is onenonpool plant in this area, located at Lawton, Oklahoma, and that plantis expected to be closed in the near future.During 1986, AMPI delivered about 90 percent of the southern Oklahoma milkproduction to Texas pool plants in July, 35 percent in March and an averageof 58 percent for the entire year. During 1987, AMPI delivered 79 percentof such milk to Texas pool plants in August, 20 percent in April and anaverage of 48 percent for the entire year. The remaining proportions werediverted to nonpool plants located outside Texas. As a result, it is apparentthat the southern Oklahoma production is an integral part of the supplysource for the Texas market and also would be the first milk to be movedto nonpool plants outside Texas when production exceeds local plant capacity.Such milk is moved on a direct-shipped basis from farms to plants in Zones1 and 1-A of the marketing area or is diverted to nonpool plants outsideTexas when it is not needed or when supplies of milk exceed the capacityof plants in Texas. As a result, transportation credits should be applicableto milk produced in southern Oklahoma as well as to milk produced in thethree pricing zones of the Texas marketing area that also represent theprimary production areas for the Texas market. The pricing structure of the Texas market reflects the relationship betweenthe production and consumption centers of the market. Zone 1 is the basingpoint at which Class I prices to handlers and blend prices to producersare announced under the order. Location adjustments are applied to theZone 1 Class I and blend prices for other pricing zones in the marketingarea and for locations outside the marketing area. The order provides forplus adjustments to the south of Zone 1 and minus adjustments to the northof Zone 1. For example, Class I and blend prices for Zone 3 are increasedby 15 cents while such prices are reduced by 25 cents and 28 cents, respectively,for milk received at plants in Zone 1-A of the marketing area and the 19southern Oklahoma counties. The increasing prices from north to south reflectthe need for milk produced in the northern major production areas to movegreater distances to supply the milk requirements of plants located inthe southern deficit production areas of the market. Thus, location adjustmentscompensate producers for the greater value of the economic service producersprovide to handlers in shipping milk greater distances to supply fluidmilk needs. Conversely, when handlers incur greater transportation costsin marketing milk of producers that is in excess of plant capacity, theyare providing a service of economic value to producers. A transportation credit for handlers should be provided for surplus milkthat is either transferred or diverted to nonpool plants outside Texas.In either case the credit should be computed at the rate of 2.4 cents perhundredweight per 10 miles for the distances that milk is hauled. Suchrate represents 80 percent of the 3-cent per hundredweight hauling costused to establish location adjustments in the Texas and other Federal ordermarketing areas to conform with Congressionally-mandated Class I differentialsestablished May 1, 1986. Official notice is taken of the Assistant Secretary'sfinal decision concerning the Texas and certain other marketing areas issuedon October 30, 1986 and published November 5, 1986 (51 FR 40176). Such2.4-cent rate also represents a reasonable alignment of Class I differentialsbetween Dallas and major cities in other Federal orders located in Arkansas,Oklahoma, Kansas, and Missouri. The credit rate proposed by AMPI is based on actual hauling costs incurredin shipping milk to nonpool plants outside Texas. However, such rate isexcessive in that actual hauling costs are not reflected in location adjustmentsunder the Texas and other nearby orders. As indicated in the officiallynoticed 1986 decision, location adjustments reflect at most a conservativeestimate of hauling costs to avoid hauling profits and to promote haulingefficiencies and encourage milk to move to the nearest alternative outlets.Such precautions for hauling milk for Class I use are even more necessaryfor hauling milk that is surplus to plant capacity. Incentives are necessaryto promote the use of the nearest available outlets for surplus disposalto ensure that returns to producers are not reduced for shipments of milkover greater distances than necessary. Also, the use of such lower ratefor transportation credits insures that the hauling incentive for surplusmilk is less than what is provided for milk for fluid use. The handlers' proposed rate is overly conservative and is based on variousalignment rates between locations in the Texas marketing area. However,such rates reflected between certain cities disregard the fact that thelocation adjustments for the major consumption centers of the Texas marketare based on a three-cent hauling rate for the additional distances betweensuch consumption centers and the nearest major production area. For example,as set forth in the officially noticed 1986 decision, the plus locationadjustment for Zone 9 (San Antonio) is 42 cents per hundredweight. Suchadjustment is based on the additional distance that milk must move fromStephenville (Erath County) to San Antonio versus the distance betweenStephenville and Ft. Worth. The additional distance of 140 miles at threecents per 10 miles establishes the 42-cent location adjustment. However,such adjustment reflects an alignment rate of considerably less than threecents between Dallas and San Antonio. Consequently, the various alignmentrates that result between cities within the Texas marketing area do notnecessarily reflect the hauling incentives provided under the Texas orderfor movements of milk from production areas to alternative consumptioncenters. In addition, such alignment rates within the Texas marketing areado not reflect the alignment of Class I differentials between Dallas andother Federal order markets to the north. The transportation credits should apply to milk that is transferred ordiverted to any nonpool plant located outside the State of Texas for ClassII or Class III use. There was no testimony presented at the hearing orarguments presented in briefs to limit such credits to only Class III uses.In addition, there should be no limitation of credits to only northwardmovements of milk. Such a limitation would be inconsistent with the implementationof a low credit rate to encourage the use of the nearest available outletsfor surplus disposal to minimize the impact of transportation credits onTexas order producers.The transportation credit to handlers should apply to bulk fluid milk productstransferred by handlers from pool plants located in Zone 1 of the marketingarea to nonpool plants located outside Texas. The credit should apply tothe total distance of the transfer. The AMPI proposal would have applied a credit to milk that is transferredor diverted from farms of producers in Zones 1 and 3 for the distance inexcess of 90 miles between Dallas and the nonpool plants receiving themilk. The basis for the mileage limitation is that producers on the averagepay the cost of hauling milk for 90 miles to supply the fluid milk plantsin Zone 1 of the marketing area. However, with respect to transfers ofmilk from pool plants, producers would pay the cost of hauling milk tothe plant of first receipt. To the extent that milk is in excess of plantcapacity, the transferor handler would incur the cost of hauling milk fromthe pool plant to the nonpool plant for surplus disposal. Thus, the handlertransferring the milk should be reimbursed for the total distance betweenthe pool plant and the nonpool plant for performing such marketing servicefor producers. Since the use of Dallas as a basing point and the mileage limitation wouldnot apply for establishing a transportation credit for transfers of milk,it is not necessary to include Zone 3 of the marketing area as an areafrom which a credit would apply to transfers of milk. Such zone is thesouthern-most area to which transportation credits would apply and thereis only one pool distributing plant located in the area. Any transfer ofmilk to nonpool plants outside Texas would be expected to originate fromthe pool plants that are located in Zone 1 of the marketing area. Also,a transportation credit would not apply to transfers of milk from plantslocated in Zone 1-A of the marketing area or southern Oklahoma. There areno pool plants in southern Oklahoma and only one pool distributing plantin Zone 1-A and there was no proposal to provide credits on transfers ofmilk from such areas. It is noted that the intent of the credit proposals is to limit such creditsprimarily to the major surplus production areas of the market. However,as pointed out at the hearing, milk that originates outside such productionareas may be received at pool plants that subsequently transfer milk tononpool plants outside Texas. Once such milk is commingled in a plant withmilk that originated in the major production areas its identity is lost.Thus, any milk that is received at Zone 1 pool plants should be eligiblefor a transportation credit. However, as set forth later in this decision,the amount of milk eligible for a transportation credit would be reducedto the extent that milk is received from outside the State of Texas. Suchoffset, in conjunction with the restriction to Zone 1 plants for transportationcredits on milk transfers, will tend to limit the application of such creditsto milk produced inside the major production areas of the market. Transportation credits should also be provided to handlers who move milkdirectly from the farms of producers to nonpool plants located outsidethe State of Texas. Handlers may divert producer milk from pool plantswhere the milk is normally received regardless of the location of the poolplant. However, only producer milk that is produced on dairy farms locatedin Zones 1, 1-A or 3 of the marketing area or in any of 19 specified southernOklahoma counties would be eligible for a transportation credit. As previouslystated, such areas represent the primary production areas that are reliedupon to meet the fluid milk needs of the market. Also, milk in these northernproduction areas would be expected to be the first milk to be moved tononpool plants outside Texas when production exceeds plant capacity. The credit should be based on the distance that milk is hauled minus 100miles. The 100-mile exclusion is basically intended to recognize an approximationof the average hauling distance to distributing plants that is paid forby producers. AMPI proposed that milk delivered from Zones 1 and 3 should receive a transportationcredit on the distance between Dallas and the nonpool plant minus 90 miles.On the other hand, handlers proposed that the credit distance should bebased on the distance between the nonpool plant and the nearer of Gainesville,Sherman, Paris or Mt. Pleasant, Texas, minus 100 miles. With respect tomilk produced in Zone 1-A or southern Oklahoma, AMPI proposed that thecredit be based on the distance between the nonpool plant and the nearerof Burkburnett, Texas or Sulphur, Oklahoma, minus 110 miles. The handlerproposal for Zone 1-A would have used the Burkburnett basing point andthe 100-mile exclusion. It is obvious from data in the record that shipping distances to distributingplants vary significantly. For example, during May 1987, the weighted averagedistance of milk movements to distributing plants in Dallas was 83 miles,while the weighted average distance of shipments to Ft. Worth and Burkburnettwere about 50 miles and 134 miles, respectively. Consequently, a precisedistance that milk from the major production areas is shipped to distributingplants, for which the cost of the haul is paid by producers, is not ascertainable.However, it is necessary that some initial distance be excluded. Otherwise,handlers would receive a transportation credit for a hauling distance thatis normally paid for by producers. A distance of 100 miles is an approximationof such distance for the four production areas to which a credit wouldapply. Also, such distance is in excess of the shipping distance observedin Zone 1 of the marketing area, which contains the greatest amount ofproduction and where most of the distributing plants are located. A mileagein excess of the Zone 1 average shipping distance is consistent with theneed to insure that handlers are not overcompensated for hauling costsincurred in clearing the market of surplus milk. In order to insure that handlers are not overcompensated, the distanceto which a credit applies should not be based exclusively on the basingpoints that were proposed by either AMPI or handlers. Rather, one basingpoint and various other locations should be used to determine the transportationdistance for which a credit would apply. The credit should apply to milkthat is diverted to a nonpool plant that is in excess of 100 miles fromthe nearer of the city hall in Dallas, Texas, the pool plant of last receiptfor the major portion of the milk on the load, or the courthouse of thecounty where the major portion of the milk on the load was produced. Theuse of these various locations to determine the distance to which a creditwould apply will assure that handlers will not receive a credit for a greaterdistance than milk was hauled. Such procedure will carry out the objectiveof the handlers' proposal, but with a greater degree of precision thanwould be accomplished by the use of the northern basing points as handlersproposed. In addition to a transportation credit for diverted milk, AMPI also proposedthat such milk that originates in the primary production areas should nolonger be priced at the location of the plant to which it is diverted ifthe milk is diverted to a nonpool plant located outside the State of Texas.Such change to the point of pricing on diverted milk was proposed for allmonths of the year by AMPI and for the flush production months by handlers.As previously stated, the Texas order provides for both plus and minuslocation adjustments that reflect the value of the economic service providedby producers in shipping milk alternative distances from production areasto handlers' plants at various locations for fluid uses. Handlers pay forthe value of the economic service provided by producers by the applicationof location adjustments to the Class I price. There are no location adjustmentsto handlers for milk in Class II or Class III uses since the basic principleis to cover the costs associated with hauling milk to distributing plantsfor fluid use. Also, there is no pricing incentive provided for haulingmilk for manufacturing uses, which compete in a market that is more regionalor national in scope than that for fluid milk, since it is more economicalfor milk to be processed into manufactured products at plants in productionareas. Such concentrated products can be transported at a lesser cost thanbulk fluid milk products.Producers are compensated for the transportation service provided to fluidmilk handlers by the application of the handler Class I location adjustmentsto the blend price. Consequently, the producer location adjustments applyto all milk delivered to a plant, regardless of its use, while handlerspay the location adjustment for milk in Class I use. The same locationadjustment is applicable to the blend price since the hauling cost is thesame for all milk delivered to a handler by a producer regardless of theultimate use of the milk by the handler. The concept of pricing diverted milk at the plant where it is receivedis based on the fact that milk that is in excess of fluid milk needs isnormally processed at manufacturing plants that are located near or inthe major production areas. Thus, producers whose milk is delivered tosuch plants normally incur a lesser hauling cost than if their milk isshipped further distances to supply fluid milk plants that are locatednear or in the major consumption areas of the market. Within the Texasmarket, the major balancing manufacturing plants, as well as distributingplants, are located in Zone 1 of the marketing area where no location adjustmentsapply. The distributing plants are located around the Dallas/Ft. Worthconsumption centers while the manufacturing plants are located in the majorproduction areas. When the milk supply exceeds fluid milk needs, it isprocessed at such manufacturing plants and the producers receive the Zone1 blend price. Also, to the extent that milk in more northern areas (Zone1-A and southern Oklahoma) where minus location adjustments apply is shippedto such plants in Zone 1, producers are compensated for the hauling costsincurred in shipping milk from the north to the south. When there is an excessive supply of milk that cannot be processed at plantslocated within the marketing area, particularly in Zone 1 of the marketingarea where the balancing plants are located, it must be processed at alternativeoutlets, principally nonpool plants that are located outside Texas. Whenmilk is diverted to such distant plants, it is obvious that greater, ratherthan lesser, hauling costs are incurred. Thus, the underlying assumptionthat provides a basis for pricing milk at the location of the plant towhich it is diverted is not applicable when supplies of milk exceed thecapacity of those plants that are located in the primary production areasof the Texas market. Regardless of the above, no change should be made to the point of pricingon diverted milk, as was proposed, to deal with this transportation problem.Such problem is primarily associated with additional costs incurred byhandlers in diverting milk to distant, alternative outlets. Handlers whodivert milk to a distant plant account to the pool at a Class II or ClassIII price, depending on the use of the milk, that is not adjusted for location.Under current provisions, handlers then receive a credit at the blend pricepayable to producers that is adjusted for the location of the plant towhich the milk is diverted. Thus, when milk is diverted to a nonpool plantwhere a minus location adjustment applies, the handler credit is reducedby such location adjustment. A reduction in the blend price credit to a handler results in establishinga penalty to a handler for diverting milk to a distant plant for surplusdisposal. As a result, a transportation credit for a handler should includean additional credit that is equal to the difference between the locationadjustment that is applicable in the area where the milk is produced andany greater minus location adjustment that is applicable at the nonpoolplant outside Texas where the milk is received. The application of this additional credit on diverted milk basically carriesout the intent of the AMPI proposal to change the point of pricing on divertedmilk. As previously indicated, a number of parties opposed any such changesas being inconsistent with the location pricing criteria under the Act.They also contend that the point of pricing is not directly related tothe authority to provide for credits to handlers for performing a serviceof marketwide benefit to producers. Contrary to opponents' views, the problem associated with the cost of divertingsurplus milk to distant outlets is a direct result of the excess milk productionthat is being produced by dairy farmers who supply the Texas market. Handlerswho market and provide an outlet for such excess milk provide a servicethat benefits producers. Consequently, it is precisely the type of servicefor which the Act specifies that handlers may be compensated by producers.A failure to provide the additional credit on diverted milk would resultin penalizing a handler for a cost that is incurred in clearing the marketof excess supplies of milk. Furthermore, the additional transportation credit would not distort thelocation value of milk or result in non-uniform costs to handlers. As previouslystated, there are no location adjustments to handlers for milk in ClassII or Class III uses. Consequently, there would be no change in the classprice value of milk to handlers as a result of the credit to remove thepenalty on handlers that results from blend price location adjustmentsunder marketing conditions that exist when supplies of milk exceed plantcapacity. In addition, the application of the additional credit will promotethe use of the most efficient and economical marketing practices availableto dispose of surplus milk. Most of the milk that is surplus to the needsof the Texas market is diverted to nonpool plants while limited quantitiesare transferred from pool plants to nonpool plants. It is often more efficientto move milk from farms in certain areas directly to nonpool plants ratherthan for such milk to be hauled to pool plants, be unloaded and then reloadedfor transfer to a nonpool plant. In the absence of the additional diversioncredit, a pricing incentive would be provided to handlers to engage insuch uneconomic transferring practices to qualify for a transportationcredit. Consequently, the application of the additional credit on divertedmilk will allow handlers the flexibility to use the most efficient methodof disposing of surplus milk.A brief in opposition to the proposed pricing point change argued thatsuch a change would amount to the compensation of producers based upontheir location. Consequently, the brief argues that the proposal wouldamount to a ``nearby'' differential that was invalidated in the case of<T3>Zuber vs. Allen </T3>(396 U.S. 168, 1969). Contrary to the arguments presented in the brief, the issue of a transportationcredit for surplus milk (which is now specifically authorized by the Act)is totally different from the differential invalidated by <T3>Zuber. </T3>In <T3>Zuber, </T3>the nearby differential was a payment to dairy farmerswho were located in certain areas. The court concluded that the locationof farms was not a basis for higher returns since location alone does notestablish that producers provided a service of economic value to handlers.The present circumstance concerns a credit from the pool to handlers forproviding a service of economic value to producers. Furthermore, the creditfrom the pool (which lowers returns to producers) does not change the valueof milk to handlers at class prices at any location. The credit is necessaryso that the handler who diverts the milk is not penalized by blend pricelocation adjustments for providing a service of value for producers, namely,clearing the market of excess milk supplies. The additional credit on diverted milk should be applicable only duringthe months of March-June and December. It is during these months, whensupplies of milk exceed plant capacity, that handlers provide an economicservice of value to producers, for which handlers should be compensated.Milk is diverted to nonpool plants outside Texas during most months ofthe year by AMPI, even during those periods when there is obviously capacityavailable to process additional supplies of milk at the Muenster and SulphurSprings balancing plants. Consequently, the decision to divert milk todistant plants when there is capacity at plants in the marketing area isa business decision by AMPI. Such movements of milk are not related tothe movements of milk to nonpool plants outside Texas that are necessitatedby a lack of plant capacity in the marketing area to handle the amountof production available during the flush production months of the year.Consequently, it would be inappropriate to reduce returns to Texas producersto compensate handlers for such movements of milk. The implementation of the transportation credits to handlers could providea pricing incentive for inefficient and unnecessary movements of milk.As previously stated, milk that is produced in New Mexico is currentlyassociated with the Texas market, although such milk does not currentlydisplace significant quantities of milk that is produced in the major productionarea of the Texas market from the plant capacity that is available in theTexas marketing area. However, the existence of a transportation creditunder the Texas order would create an economic incentive for such milkto be received at plants in the marketing area, thereby displacing Texasmilk that could be hauled to alternative outlets with a transportationcredit. Although hauling distances would tend to discourage such movements,the transportation credit would provide some additional incentive for suchmovements. With respect to milk produced in other areas transportation credits wouldprovide a significant incentive for uneconomic movements of milk. For example,there is currently an incentive for milk produced in southern Oklahomato be received at plants in the Texas marketing area because current locationadjustments increase the value of milk from north to south to encouragemovements of milk to the south. Thus, a portion of the cost of haulingmilk southward is currently covered under the order pricing structure.Such pricing, coupled with a transportation credit to move milk to plantsoutside Texas, would encourage southern Oklahoma milk to be received atplants in the marketing area and encourage Texas milk to be shipped toplants outside the State. Such movements of milk would not be representativeof an efficient and economical marketing system since the most northernlocated milk would be the first milk that would be expected to be movedto nonpool plants outside Texas when plant capacity in the Texas marketingarea is inadequate. Texas order producers should not be required to reimbursehandlers for such uneconomic movements of milk. In order to prevent Texas order producers from bearing unnecessary haulingcosts, the amount of milk to which a transportation credit would applyshould be reduced by the amount of milk from outside the State of Texasthat a handler, or any affiliate of the handler, causes to be receivedat plants in the Texas marketing area. An affiliate of a handler wouldinclude a multi-plant handler or cooperative associations operating undera joint marketing agreement. To the extent that milk is received at plantsfrom outside Texas, the lowest possible transportation credit shall beassigned to a handler for any remaining volume of milk shipped to nonpoolplants outside Texas. This is accomplished by assigning the offset poundsof milk (the volume of milk received from outside Texas) in sequence beginningwith the nonpool plant at which the greatest credit would apply. In addition,no transportation credit should apply to milk shipped to any given nonpoolplant during the month if any of such milk is assigned to Glass I use.Texas producers should not be required to reimburse handlers for costsincurred in shipping milk to other plants outside Texas for Class I use.With the implementation of the offset provisions to assure that producersdo not reimburse handlers for inefficient movements of milk, it is alsonecessary to limit transportation credits to handlers for only the lasthalf of December as proposed by handlers. As indicated, the historicalsupply/demand situation during December is somewhat different than thesituation that exists during March-June. To the extent that supplies arein excess of plant capacity during the latter part of the month, shipmentsof milk to nonpool plants outside Texas during the latter part of the monthshould not be offset to the extent that milk may be imported from outsideTexas during the beginning of the month to meet additional fluid milk needs.By limiting the application of transportation credits to only the December16-31 period, handlers would not be penalized for market-clearing activitiesduring such period because of the need to obtain additional milk suppliesduring the first part of the month. A number of parties raised concerns over the extent to which transportationcredits for the Texas market could lead to abuses. In particular, theycontended that if transportation credits are implemented, safeguards shouldbe provided to assure that Texas order producers do not bear the cost oftransporting surplus milk associated with other markets, that credits donot overcompensate handlers, thus encouraging excessive hauling of milk,and that assurances be provided that milk is first made available to fluidmilk plants. The provisions contained herein are designed to specificallyminimize any adverse impact of transportation credits on Texas producers,as well as other order producers and fluid milk handlers. The safeguardsinclude a credit rate below transportation costs, a substantial distancethat milk must be diverted before a credit applies, and the offset to theamount of milk to which a credit would apply. In addition, the nonpoolplants outside Texas that receive milk subject to a credit and the totalvalue of credits will be made available on a monthly basis by the marketadministrator. Such market information will provide a basis for the continuedmonitoring of the effectiveness and impact of these provisions by the industry.Other potential safeguards, such as a maximum shipping distance or a notificationprocess to identify the nearest available nonpool plants or the fluid milkneeds of distributing plants, do not appear to be necessary. To the extentthat additional modifications may be necessary, the amendatory processis available to refine, or eliminate, order provisions as the need mayarise through experience with the issue of transportation credits. 2. <T3>The need for emergency action with respect to issue no. 1. </T3>Thehearing notice indicated that evidence would be taken at the hearing todetermine whether emergency marketing conditions exist to such an extentthat omission of a recommended decision and the opportunity to file exceptionsthereto under the rules of practice and procedure is warranted. There wasa consensus among the hearing participants that the disposal of surplusmilk would be a problem for Texas regulated handlers this spring. In anticipationof these marketing conditions, AMPI testified that the amandments emanatingfrom the February hearing should be adopted as expeditiously as possible.The implementation of the proposed amendments on an emergency basis wasopposed by handlers. They testified that it would be inappropriate to issueany transportation credits without providing the industry with the opportunityto fully review and analyze the decision and any amendments resulting fromthe hearing. They indicated that there is little experience with transportationcredits and that it is a highly complex and important issue that is ofinterest throughout the Federal order system. The evidence in the record of this proceeding strongly indicates that surplusmilk supplies in the Texas market will be substantially larger than normalduring the months of March-June this year. It also shows that the capacityof Texas manufacturing plants will not be adequate to process all of themarket's excess milk. In addition to the emergency marketing conditions,the Act authorizing transportation credits requires that any amendmentsresulting from the hearing be implemented not later than 120 days aftera hearing is conducted on such issue. The transcript of the proceedingwas certified on March 15, 1988, which requires the implementation of amendmentsby July 13, 1988. The complexity of the issue and the considerations involved require theissuance of a tentative decision to make it possible to issue an interimrule to implement the proposed provisions within the statutory deadline.This procedure will also give interested parties the opportunity to commentfully, through exceptions, on the decision and proposed amendments. <ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions </ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision. <ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings </ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the Texas order was first issued and when it was amended.The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,except where they may conflict with those set forth herein. (a) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, will tend toeffectuate the declared policy of the Act; (b) The parity prices of milk as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the marketing area, and the minimum prices specifiedin the tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors, insurea sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and be in the publicinterest; and(c) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, will regulate the handling of milk in the same manner as,and will be applicable only to persons in the respective classes of industrialand commercial activity specified in, a marketing agreement upon whicha hearing has been held. <ITAG tagnum="84">Tentative Marketing Agreement and Interim Order Amending the Order</ITAG>Annexed hereto and made a part hereof are two documents, a Tentative MarketingAgreement regulating the handling of milk, and an Interim Order Amendingthe Order regulating the handling of milk in the Texas marketing area,which have been decided upon as the detailed and appropriate means of effectuatingthe foregoing conclusions. <T3>It is hereby ordered, </T3>That this entire decision and the two documentsannexed hereto be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. <ITAG tagnum="84">Determination of Producer Approval and Representative Period </ITAG>April 1988 is hereby determined to be the representative period for thepurpose of ascertaining whether the issuance of the order, as amended andas hereby proposed to be amended, regulating the handling of milk in theTexas marketing area is approved or favored by producers, as defined underthe terms of the order (as amended and as hereby proposed to be amended),who during such representative period were engaged in the production ofmilk for sale within the aforesaid marketing area. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 1126 </ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on: June 6, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Kenneth A. Gilles, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Marketing and Inspection Services. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="85">Interim Order Amending the Order Regulating the Handling of Milk inthe Texas Marketing Area </ITAG>(This order shall not become effective unless and until the requirementsof andSection; 900.14 of the rules of practice and procedure governing proceedingsto formulate marketing agreements and marketing orders have been met.)Findings and Determinations The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the order was first issued and when it was amended.The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,except where they may conflict with those set forth herein. (a) <T3>Findings. </T3>A public hearing was held upon certain proposed amendmentsto the tentative marketing agreement and to the order regulating the handlingof milk in the Texas marketing area. The hearing was held pursuant to theprovisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended(7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicable rules of practice and procedure(7 CFR Part 900). Upon the basis of the evidence introduced at such hearing and the recordthereof, it is found that: (1) The said order as hereby amended, and all of the terms and conditionsthereof, will tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act; (2) The parity prices of milk, as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct, are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the said marketing area; and the minimum prices specifiedin the order as hereby amended are such prices as will reflect the aforesaidfactors, insure a sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and bein the public interest; and (3) The said order as hereby amended regulates the handling of milk inthe same manner as, and is applicable only to persons in the respectiveclasses of industrial or commercial activity specified in, a marketingagreement upon whih a hearing has been held. Order Relative to Handling <T3>It is therefore ordered, </T3>That on and after the effective datehereof, the handling of milk in the Texas marketing area shall be in conformityto and in compliance with the terms and conditions of the order, as amended,and as hereby amended, as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1126_MILK IN THE TEXAS MARKETING AREA </ITAG>1. The authority citation for 7 CFR Part 1126 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-674.</ITAG>2. A new andSection; 1126.55 is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1126.55</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Credits to handlers for transporting surplus milk. </ITAG>For each of the months of March through June and December 16-31, a transportationcredit shall be computed for each handler on the amount of producer milkthat is classified as Class II or Class III pursuant to andSection; 1126.42(b)(3) or (d)(2) that such handler transfers or diverts to nonpool plantslocated outside the State of Texas. Credits established pursuant to paragraphs(a) and (b) of this section shall be computed at the rate of 2.4 centsper hundredweight for each 10 miles, or fraction thereof, for the shortesthard-surfaced highway distance, as determined by the market administrator.The amount of milk eligible for a transportation credit and the amountof such credit shall be established in accordance with paragraphs (a),(b), and (c) of this section subject to the limitations specified in paragraph(d) of this section. (a) A transfer credit shall apply to bulk fluid milk products transferredby a handler from a pool plant located in Zone 1 of the marketing areafor the distance between the transferor pool plant and the transferee nonpoolplant. (b) A credit for diverted milk shall apply to milk produced in Zone 1,1-A, or 3 of the marketing area or the Oklahoma counties of Atoka, Bryan,Carter, Choctaw, Comanche, Cotton, Greer, Harmon, Jackson, Jefferson, Johnston,Kiowa, Love, Marshall, McCurtain, Murray, Pushmataha, Stephens, or Tillmanthat is diverted to a nonpool plant for the distance in excess of 100 milesbetwean the nonpool plant and the nearer of the city hall in Dallas, Texas,the pool plant of last receipt for the major portion of the milk on theroute, or the courthouse of the county where the major portion of the milkon the load was produced.(c) A credit for diverted milk produced in the area specified in paragraph(b) of this section shall also include an amount per hundredweight equalto the difference between the location adjustment (excluding any plus adjustment)applicable in the area where the milk was produced and any greater minuslocation adjustment applicable at the location of the nonpool plant wherethe milk was received. (d) No credit shall apply to the total quantity of milk moved to a givennonpool plant by a handler during each of the credit periods if any portionof the milk is assigned to Class I. Also, the amount of milk to which acredit would be applicable during each of the credit periods pursuant toparagraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall be offset by the amountof milk that a handler or any affiliate of the handler causes to be receivedat plants located in the marketing area from outside the State of Texasduring each of the credit periods, with such offset to be applied in sequencebeginning with the nonpool plant at which the greatest credit would apply.3. In andSection; 1126.60, paragraph (h) is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1126.60</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Handler's value for computing uniform price. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(h) Deduct any credit applicable pursuant to andSection; 1126.55. <ITAG tagnum="85">Tentative Marketing Agreement Regulating the Handling of Milk in theTexas Marketing Area </ITAG>The parties hereto, in order to effectuate the declared policy of the Act,and in accordance with the rules of practice and procedure effective thereunder(7 CFR Part 900), desire to enter into this tentative marketing agreementand do hereby agree that the provisions referred to in paragraph I hereofas augmented by the provisions specified in paragraph II hereof, shallbe and are the provisions of this tentative marketing agreement as if setout in full herein. I. The findings and determinations, order relative to handling, and theprovisions of andSection;andSection; 1126.1 to 1126.86, all inclusive, of theorder regulating the handling of milk in the Texas marketing area 7 CFRPart 1126 which is annexed hereto; and II. The following provisions: Section 1126.87 Record of milk handled and authorization to correct typographicalerrors. (a) <T3>Record of milk handled. </T3>The undersigned certifies that he handledduring the month of April 1988  hundredweight of milk covered by this marketingagreement. (b) <T3>Authorization to correct typographical errors. </T3>The undersignedhereby authorizes the Director, or Acting Director, Dairy Division, AgriculturalMarketing Service, to correct any typographical errors which may have beenmade in this marketing agreement. Section 1126.88 Effective date. This marketing agreement shall become effective upon the execution of acounterpart hereof by the Secretary in accordance with andSection; 900.14(a)of the aforesaid rules of practice and procedure. In Witness Whereof, The contracting handlers, acting under the provisionsof the Act, for the purposes and subject to the limitations herein containedand not otherwise, have hereunto set their respective hands and seals.<ITAG tagnum="77">_ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">        (Signature)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">BY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">   (Name)          (Title)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">         (Address)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Seal)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Attest </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Date </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-13162 Filed 6-10-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>