<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88701-0120 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-01-88.f2.A1119</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">POSTAL SERVICE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Privacy Act of 1974; Systems of Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Agency:</T2> Postal Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Action:</T2> Notice of Records Systems Changes.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Summary:</T2> This document gives notice of the Postal Service's additionof a routine use to each of its systems USPS 120.120, Personnel Records_PersonnelResearch and Test Validation Records, and USPS 050.020, Finance Records_PayrollSystem. The routine uses will permit disclosure of limited informationabout applicants for postal employment and current employees, respectively,for comparison with registrant files of the Selective Service System toidentify potential nonregistrants.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Effective Date:</T2> The new routine uses will become effective withoutfurther notice on August 1, 1988, unless comments received on or beforethat date result in a contrary determination.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Address:</T2> Comments may be mailed to the Records Officer, U.S. PostalService, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260-5010, or deliveredto room 8121 at the above address between 8:15 a.m. and 4:45 p.m. Commentsreceived may also be inspected during the above hours in room 8121.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For further information contact:</T2> Betty Sheriff, Records Office,(202) 268-5158.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Supplementary Information:</T2> The Selective Service System has askedthe Postal Service to participate in computer matching programs under whichfiles containing limited information about applicants for postal employmentduring the years 1987 and 1988 and about current employees will be comparedwith a file of registrants under the Selective Service System RegistrationCompliance Program. Disclosure of information will be limited to thosedata elements necessary to identify and locate males born in the yearsof birth (1963 through 1970) of the age groups which are required to register,to verify their registration status, and to seek registration of thosewho have not met the requirement. In addition, the Postal Service willprovide its file of applicants for employment only for target areas whereregistration compliance is low, as identified by the Selective ServiceSystem. Potential nonregistrants identified through these programs willbe contacted by the Selective Service System for verification of theirregistration status. Those not meeting their registration responsibilitywill be encouraged to do so to avoid possible prosecution. Proposed routineuse No. 9 to be added to USPS 120.120, Personnel Records_Personnel Researchand Test Validation Records, and proposed routine use No. 35 to be addedto USPS 050.020, Finance Records_Payroll System, will permit disclosureof only that information necessary to accomplish the above-described purposeof these matching programs. These programs will be conducted in accordancewith the Office of Management and Budget's Revised Supplemental Guidelinesfor Conducting Matching Programs (47 FR 21656, May 19, 1982).System USPS 120.120 collects information needed to make personnel selectiondecisions, and system USPS 050.020 collects information about postal employeesneeded by supervisors in the performance of their managerial duties. Inmaking hiring decisions and in the management of its employees, the PostalService expects both an employee and a potential employee to adhere toFederal laws including the Military Selective Service Act which requiresregistration with the Selective Service System. For this reason, disclosureunder the proposed routine uses is compatible with the purposes for whichthe information in both systems is collected.Accordingly, the Postal Service is adding new routine use Nos. 9 and 35,as shown in italic, under the ``Routine Uses of Records * * * Purposesof Such Uses'' segment of the following complete descriptions of systemsUSPS 120.120, Personnel Records_Personnel Research and Test ValidationRecords, and USPS 050.020, Finance Records_Payroll System:<ITAG tagnum="66">USPS 050.020 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Finance Records_Payroll System. SYSTEM LOCATION: Payroll system records are located and maintained in all Departments, facilitiesand certain contractor sites of the Postal Service. However, Postal DataCenters are the main locations for payroll information. Also, certain informationfrom these records may be stored at emergency records centers. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: Current and former USPS employees, postmaster relief/replacement employees,and certain former spouses of current and former postal employees who qualifyfor Federal Employees Health Benefits Coverage under Pub. L. 96-615. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: Records contain general payroll information including retirement deduction,family compensations, benefit deductions, accounts receivable, union dues,leave data, tax withholding allowances, FICA taxes, salary, name, socialsecurity number, payments to financial organizations, dates of appointmentor status changes, designation codes, position titles, occupation code,addresses, records of attendance, and other relevant payroll information.Also includes automated Form 50 records. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 39 U.S.C. 401, 1003; 5 U.S.C. 8339 ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES: Purpose_ 1. Information within the system is for handling all necessary payrollfunctions and for use by employee supervisors for the performance of themanagerial duties. 2. To provide information to USPS management and executive personnel foruse in selection decisions and evaluation of training effectiveness. Theserecords are examined by the Selection Committee and Regional PostmastersGeneral. 3. To compile various lists and mailing list, i.e., Postal Leader, Women'sPrograms, Newsletter, etc. 4. To support USPS Personnel Programs such as Executive Leadership. Non-BargainingPositions Evaluations of Probationary Employees, Merit Evaluation, Membershipand Identification Listings, Emergency Locator Listings, Mailing Lists,Women's Programs, and to generate retirement eligibility information andanalysis of employees in various ranges. Use_ 1. Retirement Deduction_To transmit to the Office of Personnel Managementa roster of all USPS employees under Title 5 U.S.C. 8334, along with acheck. 2. Tax Information_To disclose to Federal, State and local government agencieshaving taxing authority, pertinent records, relating to individual employees,including names, home address, social security number, wages and taxeswithheld for other jurisdiction. 3. Unemployment Compensation Data_To reply to State Unemployment Officesat the request of separated USPS employees. 4. Employee Address File_For W-2 tax mailings and Postal mailing such asPostal Life, Postal Leaders, etc. 5. Salary payments and allotments to financial organizations_To providepertinent information to organizations receiving salary payments or allotmentsas elected by the employee. 6. FICA Deductions_The Social Security Act requires that FICA deductionsbe made for those employees not eligible to participate in the Civil ServiceRetirement System (casuals). In addition, the Tax Equity and Fiscal ResponsibilityAct of 1982 requires that contributions to the Medicare program be deductedfrom all employees; earnings. (These statutes do not apply to employeesin the Trust Territories who are not U.S. citizens.) Accordingly, recordsof earnings (i.e., W-2 information) must be disclosed to the Social SecurityAdministration in order that it may account for funds received and determineindividual's eligibility for benefits. Information disclosed includes name,address, SSN, wages paid subject to withholding. Federal, state, and localincome tax withheld, total FICA wages paid and FICA tax withheld, occupationaltax, life insurance premium and other information as reported on an individual'sW-2 form. 7. Determine eligibility for coverage and payments of benefits under theCivil Service Retirement System, the Federal Employees Group Life InsuranceProgram and the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program and transferrelated records as appropriate. 8. Determine the amount of benefit due under the Civil Service RetirementSystem, the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Program and the FederalEmployees Health Benefits Program and authorizing payment of that amountand transfer related records as appropriate. 9. Transfer to Office of Workers Compensation Program, Veterans AdministrationPension Benefits Program, Social Security Old Age, Survivor and DisabilityInsurance and Medicare Programs, military retired pay programs, and FederalCivilian employee retirement systems other than the Civil Service RetirementSystem, when requested by that program or system or by the individual coveredby this system for use in determining an individual's claim for benefitsunder such system. 10. Transfer earnings information under the Civil Service Retirement Systemto the Internal Revenue Service as required by The Internal Revenue Codeof 1954, as amended. 11. Transfer information necessary to support a claim for life insurancebenefits under the Federal Employees' Group Life Insurance, 4 East 24thStreet, New York, NY 10010. 12. Transfer information necessary to support a claim for health insurancebenefits under the Federal Employees' Health Benefits Program in a healthinsurance carrier or plan participating in the program.13. To refer, where there is an indication of a violation or potentialviolation of law, whether civil, criminal or regulatory in nature to theappropriate agency whether Federal, State, or local charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or charged with enforcingor implementing the statute, or rule, regulation or order issued pursuantthereto. 14. To request or provide information from or to a Federal, State, or localagency maintainging civil, criminal, or other relevant enforcement or otherpertinent information, such as licenses. If necessary to obtain informationrelevant to an agency decision concerning the hiring or retention of anemployee, the issuance of a security clearance, the letting of a contractor the issuance of a license, grant, or other benefits. 15. As a data source for management information for production of summarydescriptive statistics and analytical studies in support of the functionfor which the records are collected and maintained, or for related personnelmanagement functions or manpower studies, may also be utilized to respondto general requests for statistical information (without personal identificationof Individuals) under the Freedom of Information Act or to locate specificindividual for personal research or the personnel management functions.16. May be disclosed to the Office of Management and Budget in connectionwith the review of private relief legislation as set forth in OMB CircularNo. A-19 at any stage of the legislative coordination and clearance processas set forth in that Circular.17. Certain information pertaining to Postal Supervisors may be transferredto the National Association of Postal Supervisors.18. Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office madeat the request of that individual.19. Disclosure may be made from the record of an individual, where pertinent,in any legal proceeding to which the Postal Service is a party before acourt or administrative body.20. Pursuant to the National Labor Relations Act, records from this systemmay be furnished to a labor organization upon its request when needed bythat organization to perform properly its duties as the collective bargainingrepresentative of postal employees in an appropriate bargaining unit.21. Inactive records may be transferred to a Federal Records Center priorto destruction.22. To provide to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) approximately19 data elements (including SSAN, DOB, service computation date, retirementsystem, and FEGLI status) for use by OPM's Compensation Group. Data collectedare not for the purpose of making determinations about specific individualsbut are used only as a means of ensuring the integrity of the active employee/annuitantdata systems and for analyzing and statistically projecting Federal retirementand insurance system costs. The same data submission will be used to producesummary statistics for reports of Federal employment.23. Information contained in this system of records may be disclosed toan authorized investigator appointed by the Equal Employment OpportunityCommission upon his request, when that investigator is properly engagedin the investigation of a formal complaint of discrimination filed againstthe U.S. Postal Service under 29 CFR 1613, and the contents of the requestedrecord are needed by the investigator in the performance of his duty toinvestigate a discrimination issue involved in the complaint.24. Records in this system are subject to review by an independent certifiedpublic accountant during an official audit of Postal Service finances.25. May be disclosed to a Federal or State agency providing parent locatorservices or to other authorized persons as defined by Pub. L. 93-647.26. Disclosure of information about current or former postal employeesmay be made to requesting States under approved computer matching effotsin which either the Postal Service or the requesting State acts as thematching agency, but limited to only those data elements considered relevantto making a determination of employee participation in and eligibilityunder unemployment insurance programs administered by the States (and bythose States to local governments); to improve program integrity; and tocollect debts and overpayments owed to those governments and their components.27. To union-sponsored insurance carriers for the purpose of determiningeligibility for coverage and payments of benefits under union-sponsorednon-Federal insurance plans and transferring related records as a appropriate.28. Disclosure of information about current or former postal employeesmay be made to requesting Federal agencies or non-Federal entities underapproved computer matching efforts in which either the Postal Service orthe requesting entity acts as the matching agency, but limited to onlythose data elements considered relevant to making a determination of employeeparticipation in and eligibility under particular benefit programs administeredby those agencies or entities or by the Postal Service; to improve programintegrity; and to collect debts and overpayments owed under those programs.29. (Temp.) To provide the Department of Housing and Urban Developmentthe names, social security account numbers and home addresses of postalemployees for the purpose of notifying those individuals of their indebtednessto the United States under programs administered by the Secretary of Housingand Urban Development and for taking subsequent actions to collect thosedebts.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note._</T4>This routine use will be in effect for a period of fiveyears ending September 24, 1989.</ITAG>30. To provide to the Department of Defense (DOD) upon request, on a semiannualbasis, the names, social security account numbers and home addresses ofcurrent postal employees for the purpose of identifying those employeeswho are indebted to the United States under programs administered by theSecretary, DOD, and for taking subsequent actions to collect those debts.31. To provide to the Department of Defense (DOD), upon request, on anannual basis, the names, social security account numbers, and salariesof current postal employees for the purposes of updating DOD's listingsof Ready Reservists and reporting reserve status information to the PostalService and the Congress.32. Disclosure of information about current or former postal employeesmay be made to requesting Federal agencies or non-Federal entities underapproved computer matching efforts in which either the Postal Service orthe requesting entity acts as the matching agency, but limited to onlythose data elements considered relevant to identifying those employeeswho are absent parents owing child support obligations and to collectiondebts owed as a result thereof.33. Disclosure of information about current or former postal employeesmay be made on a semi-annual basis to the Department of Defense (DOD) underapproved computer matching efforts in which either the Postal Service orDOD acts as the matching agency, but limited to only those data elementsconsidered relevant to identifying retired military employees who are subjectto restrictions under the Dual Compensation Act as amended (5 U.S.C. 5532),and for taking subsequent actions to reduce military retired pay or collectdebts and overpayments, as appropriate.34. Disclosure of information about current or former postal employeesmay be made to requesting Federal agencies under approved computer matchingefforts in which either the Postal Service or the requesting entity actsas the matching agency. Disclosure will be limited to only those data elementsconsidered relevant to identify individuals who are indebted to those agenciesand to provide those individuals with due process rights prior to initiatingany salary offset, pursuant to the Debt Collection Act.<T3>35. Disclosure of information about current and former employees maybe made to the Selective Service System (SSS) under approved computer matchingefforts in which either the Postal Service or SSS acts as the matchingagency. Disclosure will be limited to only those data elements consideredrelevant to identify individuals eligible for registration under the MilitarySelective Service Act (50 U.S.C. App. 451 et seq.), to determine whetherthose individuals have complied with registration requirements, and toenforce compliance when necessary.</T3>POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Preprinted forms, magnetic tape, microforms, punched cards, computer reportsand card forms.RETRIEVABILITY:These records are organized by location, name and social security number.SAFEGUARDS:Records are contained in locked filing cabinets; are also protected bycomputer passwords and tape library physical security.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:a. Leave Application Files (Absence Control) and Unauthorized Overtime_Destroywhen 2 years old.b. Time and Attendance Records (Other than payroll) and local payroll records_Destroywhen 3 years old.c. PDC records retention_contact PDC Payroll Office or Records Office.system manager(s) and address:APMG, Department of the Controller and APMG, Employee Relations Departmentsat Headquarters.notification procedure:Request for information on this system of records should be made to thehead of the facility where employed giving full name and social securitynumber. Headquarters employees should submit requests to the System Manager.record access procedure:See NOTIFICATION above.contesting record procedures:See NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE above.record source categories:Information is furnished by employees, supervisors and the Postal SourceData System.<ITAG tagnum="66">USPS 120.120</ITAG>System name:Personnel Records_Personnel Research and Test Validation Records, 120.120.system location:USPS National Tests Administration Center, Los Angeles, CA; USPS Nationaland Regional Headquarters; Bulk Mail Centers; District Offices; and theOklahoma City Computer Center.categories of individuals covered by the system:Applicants for postal employment and USPS employee applicant for reassignmentand/or promotion.categories of records in the system:Computer scannable information and the applicants answers to the test questions.Reports and analyses that have resulted from comparison of informationfrom this system and from system USPS 120.121.authority for maintenance of the system:39 U.S.C. 401, 1001.routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses:Purpose_To provide verification of the applicants' test score. Data arecollected whenever an examination is given and are used for construction,analysis and validation of written tests; for research on personnel measurementand selection methods and techniques and research on personnel managementpractices such as performance evaluation or productivity. Race and nationalorigin data are used to evaluate any adverse impact of the selection process.Use of these race and national origin data is limited to research projectsand test validation conducted by the Postal Service. No personnel decisionsare made in the use of these research records. Many data are collectedunder conditions assuring their confidentiality. This confidentiality willbe protected. Personnel information in this system of records is used bythe personnel research staff in the Office of Personnel Management of theU.S. Postal Service.Use_1. To disclose information to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commissionfor use in determining the existence of adverse impact in the total selectionprocess, in reviewing allegations of discrimination, or in assessing thestatus of compliance with Federal law.2. To refer, where there is an indication of a violation or potential violationof law, whether civil, criminal or regulatory in nature, to the appropriateagency, whether Federal, State, or local, charged with the responsibilityof investigating or prosecuting such violation or charged with enforcingor implementing the statute, or rule, or order issued pursuant thereto.3. To request information from a Federal, State, or local agency maintainingcivil, criminal, or other relevant enforcement or other pertinent information,such as licenses, if necessary to obtain relevant information to an agencydecision concerning the hiring or retention of an employee, the issuanceof a security clearance, the letting of a contract, or the issuance ofa license, grant or other benefit.4. To provide information or disclose to a Federal agency, in responseto its request, in connection with the hiring or retention of an employee,the letting of a contract, or issuance of a license, grant, or other benefitby the requesting agency to the extent that the information is relevantand necessary to the requesting agency's decision on that matter.5. May be disclosed to the Office of Management and Budget in connectionwith the review of private relief legislation as set forth in OMB CircularNo. A-19 at any stage of the legislative coordination and clearance processas set forth in that Circular.6. Pursuant to the National Labor Relations Act, records from this systemmay be furnished to a labor organization upon its request when needed bythat organization to perform properly its duties as the collective bargainingrepresentative of postal employees in an appropriate bargaining unit.7. Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office madeat the request of that individual.8. Disclosure may be made from the record of an individual, where pertinent,in any legal proceeding to which the Postal Service is a party before acourt or administrative body.9. Disclosure of information about applicants for employment with the PostalService may be made to the Selective Service System (SSS) under approvedcomputer matching efforts in which either the Postal Service or SSS actsas the matching agency. Disclosure will be limited to only those data elementsconsidered relevant to identify individuals eligible for registration underthe Military Selective Service Act (50 U.S.C. App. 451 et seq.), to determinewhether those individuals have complied with registration requirements,and to enforce compliance when necessary.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Answer sheets in handwritten form and computer storage media.RETRIEVABILITY:This system of records is indexed by employee name, batch number or employee'sdate of examination and examination center administering the examination.SAFEGUARDS:These records are maintained in closed file cabinets in a secure facility.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:a. Hard Copy_Destroy 6 months after processing.b. Magnetic Tape_Maintain for 30 years_DO NOT TRANSFER TO A FEDERAL RECORDSCENTER.SYSTEM MANAGERS(S) AND ADDRESS:APMG, Employee Relations Department, Headquarters.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:Persons wishing to know whether this system of records contains informationon them should address inquiries to the head of the Test AdministrationCenter where they were examined. Inquiries should contain full name, socialsecurity number, date of examination, examination number, and place ofparticipation in the examination.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:See ``NOTIFICATION'' above.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:See ``NOTIFICATION'' above.RECORD RESOURCE CATEGORIES:Applicant's test answers.SYSTEMS EXEMPTED FROM CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE ACT:Reference 39 CFR 266.9 for details.<ITAG tagnum="6">Fred Eggleston,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant General Counsel, Legislative Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-14825 Filed 6-30-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7710-12-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>