<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88815-0052 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-15-88.f2.A1051</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Resources and Services Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Program Announcement and Proposed Funding Priorities for Grants forGraduate Training in Family Medicine</ITAG>The Health Resources and Services Administration announces that applicationsfor Fiscal Year 1989 Grants for Graduate Training in Family Medicine arebeing accepted under the authority of section 786(a) of the Public HealthService Act, as amended by Pub. L. 99-129 and invites comments on the proposedfunding priorities stated below.Section 786(a) authorizes the Secretary to make grants to public or nonprofitprivate hospitals, accredited schools of medicine or osteopathy, and otherpublic or private nonprofit entities to assist in meeting the cost of planning,developing and operating or participation in approved graduate trrainingprograms in the fields of family medicine. In addition, section 786(a)authorizes assistance in meeting the cost of supporting trainees in suchprograms who plan to specialize or work in the practice of family medicine.Legislative authorization for this program expires September 30, 1988.For FY 1989 the Administration is proposing to consolidate the varioushealth professions categorical programs into a single, flexible authority.This announcement is being made in the event that the Graduate Trainingin Family Medicine Program is reauthorized and funds are made availablein FY 1989. Publication of this notice is a contingency measure that willassure that grants can be awarded in a timely fashion consistent with theneeds of the program as well as to provide for even distribution of fundsthroughout the fiscal year.In addition, programmatic changes may result from currently pending legislativeaction. Should such changes be necessary, all applicants will be notifiedat a later date.To receive support, programs must meet the requirements of regulationsas set forth in 42 CFR Part 57, Subpart Q.<ITAG tagnum="84">Review Criteria</ITAG>The review of applications will take into consideration the following criteria:(1) The degree to which the proposed project provides for the project requirements;(2) The administrative and management ability of the applicant to carryout the proposed project in a cost-effective manner; and (3) The potential of the project to continue on a self-sustaining basis.<ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Funding Priorities</ITAG>In determining the order of funding of approved applications it is proposedto give a funding priority to the following:(1) Projects which satisfactorily demonstrate a net increase in enrollmentof underrepresented minorities in proportion or more to their numbers inthe general population or can document extent of demonstration net increaseof underrepresented minorities (i.e. Black, Hispanic and American Indian/AlaskanNative) over average enrollment of the past three years in postgraduateyear (PGY) trainee.These population groups continue to be underrepresented in the medicalprofession and have insufficient access to primary medical care. Theirrepresentation should be increased to ensure equitable opportunities toa career in medicine and equal access to health care services. Studiesshow that minority physicians provide a greater proportion of health carefor medically underserved populations than other United States physicians.Therefore, this funding priority is designed to increase the number ofunderrepresented minority physicians.(2) Projects in which the substantial training experience is in a PHS 332health manpower shortage area and/or PHS 329 migrant health center, PHS330 community health center or PHS 781 funded Area Health Education Centeror State designated clinic/center serving an underserved population. Section329 authorizes support for migrant health facilities nationwide and comprisesa network of health care services for migrant and seasonal farm workers.Section 330 of the Public Health Service Act is the authority which supportscommunity health centers providing primary health services to persons locatedin rural and urban areas with financial and/or geographic barriers to care.Section 781 authorizes a national program to support area health educationcenters and projects to improve the distribution, supply, quality, utilization,and efficiency of health personnel in the health services delivery system.There are estimated 1,931 health manpower shortage areas with an estimatedunderserved population of 12,847,023. An estimated 4,139 primary medicalpractitioners are needed to remove these areas from the shortage designation.These designations include geographic areas, population groups and facilities.The proposed funding priority is designed to provide trainees with substantialtraining in health manpower shortage areas, community health centers, migranthealth centers, and State facilities serving underserved population. Anapplicant applying for this priority through a State or local designationmust have written documentation from the appropriate State or local authorityresponsible for designating health personnel shortages for geographic areas,population groups and/or facilities. This documentation must indicate thatthe designated geographic areas, population groups, and/or facilities arepart of a State or local plan to increase service access to underservedpopulations. These experiences are expected to have a positive influenceon the selection of practice locations of such trainees. The applicationof this funding priority is also to provide a more integrated federal strategyto the implementation of health professions assistance and primary healthservice programs.(3) Applications proposing to develop, expand or implement curricula concerningambulatory and impatient case management of HIV/AIDS patients.Health professionals are increasingly required to provide a wide rangeof services to HIV-infected persons. However, widespread organized curriculaofferings for these trainees are not in place. The proposed priority isdesigned to encourage new offerings.(4) Applications which are innovative in their educational approaches toquality assurance/risk management activities, monitoring and evaluationof health care services and utilization of peer-developed guidelines andstandards. Assuring quality in the health care system is increasingly becomingthe responsibility of health care providers. The proposed funding priorityis designed to encourage increased emphasis on the principles and methodsof health care quality assurance and risk management in the continuum ofthe health professions educational process.(5) Applications proposing to provide substantial multidisciplinary geriatrictraining experiences in multiple ambulatory settings and inpatient andextended care facilities.The population 65 years of age and over will increase about 2 percent ayear between now and 2020 (compared to an increase of less than 1 percentfor younger persons). The oldest old (85-plus) segment of the populationwill experience the most rapid growth before 200. The youngest old (65-74)segment will increase fastest between 2000 and 2020. The older populationwill require expansion of a wide range of health services, including preventive,primary, long-term, hospice, and rehabilitation care. However, health providerslack adequate training needed to care for this aging population.The proposed funding priority is designed to provide increased emphasison geriatrics training for all health professions trainees in the continuumof their training.Interested persons are invited to comment on the proposed funding priorities.Normally, the comment period would be 60 days. However, due to the needto implement any changes for the Fiscal Year 1989 award cycle, this commentperiod has been reduced to 30 days. All comments received on or beforeSeptember 14, 1988 will be considered before the final funding prioritiesare established. No funds will be allocated or final selections made untila final notice is published stating whether the final funding prioritieswill be applied.Written comments should be addressed to: Director, Division of Medicine,Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and Services Administration,Parklawn Building, Room 4C-25, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20857.All comments received will be available for public inspection and copyingat the Division of Medicine, Bureau of Health Professions, at the aboveaddress, weekdays (Federal holidays excepted) between the hours of 8:30a.m. and 5:00 p.m.Requests for application materials and questions regarding grants policyshould be directed to: Grants Management Officer (D-15), Bureau of HealthProfessions, Health Resources and Services Administration, 5600 FishersLane, Room 8C-22, Rockville, Maryland 20857, Telephone (301) 443-6960.If additional programmatic information is needed, please contact: PrimaryCare Medical Education Branch, Division of Medicine, Bureau of Health Professions,Health Resources and Services Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 4C-04,Rockville, Maryland 20857, Telephone (301) 443-6820.The standard application form PHS 6025-1, HRSA Competing Training GrantApplication, General Instructions and supplement for this program havebeen approved by the Office of Management and Budget under the PaperworkReduction Act. The OMB clearance number is 0915-0060.The deadline date for receipt of applications is September 30, 1988. Applicationsshall be considered as meeting the deadline if they are either:(1) <T3>Received </T3>on or before the deadline date, or(2) <T3>Postmarked </T3>on or before the deadline and received in time forsubmission to the independent review group. A legibly dated receipt froma commercial carrier or U.S. Postal Service will be accepted in lieu ofa postmark. Private metered postmarks shall not be acceptable as proofof timely mailing.Applications received after the deadline will be returned to the applicant.This program is listed at 13.379 in the <T3>Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance. </T3>It is not subject to theprovisions of Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Review of FederalPrograms (as implemented through 45 CFR Part 100).<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: August 9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John H. Kelso,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-18332 Filed 8-12-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-15-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>