<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88606-0024 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-06-88.f2.A1023</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 108 / Monday, June 6, 1988 / Rulesand Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR Parts 232 and 233</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRL-3214-1]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Clean Water Act Section 404 Program Definitions and Permit Exemptions;Section 404 State Program Regulations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>We are hereby issuing final rules containing 404 programdefinitions and 404(f)(1) exemptions and the procedures and criteria usedin approving, reviewing and withdrawing approval of State 404 programs.Part 232 contains definitions and exemptions related to both the Federaland State-run 404 program and Part 233 deals with State programs only.The revisions in these rules will provide the States more flexibility inprogram design and administration while still meeting the requirementsand objectives of the Clean Water Act (the Act).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATES: </T2>This final rule is effective on July 6, 1988.In accordance with 40 CFR 23.2, this regulation shall be considered issuedfor purposes of judicial review at 1:00 p.m., Eastern time on June 20,1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Lori Williams, Office of WetlandsProtection (A-104F), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington,DC 20460, (202) 382-5043.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This final rule contains the 404 programdefinitions and 404(f)(1) permit exemptions in addition to the proceduresand criteria used in approving, reviewing and withdrawing approval of 404State programs. Part 232 basically recodifies the existing 404 programdefinitions and 404(f)(1) permit exemptions in a new, separate part ofeliminate any confusion about their applicability. Part 232 applies toboth the Federal and State programs. Part 233 revises the procedures andcriteria used in approving, reviewing and withdrawing approval of 404 Stateprograms. These final rules provide the States more flexibility in programdesign and administration while still meeting the requirements and objectivesof the Act.This rule was proposed on October 2, 1984 at 49 FR 39012. The notice invitedpublic comments for a 60-day period ending December 3, 1984. On December10, 1984 (49 FR 48064), the comment period was extended to January 2, 1985.Thirty-eight comments were received_15 State agencies, 10 environmentalgroups, 6 industry groups, 4 Federal agencies, and 3 others.The comments covered the full range of views, ranging from those whichindicated that more streamlining is required to those which indicated thatthe proposed regulations increased flexibility at the expense of environmentalprotection.In addition to the more significant revisions described in the preamble,we have made minor editorial and content changes from the proposal. Wehave also renumbered the sections in Part 233 to close the large gaps innumbering in the proposal.It is the agency's intent that 40 CFR Part 124 no longer applies to 404State programs. We will be publishing technical, conforming regulationsin the near future.  The following summarizes the major comments and EPA's response to them. <ITAG tagnum="84">Response to Comments and Explanation of Changes  </ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>PART 232_404 PROGRAM DEFINITIONS, EXEMPT ACTIVITIES NOT REQUIRING 404PERMITS</T3><T3>Section 232.2(b): </T3>In response to comment, we have revised theproposed definition of ``application'' for clarity.<T3>Section 232.2 (e) and (f): </T3>The definition of ``discharge of dredgedmaterial'' and ``discharge of fill material'' were modified for consistencywith the Corps regulations (33 CFR 323.2 (d) and (f)).<T3>Section 232.2(j): </T3>We received comment that our definition of ``generalpermit'' is different from the Corps' definition (33 CFR 323.2(n)). Theproposed definition was taken from the Act (404(e)(1)) and, therefore,has been retained in the final regulation.<T3>Section 232.2(i): </T3>Under Section 404 of the Act, the Corps (andStates approved by EPA) issue permits for discharges of dredged and fillmaterial into waters of the U.S. Under Section 402, EPA (and States approvedby EPA) issue permits for discharges of all other pollutants into watersof the U.S. In January 1986 the Corps and EPA entered into a Memorandumof Agreement (MOA) to resolve a longstanding difference over the appropriateClean Water Act program to regulate certain discharges of solid wastesinto waters of the U.S. The Corps issued its definition of ``fill material''in 1977, which provided that only those solid wastes discharged with theprimary purpose of replacing an aquatic area or of changing the bottomelevation of a waterbody are regulated under the Corps' 404 program. Thesedischarges include discharges of pollutants intended to fill a regulatedwetland to create fast land for development. The Corps' definition excludespollutants discharged with the primary purpose to dispose of wastes which,under the Corps' definition, would be regulated under Section 402. UnderEPA's definition of ``fill material,'' all such solid waste dischargeswould be regulated under Section 404, regardless of the primary purposeof the discharger. The difference complicated the regulatory program forsome solid wastes discharged into waters of the U.S. The MOA provides an interim arrangement between the agencies for controllingthese discharges. In the longer term EPA and Army agree that considerationgiven to the control of discharges of solid waste both in waters of theU.S. and upland should take into account the results of studies being implementedunder the 1984 Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments to the Resource Conservationand Recovery Act (RCRA). The main focus of the interim arrangement is toensure an effective enforcement program under Section 309 of the Act ofcontrolling discharges of solid and semi-solid wastes into waters of theU.S. for the purpose of dispoal of waste. When warranted, EPA will normallyinitiate section 309 action to control such unauthorized discharges. Ifit becomes necessary to determine whether Section 402 or 404 applies toan ongoing or proposed discharge, the determination will be based uponcriteria in the agreement, which provide, <T3>inter alia, </T3>for certain homogeneous wastes to be regulated underthe Section 402 Program and certain heterogeneous wastes to be regulatedunder the Section 404 Program, subject to certain criteria. This agreementdoes not affect the regulatory requirements for materials discharged intowaters of the U.S. for the primary purpose of replacing an aquatic areaor of changing the bottom elevation of a water body. Discharges listedin the Corps definition of ``discharge of fill material'' (33 CFR 323.2(1))remain subject to Section 404 even if they occur in association with dischargesof waste meeting the criteria in the agreement for Section 402 discharges.Unless extended by mutual agreement, the MOA will expire at such time asEPA has accomplished specified steps in its implementation of RCRA. Inthe meantime, these regulations simply repromulgate EPA's existing definitionof fill material. <T3>Section 232.2 (q) and (r): </T3>Several comments were directed towardthe definitions of ``waters of the United States'' and wetlands.'' Thecommentors suggested that these definitions exceed the original intentof Congress.The legislative history of the Act, from both 1972 and 1977, emphasizesCongress' intent that the jurisdiction of the Act over waters of the UnitedStates reflect the maximum extent permissible under the Commerce Clauseof the Constitution. The specific definition of wetlands used in theseregulations was originally promulgated in 1977 (prior to the 1977 Amendmentsto the Act) and has been approved in numerous courts, most recently bythe Supreme Court in <T3>U.S. </T3>v. <T3>Riverside Bayview Homes Inc. </T3>(106 S.Ct. 455 (Dec. 4, 1985)). Theoverall definition of waters of the United States has also been approvedby the courts, both in its current articulation and in earlier versions.Therefore, we see no need to change these definitions to narrow their coverage.Several questions have arisen about this application of this definitionto isolated waters which are or could be used by migratory birds and endangeredspecies. As the Agency explained in an opinion by the General Counsel datedSeptember 12, 1985, if evidence reasonably indicates that isolated watersare or would be used by migratory birds or endangered species, they arecovered by EPA's regulation. Of course, the clearest evidence would beevidence showing actual use in at least a portion of the waterbody. Inadition, if a particular waterbody shares the characteristics of otherwaterbodies whose use by and value to migratory birds as well established,and those characteristics make it likely that the waterbody in questionwould also be used by migratory birds, it would also seem to fall clearlywithin the definition (unless, of course, there is other information thatindicates the particular waterbody would not in fact be so used). Endangeredspecies are, almost by definition, rare. Therefore, in the case of endangeredspecies, if there is no evidence of actual use of the waterbody (or similarwaters in the area) by the species in question, one could actually assumethat the waterbody was not susceptible to use by such species, notwithstandingthe particular characteristics of the waterbody. However, in each casea specific determination of jurisdiction would have to be made, and wouldturn on the particular facts.For clarity and consistency, we are adding the following language fromthe preamble to the Corps' regulations published on November 13, 1986 (51FR 41217). This language clarifies some cases that typically are or arenot considered ``waters of the United States.''``Waters of the United States'' typically include the following waters:andbullet; Which are or would be used as habitat by birds protected by MigratoryBird Treaties; orandbullet; Which are or would be used as habitat by other migratory birdswhich cross State lines; orandbullet; Which are or would be used as habitat for endangered species;orandbullet; Used to irrigate crops sold in interstate commerce.For clarification it should be noted that we generally do not considerthe following waters to be ``waters of the United States.'' However, EPAreserves the right on a case-by-case basis to determine that a particularwaterbody within these categories of waters is a water of the United States.Pursuant to agreements with EPA, the permitting authority also has theright to determine on a case-by-case basis if any of these waters are ``watersof the United States.''Non-tidal drainage and irrigation ditches excavated on dry land.andbullet; Artificially irrigated areas which would revert to upland if theirrigation ceased.andbullet; Artificial lakes or ponds created by excavating and/or dikingdry land to collect and retain water and which are used exclusively forsuch purposes as stock watering, irrigation, settling basins, or rice growing.andbullet; Artificial reflecting or swimming pools or other small ornamentalbodies of water created by excavating and/or diking dry land to retainwater for primarily aesthetic reasons.andbullet; Waterfilled depressions created in dry land incidental to constructionactivity and pits excavated in dry land for the purpose of obtaining fill,sand, or gravel unless and until the construction or excavation operationis abandoned and the resulting body of water meets the definition of watersof the United States.<T3>Section 232.3</T3>: The 1977 Clean Water Act provided for specificexemptions (404(f)(1)) from permitting requirements. EPA's 1980 ConsolidatedPermit Regulations promulgated regulations spelling out the scope of theexempted activities. The October 2, 1984, publication proposed severalsubstantive revisions to the 404(f)(1) exemptions, as well as organizationalchanges. This rulemaking finalizes the organizational changes, but finalizesonly one of the proposed substantive revisions. That revision substitutes``one year from discovery'' for the previous ``one year from formation''in andSection; 232.2(d)(3)(i)(D), which exempts as minor drainage certaindischarge of dredged or fill material incidental to the emergency removalof sandbars, gravel bars, or other similar blockages. This rule also includesthe revised irrigation ditch provision which was the subject of a separaterulemaking (40 CFR 233.35(a)(3), December 20, 1984). Additionally, we havemade the note following andSection; 232.3(b) more explicit to clarify thata conversion of wetlands to non-wetlands is (and has been) considered a``change in use.'' Apart from these changes, it appears, based on the commentsreceived, that the regulated sector is familiar with the existing languageand that no additional clarification or improvement is now needed.One commenter suggested that the Best Management Practices (BMPs) for theexemption from permitting for construction or maintenance of farm roads,forest roads or temporary roads for moving mining equipment are complexand difficult to administer and should be left to negotiation between theState and EPA for inclusion in the Memorandum of Agreement (andSection; 233.13).These BMPs are the same BMPs that are required for exemption from Federalpermitting requirements. These BMPs were promulgated in 1980 and have notbeen the subject of significant comment or complaint since then. A dischargerunder an approved State program should meet the same requirements as underthe Federal program.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>PART 233_STATE SECTION 404 PROGRAM ASSUMPTION REGULATIONS</T3>We received several comments expressing concern that the proposed regulationswould weaken Federal responsibilities, such as those in the Fish and WildlifeCoordination Act, Endangered Species Act, and National Environmental PolicyAct. When a State assumes the 404 permitting responsibility, these statutesusually no longer apply, since these statutes only apply to Federal actions.When a State assumes the program, the permit decision is a State action,not a Federal action. However, a Federal oversight role is clearly establishedby section 404(j) of the Act. Therefore, the altered Federal role afterprogram approval is a function of the statutory scheme, not these regulations.<T3>Section 233.1:</T3> Several comments were received on partial Stateprograms, ranging from the view that partial programs should not be allowedto the view that it is desirable to approve partial programs. The commentorsidentified partial programs in terms of geographic extent or scope of activitiesregulated. EPA interprets the Act as requiring State programs to have fullgeographic and activities jurisdiction (subject to the limitation in section404(g)). While specific authorization for partial programs under section402 was enacted in the Water Quality Act of 1987, no similar provisionwas added for section 404. Accordingly, partial 404 programs are not approvable.Because of the special status of Indians, a lack of State authority toregulate activities on Indian lands will not cause the State's programto be considered a partial program.We encourage States to begin working with the Federal land-owning agencies(i.e., Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, and National Park Serviceto name a few) early in the program development stage. This should eliminateor reduce any confusion that may develop, since subsequent to program approval,the State will assume 404 permitting responsibility in these lands.In response to comments, we have clarified that States may have a programthat is more stringent or extensive than what is required for an approvableprogram. Under State law, and not as part of its approved program, Statesmay also regulate discharges into those waters over which the Corps retainsjurisdiction. Those parts of the State's program that go beyond the scopeof Federal requirements for an approvable program are not subject to Federaloversight or federally enforceable. Of course, while States may imposemore stringent requirements they may not compensate for making one requirementmore lenient than required under these regulations by making another requirementmore stringent than required.<T3>Section 233.3:</T3> One commentor requested that we limit confidentialityonly to that information that does not relate to adverse effects on theaquatic environment. As these regulations conform to EPA's general regulationson confidentiality of information (40 CFR Part 2), we did not make therequested change.<T3>Section 233.4:</T3> In the preamble to the proposed rulemaking, wespecifically sought comment on the conflict of interest section. Severalcomments were received on this topic, the vast majority of which supportedthe need for a conflict of interest provision. However, several commentorsdid suggest that some flexibility should be added into this section.The current language is derived from the requirements for an approvableNPDES program. However, State 404 programs should not be held to the sameconflict of interest standards as State NPDES programs because of factualdifferences between the two programs. NPDES discharges are usually longterm discharges, often from certain specific types of industrial or municipaldischargers. Discharges authorized by section 404 typically tend to beone time, of shorter duration, and by a wider range of dischargers thanNPDES, ranging from private citizens to large corporations, from smallfills for boat docks or erosion prevention to major development projects.Therefore, an absolute ban on anyone with a financial interest in a permitfrom serving on a board that approves permits is likely to be more difficultto comply with under the 404 program than under the NPDES program becauseunder the NPDES criteria, so many people would be considered to be financiallyinterested in 404 permits that the pool of potential 404 board memberswould be unreasonably small. In addition, because of the nature and sizeof the discharge, 404 dischargers will often have less at stake financiallythan 402 dischargers.Therefore, we have simplified the conflict of interest section from whatwas proposed. The final rule does not prohibit a person with an interestin a 404 permit decision from generally participating on a board whichmakes decisions on permit issuance or denial. However, anyone with a directpersonal or pecuniary interest in a particular permit decision <T3>must</T3> make such interest known and must <T3>not</T3> participate in that permit decision. This new language allowsmore latitude in who may serve on a board, but still provides that therenot be a conflict of interest or appearance of conflict of interest inany particular permit decision. This language effectuates the basic intentof the NPDES criteria, by ensuring that board members are disinteresteddecisionmakers.<T3>Section 233.10:</T3> In response to comment, we have clarified ouroriginal intent that copies of State statutes and regulations submittedas part of a State's submission include statutes and regulations concerningthe State's applicable administrative procedures.<T3>Section 233.11:</T3> Several comments addressed the need for additionalinformation in the program description. These commentors were concernedthat there may be insufficient information available to determine a program'sadequacy. These regulations reflect EPA's view that a complete programdescription is essential for determining the adequacy of a State's program.A State's program must be at least as stringent and extensive as the Federalprogram. In response to these comments, we have specified certain informationthat must be included in the scope and structure of the State's program.The description of the scope and structure of the State's program mustinclude a detailed description of the extent of the State's jurisdiction,scope of the activities regulated as well as the scope of permit exemptions(if any), anticipated coordination, and the environmental permit reviewcriteria.Section 233.11(h) clarifies the requirements for a description of the State'sjurisdiction. As part of the program description, the State must describeseparately the waters it will assume after program approval and the watersretained by the Corps. This should make it easier for the public to understandthe split jurisdiction between the State and the Corps.We do not concur with the comment that, in addition to a description offunding and manpower available for program administration, the programdescription should include formal assurance from the Governor that thelevel of funding is sufficient to provide for an effective program. However,we have reinstated the existing requirement that the State provide an estimateof the anticipated workload. This should provide the information neededto determine if the State has sufficient manpower to adequately administera good program. If there is insufficient funding or manpower for an adequateprogram, this will become evident either in review of the program submissionor in the annual review of an approved program.<T3>Section 233.13:</T3> In response to comment, we have specified that,if more than one State agency has responsibility for program administration,all the involved State agencies must be parties to the Memorandum of Agreement(MOA) between the State and EPA's Regional Administrator. This requirementis in the existing regulations, but had been eliminated in the proposal.Restoring this requirement ensures that all State agencies responsiblefor program implementation are fully aware of their responsibilities.One commenter suggested we use the MOA to establish procedures to withdrawa permit from State processing prior to any State action on the application.We do not agree with this suggestion. Except for one situation providedfor in Section 404(j), only the State may issue a permit for dischargesin State regulated waters.We do not agree with the comment that the proposal fails to ensure adequatecoordination of EPA and State enforcement activities, as it requires theMOA to address State and EPA roles and coordination on compliance monitoringand enforcement activities. The purpose of formalizing this aspect of theState's program in an MOA is to assure adequate coordination on compliancemonitoring and enforcement activities. As part of the State's program submission,this MOA is subject to public comment. If there is any question on theadequacy of a particular program, it should become apparent during Federalagency and public review.Many commentors expressed concern about the provision for waiver of Federalreview. Many were concerned that the waiver provision would be abused andthat environmental protection of the resources would suffer. Several commentorswere concerned that inappropriate categories would be waived. We feel thatuse of this waiver provision will reduce workload and paperwork and focusFederal resources where they are most needed and appropriate. Specificwaivers will be available for public review and comment prior to programapproval.This final regulation eliminates a separate section on sharing of information(former 40 CFR 233.29), since the MOA with the Regional Administrator isalready required to address State submittal of information to EPA and EPAaccess to State records, reports and files relevant to the program. Wefeel this adequately serves the purpose of 40 CFR 233.29.<T3>Section 233.14:</T3> In response to comments, we have, as in the previoussection, now specified that all State agencies responsible for programadministration must be parties to the Memorandum of Agreement between theState and the Secretary.EPA has also added a note encouraging States to use this MOA to establishprocedures for joint processing of Federal and State permits. Several commentsrequested that joint processing be made mandatory. While we agree thatjoint permit processing may be very beneficial to the regulated public,we cannot make this a condition to an approvable program. However, we willcontinue to strongly encourage States to look into the possibility of jointprocessing.In response to comment, we have retained the existing requirement that,if States plan to assume existing Corps general permits, this MOA mustinclude procedures for transferring the support files for these generalpermits from the Corps to the State. This will facilitate State oversightof such general permits.One commentor was concerned that the regulations eliminated a provisionfor procedures to ensure the State did not approve permits on the basisof incomplete applications transferred by the Corps. This provision wasdeleted as unnecessary. Once a State assumes the program, it is responsiblefor fulfilling all permitting requirements, including public notice. Theregulation requires that sufficient information be available to meet theinformation requirements for public notice and for assessing the impactsof the discharge. Therefore, the State must either deny incomplete applicationsor take steps to get the complete information.<T3>Section 233.15: </T3>The Act establishes a 120-day time clock for EPAdecision on a State's request for program approval. The final regulationclarifies that this statutorily mandated time period starts on EPA's receiptof a complete program submission. If the State significantly changes itssubmission during the review period, the time clocks starts over upon EPA'sreceipt of the revised submission. The review period may be extended uponagreement of the State and EPA.We cannot agree to the suggestion that the regulation lengthen the publiccomment period and notice of public hearing for decision on a State program.The Act is very specific on the timeframe for this decision. If a decisionis not made within the 120 days timeframe, the State's program is automaticallyapproved. EPA cannot make a decision within the mandated 120 days of receiptif these time frames are extended. Of course, as noted earlier, a Statemay agree to extend the time period for program approval; in that event,additional time could be provided for public participation within thatState.EPA will make its decision to approve or disapprove the State's programwithin the statutorily mandated timeframe. However, if approved, the State'sprogram will not be effective until the notice of approval is publishedin the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>Many comments were received on the delegation of authority to the RegionalAdministrator to approve/disapprove State programs. Most commentors wereconcerned about national consistency among the States' programs. The DelegationManual, which formalizes this delegation of authority, requires that theRegional Administrator approving a State program must obtain the concurrenceof two EPA headquarters offices_Office of Water and Office of General Counsel.This should ensure the desired national consistency.EPA has added language to make it explicit that programs shall be approvedor disapproved based on whether the State's program fulfills the requirementsof this regulation and the Act.This rule also clarifies that EPA will use existing State, Corps, FWS andNMFS mailing lists as the basis for mailing notices about the State's requestfor program approval.A summary of significant comments received and response to these commentswill be prepared by the Regional Administrator prior to decision on a State'sprogram. Since there are already specific requirements for public noticeand public hearing, there is no need for (and we have deleted the requirementfor) the responsiveness summary itself to describe the public participationactivities or matters presented to the public.<T3>Section 233.16: </T3>This rule clarifies that it is the State's obligationto keep the Regional Administrator informed of any proposed or actual changesto the State's approved program.We rejected the suggestion that if a State must amend or enact new legislationto comply with any modification in Federal regulation, the change mustbe promulgated within one year of the modification. A two year time periodwas chosen because many State legislatures do not meet every year. A one-yeardeadline for these States would be impossible to meet.We also do not agree with the suggestion that minor revisions to an approvedState program should undergo as much review and/or coordination as substantialprogram revisions. As the name (minor revision) implies, these programchanges will not have a significant impact on the program or the environment.Of course, if there is question in EPA's mind about whether a proposedrevision is minor or substantial, the revision shall be considered substantialand undergo full review specified for an original application.<T3>Section 233.21: </T3>Several commentors questioned the legality ofState issued general permits. Sections 404 (g), (h) and (j) of the Actauthorize this type of State permit.Many commenters were received on general permits. States have the optionof assuming administration of Corps' existing general permits. If theychoose to exercise this option, the State is responsible for ensuring dischargescomply with any existing permit conditions and any reporting, monitoringor predischarge requirements. The Corps shall provide the State copiesof the support files for any general permits assumed by the State. One commentor questioned the advisability of EPA approving transfer ofsome existing Corps general permits to a State. EPA cannot ignore Sections404 (g)(1) and (h)(5) which provide for a State to assume existing generalpermits. If a State with an approved State program proposes renewal ofany permits that have not worked well, EPA will comment/object to theseproposed permits, as appropriate. Several commentors expressed satisfaction with the Corps' existing generalpermits. These commentors expressed concern about the States not assumingsuch existing general permits and about their opportunity for participationin such a decision. It is the State's prerogative not to assume any ofthe existing general permits. However, if, at the time of initial programassumption, the State does not intend to assume existing Corps generalpermits, this will be noted within the program submission and will be subjectto public comment and public hearing as part of the approval process. Failureto assume existing Corps general permits does not constitute a partialprogram, since the State will process individual permit applications forthose discharges previously authorized by general permit. Any Corps generalpermit not assumed by the State will remain in effect, for purposes ofthe Clean Water Act, until its normal expiration date, unless revoked ormodified sooner by the Corps under its procedures. If subsequent to programapproval the State decides to revoke or modify a general permit it hasassumed, the normal revocation procedures will apply. Many comments were received on predischarge notification requirements forgeneral permits. Some commenters agreed that notification should be determinedon a permit-by-permit basis; others felt that such notification shouldbe required on all general permits. This rule adopts the proposal thatnotification requirements be established on a permit-by-permit basis. Forinstance, prenotification or reporting may be required in areas where thereis a likelihood for individual or cumulative adverse effect on the environmentbecause of discharges conducted under a general permit. All draft generalpermits will be reviewed by EPA and the other Federal review agencies aswell as the general public. If during the review of a particular draftgeneral permit, EPA determines that notification provisions are appropriateto ensure compliance with the 404(b)(1) Guidelines, we will so state inthe Federal comments to the State. This ensures that notification requirementswill be included where in fact appropriate. The Department of the Interior requested that we require a 30-day prenotificationrequirement on any discharge pursuant to a general permit that may impactunits of the National Park System, National Wildlife Refuge System, NationalFish Hatchery, Reclamation project lands, Indian Reservation and Trustlands, and public lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management.We do not feel at this time that there is a basis for automatically requiringsuch prenotification. If there is a need for prenotification for a particularpermit, it may be specified through the Federal comment on the draft permitsand will therefore be included in the issued general permit, in accordancewith andSection;233.50. Several commentors requested that we retain limits on any single operationconducted under a general permit. We agree that this is appropriate. Subsection233.21(c) (1) and (2) require each general permit to have limits on thesize and location and type of fill for any single operation, sufficientto ensure minimal adverse environmental effects when performed separatelyand minimal cumulative adverse effects, as required by Section 404(e).One commentor was concerned that we had deleted all the standard permitconditions (andSection;233.23) for general permits. Section 233.21(c) (1)and (2) recapture the main items of andSection;233.23(c)(1) such as specificdescription of activities authorized including limitations for any singleoperation and precise description of geographic area to which the generalpermit applies including any limitations where operations may be conducted.The only part of andSection;233.23 (Permit conditions) that does not applyfor general permits is andSection;233.23(c)(1), which is not applicable becauseit refers to items that are pertinent only to individual permits (e.g.name and address of permittee). Several commentors suggested that the Director should show cause for invokingdiscretionary authority to require an individual permit. This regulationspecifies that discretionary authority may be based on concerns for theaquatic environment including compliance with these regulations and the404(b)(1) Guidelines. Section 510 of the Act preserves the Director's rightto impose more stringent requirements, i.e., to invoke discretionary authorityfor other reasons under State law. Once the Director notifies a dischargerthat he will exercise discretionary authority to require an individualpermit, the activity is no longer authorized under the general permit.If the activity continues after notification, the discharger is subjectto enforcement action. <T3>Section 233.22: </T3>In response to comments requesting more specificpermit conditions, we have clarified that emergency permits, to the extentpossible, should incorporate all applicable permit conditions (andSection;233.23),including restoration of the site. We have also retained the provisionthat emergency permits shall be limited to duration of time needed to completethe authorized emergency action. We do not agree with the comment that the Regional Administrator must showcause to terminate an emergency permit. The Regional Administrator neverterminates permits. The Director may terminate an emergency permit if hedetermines such an action is necessary to protect human health or the environment.<T3>Section 233.23:</T3> Each permit shall have conditions which assurecompliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory requirements. Ifany of these requirements change, the permit conditions must be modifiedas needed to assure compliance with the revised requirements.In response to comments, we have added a requirement that the permit containconditions which assure that the discharge will be conducted in a mannerwhich minimizes adverse impacts on the physical, chemical and biologicalintegrity of the waters of the United States. This is a reiteration ofthe requirements in the 404(b)(1) Guidelines (andSection; 230.10(a)). Restorationand mitigation may be considered as mechanisms for reducing adverse impactsin appropriate circumstances.One commentor expressed concern about the proposed deletion of the permitcondition referring to BMP's approved by a Statewide 208(b)(4) agency.If a State has an approved 208 program, these requirements would be coveredby andSection; 233.23(a), which requires the Director to establish conditionswhich assure compliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory requirements,so there is no need for a separate reference to the BMP's.In response to comment, we have retained the requirement for a permit conditionexplaining that a permit violation is a violation of the Act as well asof State statutes or regulations, as this reminder may enhance compliance.We also have expanded andSection; 233.23(c)(6) to require the permittee toprovide the Director information to determine whether cause exists forpermit revocation or termination as well as modification.We concur with the comment that the Director or his authorized representativeshould have proper identification before they can enter the premises orinspect any records. We believe this is reasonable and have added thisto the final regulation.One commentor requested that the regulation require more specific identificationof the disposal site. We feel that between the existing requirements forpermit application, public notice and permit conditions, the disposal sitewill be adequately identified. However, as a safeguard, we have added thatthe description of the project on the issued permit must include a descriptionof the purpose of the discharge.<T3>Section 233.24 (Effect of a permit)</T3>. This section has been deletedas unnecessary. The statements in this section were simply facts whichdo not need to be included in regulations to be in effect.<T3>Section 233.30:</T3> Many comments were received on the State applicationform. A number expressed concern that there would not be enough informationavailable to evaluate the potential impacts of the discharge activity.We have accordingly revised this section to generally reflect the sameapplication information requirements contained in the Corps' current regulations(33 CFR Part 325). Under this approach, State assumption of the programshould not result in any change in either the kind of information availablefor review or the burden upon the applicant to supply the information.In addition, a requirement for certification that all information containedin the application is true and accurate has been added to andSection; 233.30(b)(4).Several commentors requested that we include the publicity and pre-applicationconsultation requirements in the regulations. As noted in the preambleto the proposed rule, we agree that publicity and preapplication consultationare beneficial; however, they are not required for an approvable program.We will continue to encourage States to include them in their programs.<T3>Section 233.31: </T3>In response to comment, this section has beensimplified from proposed andSection; 233.61; it now simply requires coordinationwith other States whose waters may be impacted by the discharge and coordinationwith Federal and Federal-State water related planning and review processes,without attempting to list such processes. These planning and review processesmay include, but are not limited to, coastal zone management plans, 208areawide plans, Continuing Planning Process (andSection; 303(e)), and advancedidentification (40 CFR 230.80). The coordination procedures will likelyvary from State to State. The State's anticipated coordination shall beincluded in the program description. EPA will carefully scrutinize theanticipated coordination to assure it is adequate.Comments were received suggesting that we require States to incorporateinto their programs information developed by FWS' National Wetlands Inventory(NWI). While we agree that this information would be very useful in administeringa State's program and encourage States to take advantage of it, it shouldnot be mandatory for States to incorporate this information in their programs.The NWI was not developed for regulatory purposes. Additionally, the FWSdid not use EPA's definition of wetlands in the NWI; therefore, the ``NWIwetlands'' and the ``404 wetlands'' may not always coincide.Several commentors were concerned that the lack of specificity of coordinationrequirements would weaken State programs. While these regulations do notlist specific entities (agencies) that must be coordinated with, we willcarefully evaluate the coordination aspects of each State's program priorto decision on approval/disapproval. While we anticipate that the State'spermitting agency will coordinate with State fish and game agencies, thisis not required by the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (FWCA). Oncea State assumes the 404 permitting responsibility, that Act no longer appliesin the permitting process since permitting becomes a State (not Federal)action. The FWCA will still require coordination with FWS whenever a State-issuedpermit is issued to a Federal agency or facility. However, it must alsobe remembered that States must assure compliance with the 404(b)(1) Guidelineswhich provide for protection of fish and wildlife resources. EPA is responsiblefor soliciting comments from the Corps, FWS, and NMFS, and commenting tothe States.<T3>Section 233.32: </T3>Many comments were received on proposed andSection;233.62 (public notice), some in support of and others opposed to shorteningthe public comment period. The final rule provides for a public commentperiod at least comparable to that under the Federal program. The existingCorps' regulations (33 CFR Part 325.3) specify a public notice period of``A reasonable period of time, normally thirty days but not less than fifteendays from date of mailing.'' Today's rules specify ``* * * a reasonableperiod of time, normally 30 days,'' and allows approving a program thatallows less than a 30 day public comment period if the Regional Administratordetermines that ``sufficient public notice is provided for.'' The RegionalAdministrator must carefully consider all aspects of a State's programin regard to public involvement, including how extensive the State's mailinglist is, whether notice is published in area newspapers, what the actuallength of the comment period is, whether the shorter time period is forall projects or just certain categories of discharge. We anticipate thatcomment periods would not be shorter than 20 days, and we will carefullyscrutinize any that are less than 30 days.Several comments on the content of the public notices were also received.These comments objected to the lack of specificity of the information requiredto be included in the public notice. In response to these comments, theinformation requirements for public notice have been changed. These regulationsincorporate much of the language in the Corps' existing regulations (33CFR 325.3.) Therefore, there should be no net change in the informationavailable to evaluate a proposed discharge from the existing Federal programto an approved State program.We have modified the requirement on who must automatically be mailed noticeof a permit application. While the notification may vary depending on thetype and location of the project, certain notifications, such as the localgovernmental agency, should be routine. Other notifications that may beuseful include historic preservation and coastal zone management offices.In response to comments, we have also clarified that anyone may requestto be put on a mailing list to receive copies of public notices.One commentor suggested that we make it clear that information obtainedin response to the public notice will be taken into consideration as partof the environmental assessment to determine if an environmental impactstatement (EIS) should be prepared. We have not included this languagesince, once a State assumes the permitting responsibility, the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act (NEPA) no longer applies. NEPA applies to Federalactions. When a State assumes the program, the permit decision is a Stateaction, not a Federal action. While many States have a State law equivalentto NEPA, it is not the function of these regulations to address EIS requirementsunder such State laws.<T3>Section 233.33: </T3>This provision has been rewritten to clarify howthe transcript of public hearings will be made available to the public.<T3>Section 233.34: </T3>Several commentors expressed concern that requiringthe State to prepare a written determination for each permit is excessivepaperwork. We do not concur with this view; we feel that a written determinationis needed for each permit decision to ensure proper evaluation and to facilitatesubsequent review. Therefore, these regulations contain the requirementthat the Director must prepare a written determination for each permitapplication outlining the decision and the rationale for the decision.Of course, in accordance with andSection; 230.6 of the Guidelines, the levelof detail may be tailored to the circumstances.Any State environmental review criteria must be at least equivalent tothe 404(b)(1) Guidelines for an approvable program. The 404(b)(1) Guidelineswere the subject of an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) (47FR 36798) published August 23, 1982, to solicit comments and examples ofalleged problems with these Guidelines. At this time, EPA has not foundsufficient basis for revising the Guidelines. Therefore, States must assurecompliance with the current Guidelines, as required in section 404(h)(1)(A)(i).We do not concur with the suggestion that we establish specific deadlinesfor State decision on an application. The only deadlines in this regulationare those which relate to the statutorily mandated timeframes for Federalreview of an application.<T3>Section 233.35: </T3>The final regulation simply requires signatureby both the applicant and the Director, and does not specify the sequencein which they sign. However, EPA anticipates that, if the project is controversialor if the permit conditions are restrictive, the Director may wish to requirethe applicant to sign the permit to indicate acceptance of its terms priorto the Director's signature.<T3>Section 233.36: </T3>These regulations simplify the procedures formodification, suspension and revocation of permits. State procedures tohandle these situations shall be approved if there is opportunity for publiccomment, coordination with the Federal review agencies, and opportunityfor public hearing. Language has been added (andSection; 233.36(b)) specifyingthat permit modification must be in compliance with andSection; 233.20 (Prohibitions).The 402 State program regulations handle modifications differently thanthese 404 State Program Regulations. 40 CFR 122.62 provides an exclusivelist of grounds which justify the modification of a 402 State permit. Section233.36 does not. This difference between the two programs is appropriatefor the following reasons. First, the 402 program has a long history oflitigation concerning reopener and the five year maximum permit term; the404 program does not. Second, the 402 program generally regulates continuousdischarges; consequently, there is great concern with balancing the permittee'sneed for certainty and continuity against the program's need to imposemore stringent standards. The 404 program, however, tends to regulate short-termdischarges, and thus the permittee's need for continuity is much less thanit is in the 402 program. Consequently, the 404 programs may facilitatepermit modification by States where the 402 program can not.One commenter expressed concern about use of abbreviated review proceduresfor modification of permits for minor modification of project plans thatdo not ``significantly'' change the character, scope and/or purpose ofthe project or result in significant change in environmental impact. Thecommenter was concerned that the use of the word ``significant'' was toovague and allowed a procedural loophole to avoid public and agency review.The key word in this sentence is ``<T3>minor</T3>'' modification. Things that will be evaluated in makingthe decision on whether the project modification is minor are whether thereis any change in project purpose, or any change that increases the amountof dredged or fill material, or any change that enlarges the scope of theproject. We anticipate that, if there is any question about the need forpublic and agency review of a project modification, the State will initiatefull review procedures.<T3>Section 233.37:</T3> In the preamble to the proposed regulation (49FR 39015) we noted that the requirements concerning who must sign may notnecessarily be appropriate for the 404 program. The language in the proposalwas the result of a settlement agreement (<T3>NRDC</T3> v. <T3>EPA</T3>, and consolidated cases [No. 80-1607 (D.C. Circuit)]). Allthe comments received on this subject agreed that the proposed signaturerequirements are appropriate for NPDES discharges, but are too inflexibleand are not really appropriate for 404 discharges, since most 404 dischargesare a one time discharge and on a relatively small scale. We concur withthese comments. Therefore, this final regulation incorporates the signatoryrequirements contained in the Corps' current regulations (33 CFR 325.1).Thus, there will be no change from the existing Section 404 requirementswhen a State assumes the program.The certification that all statements contained in the application or otherdocuments are true and accurate and that there are penalties for submittingfalse information has been removed from this section to andSection; 233.30(Application for a permit). Section 233.41(a)(3)(iii) also addresses thiscertification in that it provides for authority to seek criminal finesagainst any person who knowingly makes false statements in any application,record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintainedunder the Act, these regulations or the approved State program.<T3>Section 233.38:</T3> One commentor requested that if a State permitapplication has been submitted in a timely manner, an existing Federalpermit should be continued beyond its expiration date until a State permitis issued. The provision in the Administrative Procedures Act for continuingFederal permits does not apply in this setting. Therefore, such continuationmay be accomplished only through State law. These regulations allow butdo not require the State to have such authority. We cannot mandate thatthis be a requirement for an approvable program.<T3>Section 233.40:</T3> The compliance evaluation provision has been rewrittenfrom the existing regulation to simplify it and to provide additional flexibility.We continue to believe that compliance evaluation is an important componentof an effective Section 404 program. Therefore, the previous provisions(40 CFR 233.27 (1984)) should be considered as guidance in interpretingthe new streamlined language.We do not agree with the comment that State agency authority to ``* * *enter any site or premises subject to regulation'' is excessive or mayviolate civil rights. This provision does not override applicable warrantrequirements or other safeguards. Of course, if State requirements so constrainthe State's right of entry that the State lacks meaningful authority toinspect, the program would not be approvable. (We are not presently awareof any States where there would be this problem, however.)<T3>Section 233.41:</T3> Many comments were received on the proposed alternativerequirements for authority to assess civil and criminal fines of a specificamount. The comments ranged from approval of the alternative concept toconcern about weakening State enforcement capability. This regulation promulgatesthe proposed subsection allowing approval of a State program without thespecific monetary penalty authority if it has a demonstrably effectivealternative enforcement mechanism.We are interested in ensuring that State programs have strong enforcementcapability, since it is not desirable for EPA to constantly overfile inState enforcement actions. Because the Act does not specify that a Statemust have penalties equal to the Federal penalties or at any other particularlevel for an approvable program, EPA has substantial discretion in decidingwhat is sufficient State enforcement authority. These regulations establishmonetary penalties for which the State must have the authority to assess;they need not be assessed by the State for every violation. These amountsare approximately half those EPA is authorized to assess.If a State cannot fulfill these monetary penalty requirements, it can stillhave an approved program if EPA is satisfied that it has ``an alternate,demonstrably effective method of ensuring compliance.'' However, even underthe alternative enforcement program provision, States must still have theauthority to assess both civil and criminal penalties, although the amountsmay not equal those required by andSection; 233.41(a)(i)-(iii).Before approving any alternate enforcement mechanism, the Regional Administrator(RA) will carefully evaluate the State's proposed alternative enforcementmechanism to ascertain the effectiveness of the proposed alternative. TheState's program must have a clear history of demonstrated effective deterrence,while also having direct punitive value. Programs will have to be in effectfor at least one year prior to formal application for program approvalin order to have a sufficient track record for evaluating effectiveness.An effective, strong restoration program is the type of enforcement programthat would be given serious consideration as an alternative under thisprovision. Being of a solid nature, 404 discharges tend to stay where originallyplaced, making restoration of illegally filled areas more feasible for404 discharges as compared to 402 discharges. Most 404 discharges are aone time discharge, of relatively short duration, and on a relatively smallscale. This lends more credence to restoration working as an alternativeenforcement mechanism which can serve to protect the environment, deterfuture violations, and penalize the violator.A key aspect that the RA must consider in determining effectiveness iswhether the alternative program has an equivalent deterrence effect aswould assessment of monetary penalties. The alternative approach must bestrong enough to cause a violator to cease any and all illegal activities.It must also deter others from violating the State's permit program. Howeffective the alternative mechanism will be in preventing and restoringany environmental damage will also be considered by the RA in making adecision on approval/denial of a State's alternative enforcement program.The enforcement authority which a State must have in order for a Section404 program to be approved is essentially the same enforcement authorityit must have to administer an NPDES program under the Act. If a State lacksauthority to recover penalties of the levels required under andSection; 233.41(a)(3)(i)-(iii),EPA will review a State's authority to assess penalties in light of theState's ability to provide other incentives to compliance and deterrenceto noncompliance. EPA intends that penalties for violations of Section404 programs will provide general and specific deterrence. Penalties assessedin State administered programs should persuade the violator to take precautionsagainst falling into noncompliance again, deter violations by others, andrestore economic equity to regulated parties who have complied with Section404 requirements. Penalties assessed in a State program should, at a minimum,recapture the economic benefit that a violator has wrongfully obtained.In support of its application for program approval, a State may provideinformation regarding its authority to obtain money judgments from Section404 violators under equitable theories such as restitution and unjust enrichment.Any proposed alternative enforcement mechanism will be available for publiccomment as part of the State's program submission. We are concerned aboutnational consistency in administration and effectiveness of State programs.Therefore, we must stress that approval of an alternate enforcement mechanismwill not be undertaken lightly. States should continue to try to meet theexisting monetary penalty requirements.In these regulations we have added a reporting requirement for States usingthe alternative enforcement authority. Under final andSection; 233.41(d)the State must keep the Regional Administrator informed of all enforcementactions carried out under the alternative provision. The manner of reportingwill be established as part of the State's submission in the Memorandumof Agreement with the Regional Administrator. This reporting requirementwill enable EPA to closely monitor the effectiveness of the State's enforcementprogram and to determine any need for EPA overfiling in State enforcementcases and/or action under Section 309.In response to comment, we have retained the requirement that the burdenof proof for State enforcement cases shall be no greater than the burdenof proof required of EPA.One commentor suggested that any intervention in a State enforcement actionmust include some showing of justification. This regulation adopts theproposal which allows intervention ``* * * by any citizen having an interestwhich is or may be adversely affected.'' We feel this adequately answersthe suggestion.One commentor requested that EPA prescribe procedures for any affectedperson to initiate legal action in State or Federal court against the Director,the permittee, or anyone operating in noncompliance with a State program.This would be comparable to the citizen suit provision in Section 505 ofthe Act. While such a provision might strengthen a State program, thereis no such statutory requirement for an approvable program. However, wedo anticipate that many States will have some form of citizen suit provisions.<ITAG tagnum="84">Subpart F_Oversight Policy</ITAG>Many Federal environmental programs were designed by Congress to be administeredat the State level wherever possible. EPA's policy has been to transferthe administration of national programs to State governments to the fullestextent possible, consistent with statutory intent and good management practice.The clear intent of this design is to use the strengths of Federal andState governments in a partnership to protect public health and the nation'sair, water, and land. State governments are expected to assume primaryresponsibility, while EPA is to provide consistent environmental leadershipat the national level, develop general program frameworks, establish standardsas required by the legislation, assist States in preparing to assume responsibilityfor program operation, provide technical support to States in maintaininghigh quality programs, and ensure national compliance with environmentalquality standards.The relationship between EPA and the States under assumption of the Section404 Program is intended to be a partnership. Both EPA and the States havecontinuing roles and responsibilities under assumed State 404 programs.EPA remains responsible to the President, the Congress and the public forprogress toward meeting national environmental goals and for ensuring thatthe Clean Water Act is adequately enforced. Thus, EPA's policy to transfermanagement responsibilities for environmental programs to State governmentscarriers with it a corresponding EPA responsibility to assure the objectivesof the Federal law are achieved.Evaluation of approved State 404 programs will generally focus on overallprogram performance and identifying patterns of problems. However, therewill be some cases where EPA (and other Federal agency) participation inan individual State permit decision will be appropriate. Section 404(j)specifically provides for Federal comment on individual permit applications.However, based on our general policy and our specific experience with Michigan'sSection 404 program, the provision for waiver of Federal review (andSection;404(k)) will be exercised to focus permit-specific oversight primarilyon proposed discharges with potentially serious adverse environmental impacts.Review of Michigan's assumed program clearly illustrates that Federal reviewwas waived in the vast majority of cases. In 1985, approximately 1% ofthe permit applications received Federal review; in 1986, approximately1.5%.We expect to issue guidance on Federal oversight of approved State programsunder these regulations. This will include guidance on identifying anddescribing categories of activities eligible and appropriate for waiverof Federal review, emphasizing reasonable waiver initially, followed byincreasing waiver over time based on experience with the State 404 Program.Thus, as experience demonstrates that a State is effectively administeringits approved program, so as to comply with all national requirements, itis expected that additional waivers will be developed, replacing more individualpermit review with periodic programmatic review. This periodic review willusually be conducted on an annual basis, but may be more frequent, as necessaryor appropriate. EPA intends that other Federal agencies with responsibilityunder Section 404 will have an opportunity to participate in State programreview activities and in the determination of what changes to such reviewwould be appropriate.<T3>Section 233.50: </T3>Several commentors expressed concern that toomuch time is allowed for Federal review of State permit applications. Thefinal regulations retain the proposed time frames because they are basedon Section 404(j) of the Act. However, the regulations do allow for thetimes to be shortened by mutual agreement of the Federal agencies and theState.Several commentors questioned why EPA receives the public notice from theState and distributes the notice to the Federal agencies. The Act establishesEPA as the Federal focus of contact with the State. However, if the State,with the goal of streamlining, wants to provide copies of the public noticedirectly to all the Federal agencies, this can be accommodated within theMemorandum of Agreement with the Regional Administrator (andSection; 233.13).In either case, the comments from the Federal review agencies will be forwardedto EPA to consolidate the Federal comment to the State.In addition to the public notice and draft general permit, the RegionalAdministrator shall forward to the Corps, FWS, and NMFS any other informationpertinent to making an informed comment that the States makes availableto him.This regulation eliminates the requirement that States prepare draft individualpermits. Draft general permits must be prepared (andSection; 404(j) refersto a copy of each proposed general permit) but there is no comparable statutoryrequirement for draft individual permits. Moreover, draft permits are notprepared as part of the current Federal program. Public review of individualpermit applications is currently based on the public notice; public reviewsubsequent to State assumption will also be based on public notice. Therefore,there will be no substantial change from existing procedures.One commentor questioned why the public notice was circulated to EPA forFederal review instead of the permit application (andSection; 404(j)). Thepublic notice usually contains all the pertinent information in the permitapplication (andSection; 233.32(d)). Under the Corps administered program,public and Federal review is normally based on the public notice; therefore,there will be no significant change from current practice. In addition,under either the Federal and State programs, EPA can request a copy ofa particular application if it has a need for it.In response to comment, we have reinstated the provision that if the RegionalAdministrator notified the Director within 30 days of receipt of the publicnotice that there is no comment, he may reserve the right to object within90 days of receipt of the notice based on new information brought out bythe public during the comment period or at a hearing. Contrary to several comments received, the regulation already providesthat the State shall provide a copy of every issued permit to the RegionalAdministrator (andSection; 233.50(a)(4)). These issued permits will be reviewedfor compliance with the requirements for an approvable program, as partof EPA's overall oversight. One commentor suggested that our provision for the Regional Administratorto consolidate comments for the Federal agencies conflicted with Section404(h)(1)(H). However, Section 404(j) specifically assigns this coordination/consolidationrole to EPA's Regional Administrator. This section clearly establishesEPA's Regional Administrator as the Federal focus for approved State programs.After ``full consideration'' of the comments of the Federal review agencies,EPA will prepare and transmit the Federal comment on a permit applicationto the State. If appropriate and/or useful, EPA may transmit copies ofthe other Federal agencies' comment to the State as part of the officialFederal comment. Those agencies are, of course, also free to furnish informationcopies of their comments to the State at the same time they submit themto EPA. <T3>Section 233.51: </T3>This section received many comments, which rangefrom the view that Federal review has been waived far too much to one thatFederal review has not been waived for enough categories of discharge.Other than the few categories never eligible for waiver, waivers will bedeveloped on a State-by-State basis. Each State has unique resources thatmust be considered in developing categories or discharge eligible for waiver.These categories will be developed in consultation with the Federal reviewagencies and will be open to public comment. We anticipate that use ofthis waiver mechanism will reduce unnecessary paperwork and direct theFederal presence to where it is most needed and appropriate. The proposed rule specified that general permits are not eligible for waiverof Federal review. The proposal intended that <T3>draft </T3>general permits are not eligible for waiver of review. Thishas been clarified in the final rule. In response to comment, we have reinstated the provision that dischargesinto National and historical monuments are not eligible for waiver of Federalreview, in light of the special Federal interest in them. We anticipate that existing Corps nationwide permits will be used as abasis for developing categories to discharge eligible for waiver of Federalreview. Previous Federal agencies' comments (or no comment) can also beused in determining activities eligible for waiver of Federal review. WhereEPA has used the advanced identification procedure with the Corps or theState under 40 CFR 230.80, or on its own initiative under Section 404(c)(40 CFR Part 231), the results of that process will be used to determinethose areas and categories of discharge that should be, and/or those thatshould not be, considered for waiver of Federal review. Categories of activities eligible for waiver of Federal review in a particularState will be developed after consultation with the Corps, FWS, and NMFS.These categories will be described in the State's submission for programapproval and therefore will be subject to public comment. Activities forwhich Federal review is waived are also subject to annual review. If, atany time, any of these categories of activities are deemed inappropriatefor continued waiver, they can (and will) be withdrawn from the waiverprovision and become subject to individual review. <T3>Section 233.52: </T3>In response to comments, we have added a requirementthat the State's draft annual report to be made available for public inspection.The annual report is a mandatory, not a discretionary, requirement foran approved program. In response to comment, we have added to the informationthat shall be included in the annual report the number of suspected unauthorizedactivities reported to the State and the nature of the State's action onthese reported activities; added that the State shall report the numberof violations identified as well as the number and nature of enforcementactions taken; and the number of permit applications received but not yetprocessed.Contrary to comment on the annual reporting requirements, the regulationdoes require the Director to respond, in the final report, to the RegionalAdministrator's comments and questions about the draft report.<T3>Section 233.53:</T3> One commentor suggested that program withdrawalshould be initiated only where a State's program, on the whole, has repeatedlyfailed to comply with the requirements for an approvable program. Thiscommentor suggested that continued problems with any one of the criteriaspecified in andSection;233.53(b) (2) and (3) is not sufficient grounds forprogram withdrawal. We cannot concur with this suggestion. While we doagree that program withdrawal will not be taken lightly and that programapproval will not be withdrawn for minor reasons, continued non-performanceof any of the criteria specified can be grounds for initiating programwithdrawal. Each of the criteria listed is a vital part of an approvedprogram and continued non-performance of any of these would result in aprogram that no longer fulfills the requirements for an approved program.These regulations provide that the Administrator shall respond in writingto any petition to commence withdrawal proceedings. One commentor suggestedthat this exceeded the public involvement requirements. We believe thatsuch written response is nonetheless good policy and publish the rule asproposed.<ITAG tagnum="84">Executive Order 12291</ITAG>Since these rules are revisions which provide regulatory relief by, forthe most part, increasing flexibility in State program design and administration,we have determined that they are not a major rule requiring a RegulatoryImpact Analysis under Executive Order 12291. This rule has been reviewedby the Office of Management and Budget in accordance with the requirementsof Executive Order 12291.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>This final rule was reviewed under the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980,Pub. L. 96-354, which requires preparation of a regulatory flexibilityanalysis for any rule which is likely to have significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. Since this revision to 40 CFRPart 233 will reduce paperwork, reporting requirements and applicationinformation requirements, this final rule will be beneficial to small entities.Thus, no Regulatory Flexibility Analysis is needed.<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has approved the informationcollection requirements contained in this final rule under the provisionsof the <T3>Paperwork Reduction Act,</T3> 44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3> and has assigned OMB control numbers:2090-011.2090-012.2090-013.2090-015.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Parts 232 and 233</ITAG>Administrative practice and procedure, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,Confidential business information, Water pollution control, Indian lands,Intergovernmental relations, Water supply, Waterways, Navigation, Penalties,Wetlands.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: May 27, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Lee M. Thomas,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency.</ITAG>For the reasons set out in the preamble, 40 CFR Part 232 is amended asset forth below.1. Part 232 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 232_404 PROGRAM DEFINITIONS; EXEMPT ACTIVITIES NOT REQUIRING404 PERMITS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">232.1 Purpose and scope of this part.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">232.2 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">232.3 Activities not requiring permits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 33 U.S.C. 1344.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;232.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose and scope of this part.</ITAG>Part 232 contains definitions applicable to the Section 404 program fordischarges of dredged or fill material. These definitions apply to boththe Federally operated program and State administered programs after programapproval. This part also describes those activities which are exemptedfrom regulation. Regulations prescribing the substantive environmentalcriteria for issuance of Section 404 permits appear at 40 CFR Part 230.Regulations establishing procedures to be followed by the EPA in denyingor restricting a disposal site appear at 40 CFR Part 231. Regulations containingthe procedures and policies used by the Corps in administering the 404program appear at 33 CFR Parts 320-330. Regulations specifying the proceduresEPA will follow, and the criteria EPA will apply in approving, monitoring,and withdrawing approval of Section 404 State programs appear at 40 CFRPart 233.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;232.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Administrator</T3> means the Administrator of the Environmental ProtectionAgency or an authorized representative.(b) <T3>Application</T3> means a form for applying for a permit to dischargedredged or fill material into waters of the United States.(c) <T3>Approved program</T3> means a State program which has been approvedby the Regional Administrator under Part 233 of this chapter or which isdeemed approved under Section 404(h)(3), 33 U.S.C. 1344(h)(3).(d) <T3>Best management practices</T3> (BMPs) means schedules of activities,prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other managementpractices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United Statesfrom discharges of dredged or fill material. BMPs include methods, measures,practices, or design and performance standards which facilitate compliancewith the Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines (40 CFR Part 230), effluent limitationsor prohibitions under Section 307(a), and applicable water quality standards.(e) <T3>Discharge of dredged material</T3> means any addition of dredged materialinto waters of the United States. The term includes, without limitation,the addition of dredged material to a specified discharge site locatedin waters of the United States and the runoff or overflow from a containedland or water disposal site. Discharges of pollutants into waters of theUnited States resulting from the onshore subsequent processing of dredgedmaterial that is extracted for any commercial use (other than fill) arenot included within this term and are subject to Section 402 of the Acteven though the extraction and deposit of such material may require a permitfrom the Corps or the State Section 404 program. The term does not include<T3>de minimus,</T3> incidental soil movement occurring during normal dredgingoperations.(f) <T3>Discharge of fill material</T3> means the addition of fill materialinto waters of the United States. The term generally includes, withoutlimitation, the following activities: Placement of fill that is necessaryto the construction of any structure; the building of any structure orimpoundment requiring rock, sand, dirt, or other materials for its construction;site-development fills for recreational, industrial, commercial, residential,and other uses, causeways or road fills; dams and dikes; artificial islands;property protection and/or reclamation devices such as riprap, groins,seawalls, breakwaters, and revetments; beach nourishment; levees; fillfor structures such as sewage treatment facilities, intake and outfallpipes associated with power plants and subaqueous utility lines; and artificialreefs.(g) <T3>Dredged material</T3> means material that is excavated or dredged fromwaters of the United States.(h) <T3>Effluent</T3> means dredged material or fill material, including returnflow from confined sites.(i) <T3>Fill material</T3> means any ``pollutant'' which replaces portionsof the ``waters of the United States'' with dry land or which changes thebottom elevation of a water body for any purpose.(j) <T3>General permit</T3> means a permit authorizing a category of dischargesof dredged or fill material under the Act. General permits are permitsfor categories of discharge which are similar in nature, will cause onlyminimal adverse environmental effects when performed separately, and willhave only minimal cumulative adverse effect on the environment.(k) <T3>Owner or operator</T3> means the owner or operator of any activitysubject to regulation under the 404 program.(l) <T3>Permit</T3> means a written authorization issued by an approved Stateto implement the requirements of Part 233, or by the Corps under 33 CFRParts 320-330. When used in these regulations, ``permit'' includes ``generalpermit'' as well as individual permit.(m) <T3>Person </T3>means an individual, association, partnership, corporation,municipality, State or Federal agency, or an agent or employee thereof.(n) <T3>Regional Administrator </T3>means the Regional Administrator of theappropriate Regional Office of the Environmental Protection Agency or theauthorized representative of the Regional Administrator.(o) <T3>Secretary </T3>means the Secretary of the Army acting through the Chiefof Engineers.(p) <T3>State regulated waters </T3>means those waters of the United Statesin which the Corps suspends the issuance of Section 404 permits upon approvalof a State's Section 404 permit program by the Administrator under Section404(h). The program cannot be transferred for those waters which are presentlyused, or are susceptible to use in their natural condition or by reasonableimprovement as a means to transport interstate or foreign commerce shorewardto their ordinary high water mark, including all waters which are subjectto the ebb and flow of the tide shoreward to the high tide line, includingwetlands adjacent thereto. All other waters of the United States in a Statewith an approved program shall be under jurisdiction of the State program,and shall be identified in the program description as required by Part233.(q) <T3>Waters of the United States </T3>means:(1) All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or maybe susceptible to us in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waterswhich are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide. (2) All interstate waters including interstate wetlands.(3) All other waters, such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (includingintermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairiepotholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the use, degradation,or destruction of which would or could affect interstate or foreign commerceincluding any such waters:(i) Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreationalor other purposes; or(ii) From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstateor foreign commerce; or(iii) Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industriesin interstate commerce.(4) All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the UnitedStates under this definition;(5) Tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (g)(1)-(4) of this section;(6) The territorial sea; and(7) Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselveswetlands) identified in paragraphs (q)(1)-(6) of this section.Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designedto meet the requirements of the Act (other than cooling ponds as definedin 40 CFR 123.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) arenot waters of the United States.(r) <T3>Wetlands </T3>means those areas that are inundated or saturated bysurface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetationtypically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generallyinclude swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 232.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Activities not requiring permits.</ITAG>Except as specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, any dischargeof dredged or fill material that may result from any of the activitiesdescribed in paragraph (c) of this section is not prohibited by or otherwisesubject to regulation under this Part.(a) If any discharge of dredged or fill material resulting from the activitieslisted in paragraph (c) of this section contains any toxic polutant listedunder Section 307 of the Act, such discharge shall be subject to any applicabletoxic effluent standard or prohibition, and shall require a Section 404permit.(b) Any discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the UnitedStates incidental to any of the activities identified in paragraph (c)of this section must have a permit if it is part of an activity whose purposeis to convert an area of the waters of the United States into a use towhich it was not previously subject, where the flow or circulation of watersof the United States may be impaired or the reach of such waters reduced.Where the proposed discharge will result in significant discernable alterationsto flow or circulation, the presumption is that flow or circulation maybe impaired by such alteration.<ITAG tagnum="21">[<T4>Note._</T4>For example, a permit will be required for the conversionof a cypress swamp to some other use or the conversion of a wetland fromsilvicultural to agricultural use when there is a discharge of dredgedor fill material into waters of the United States in conjunction with constuctionof dikes, drainage ditches or other works or structures used to effectsuch conversion. A conversion of Section 404 wetland to a non-wetland isa change in use of an area of waters of the U.S. A discharge which elevatesthe bottom of waters of the United States without converting it to dryland does not thereby reduce the reach of, but may alter the flow or circulationof, waters of the United States.]</ITAG>(c) The following activities are exempt from Section 404 permit requirements,except as specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section: (1)(i) Normal farming, silviculture and ranching activities such as plowing,seeding, cultivating, minor drainage, and harvesting for the productionof food, fiber, and forest products, or upland soil and water conservationpractices, as defined in paragraph (d) of this section. (ii)(A) To fall under this exemption, the activities specified in paragraph(c)(1) of this section must be part of an established (i.e., ongong) farming,silviculture, or ranching operation, and must be in accordance with definitionsin paragraph (d) of this section. Activities on areas lying fallow as partof a conventional rotational cycle are part of an established operation.(B) Activities which bring an area into farming, silviculture or ranchinguse are not part of an established operation. An operation ceases to beestablished when the area in which it was conducted has been convertedto another use or has lain idle so long that modifications to the hydrologicalregime are necessary to resume operation. If an activity takes place outsidethe waters of the United States, or if it does not involve a discharge,it does not need a Section 404 permit whether or not it was part of anestablished farming, silviculture or ranching operation. (2) Maintenance, including emergency reconstruction of recently damagedparts, of currently serviceable structures such as dikes, dams, levees,groins, riprap, breakwaters, causeways, bridge abutments or approaches,and transportation structures. Maintenance does not include any modificationthat changes the character, scope, or size of the original fill design.Emergency reconstruction must occur within a reasonable period of timeafter damage occurs in order to qualify for this exemption. (3) Construction or maintenance of farm or stock ponds or irrigation ditchesor the maintenance (but not construction) of drainage ditches. Dischargeassociated with siphons, pumps, headgates, wingwalls, wiers, diversionstructures, and such other facilities as are appurtenant and functionallyrelated to irrigation ditches are included in this exemption. (4) Construction of temporary sedimentation basins on a construction sitewhich does not include placement of fill material into waters of the UnitedStates. The term ``construction site'' refers to any site involving theerection of buildings, roads, and other discrete structures and the installationof support facilities necessary for construction and utilization of suchstructures. The term also includes any other land areas which involve land-disturbingexcavation activities, including quarrying or other mining activities,where an increase in the runoff of sediment is controlled through the useof temporary sedimentation basins. (5) Any activity with respect to which a State has an approved programunder Section 208(b)(4) of the Act which meets the requirements of Section208(b)(4)(B) and (C). (6) Construction or maintenance of farm roads, forest roads, or temporaryroads for moving mining equipment, where such roads are constructed andmaintained in accordance with best management practices (BMPs) to assurethat flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristicsof waters of the United States are not impaired, that the reach of thewaters of the United States is not reduced, and that any adverse effecton the aquatic environment will be otherwise minimized. The BMPs whichmust be applied to satisfy this provision include the following baselineprovisions: (i) Permanent roads (for farming or forestry activities), temporary accessroads (for mining, forestry, or farm purposes) and skid trails (for logging)in waters of the United States shall be held to the minimum feasible number,width, and total length consistent with the purpose of specific farming,silvicultural or mining operations, and local topographic and climaticconditions; (ii) All roads, temporary or permanent, shall be located sufficiently farfrom streams or other water bodies (except for portions of such roads whichmust cross water bodies) to minimize discharges of dredged or fill materialinto waters of the United States; (iii) The road fill shall be bridged, culverted, or otherwise designedto prevent the restriction of expected flood flows; (iv) The fill shall be properly stabilized and maintained to prevent erosionduring and following construction; (v) Discharges of dredged or fill material into waters of the United Statesto construct a road fill shall be made in a manner that minimizes the encroachmentof trucks, tractors, bulldozers, or other heavy equipment within the watersof the United States (including adjacent wetlands) that lie outside thelateral boundaries of the fill itself; (vi) In designing, constructing, and maintaining roads, vegetative disturbancein the waters of the United States shall be kept to a minimum; (vii) The design, construction and maintenance of the road crossing shallnot disrupt the migration or other movement of those species of aquaticlife inhabiting the water body; (viii) Borrow material shall be taken from upland sources whenever feasible;(ix) The discharge shall not take, or jeopardize the continued existenceof, a threatened or endangered species as defined under the EndangeredSpecies Act, or adversely modify or destroy the critical habitat of suchspecies; (x) Discharges into breeding and nesting areas for migratory waterfowl,spawning areas, and wetlands shall be avoided if practical alternativesexist; (xi) The discharge shall not be located in the proximity of a public watersupply intake; (xii) The discharge shall not occur in areas of concentrated shellfishproduction; (xiii) The discharge shall not occur in a component of the National Wildand Scenic River System; (xiv) The discharge of material shall consist of suitable material freefrom toxic pollutants in toxic amounts; and(xv) All temporary fills shall be removed in their entirety and the arearestored to its original elevation.(d) For purpose of paragraph (c)(1) of this section, cultivating, harvesting,minor drainage, plowing, and seeding are defined as follows:(1) Cultivating means physical methods of soil treatment employed withinestablished farming, ranching and silviculture lands on farm, ranch, orforest crops to aid and improve their growth, quality, or yield.(2) Harvesting means physical measures employed directly upon farm, forest,or ranch crops within established agricultural and silvicultural landsto bring about their removal from farm, forest, or ranch land, but doesnot include the construction of farm, forest, or ranch roads.(3)(i) Minor drainage means:(A) The discharge of dredged or fill material incidental to connectingupland drainage facilities to waters of the United States, adequate toeffect the removal of excess soil moisture from upland croplands. Constructionand maintenance of upland (dryland) facilities, such as ditching and tiling,incidental to the planting, cultivating, protecting, or harvesting of crops,involve no discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the UnitedStates, and as such never require a Section 404 permit;(B) The discharge of dredged or fill material for the purpose of installingditching or other water control facilities incidental to planting, cultivating,protecting, or harvesting of rice, cranberries or other wetland crop species,where these activities and the discharge occur in waters of the UnitedStates which are in established use for such agricultural and silviculturalwetland crop production;(C) The discharge of dredged or fill material for the purpose of manipulatingthe water levels of, or regulating the flow or distribution of water within,existing impoundments which have been constructed in accordance with applicablerequirements of the Act, and which are in established use for the productionor rice, cranberries, or other wetland crop species.<ITAG tagnum="21">[<T4>Note._</T4>The provisions of paragraphs (d)(3)(i) (B) and (C) of thissection apply to areas that are in established use exclusively for wetlandcrop production as well as areas in established use for conventional wetland/non-wetlandcrop rotation (e.g., the rotations of rice and soybeans) where such rotationresults in the cyclical or intermittent temporary dewatering of such areas.]</ITAG>(D) The discharge of dredged or fill material incidental to the emergencyremoval of sandbars, gravel bars, or other similar blockages which areformed during flood flows or other events, where such blockages close orconstrict previously existing drainageways and, if not promptly removed,would result in damage to or loss of existing crops or would impair orprevent the plowing, seeding, harvesting or cultivating of crops on landin established use for crop production. Such removal does not include enlargingor extending the dimensions of, or changing the bottom elevations of, theaffected drainageway as it existed prior to the formation of the blockage.Removal must be accomplished within one year after such blockages are discoveredin order to be eligible for exemption.(ii) Minor drainage in waters of the United States is limited to drainagewithin areas that are part of an established farming or silviculture operation.It does not include drainage associated with the immediate or gradual conversionof a wetland to a non-wetland (e.g., wetland species to upland speciesnot typically adequate to life in saturated soil conditions), or conversionfrom one wetland use to another (for example, silviculture to farming).In addition, minor drainage does not include the construction of any canal,ditch, dike or other waterway or structure which drains or otherwise significantlymodifies a stream, lake, swamp, bog or any other wetland or aquatic areaconstituting waters of the United States. Any discharge of dredged or fillmaterial into the waters of the United States incidental to the constructionof any such structure or waterway requires a permit.(4) Plowing means all forms of primary tillage, including moldboard, chisel,or wide-blade plowing, discing, harrowing, and similar physical means usedon farm, forest or ranch land for the breaking up, cutting, turning over,or stirring of soil to prepare it for the planting of crops. Plowing doesnot include the redistribution of soil, rock, sand, or other surficialmaterials in a manner which changes any area of the waters of the UnitedStates to dryland. For example, the redistribution of surface materialsby blading, grading, or other means to fill in wetland areas is not plowing.Rock crushing activities which result in the loss of natural drainage characteristics,the reduction of water storage and recharge capabilities, or the overburdenof natural water filtration capacities do not constitute plowing. Plowing,as described above, will never involve a discharge of dredged or fill material.(5) Seeding means the sowing of seed and placement of seedlings to producefarm, ranch, or forest crops and includes the placement of soil beds forseeds or seedlings on established farm and forest lands.(e) Federal projects which qualify under the criteria contained in Section404(r) of the Act are exempt from Section 404 permit requirements, butmay be subject to other State or Federal requirements.2. Authority citation for Part 233 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1344.</ITAG>3. Part 233 is amended by revising Subparts A, B, C, E, and F and by redesignatingSubpart D as G and the section number is changed from ``233.42'' to ``233.60''and by adding a new Subpart D to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 233-404 STATE PROGRAM REGULATIONS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart A_General</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.1 Purpose and scope.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.2 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.3 Confidentiality of information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.4 Conflict of interest.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart B_Program Approval</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.10 Elements of a program submission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.11 Program description.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.12 Attorney General's statement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.13 Memorandum of Agreement with Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.14 Memorandum of Agreement with the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.15 Procedures for approving State programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.16 Procedures for revision of State programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart C_Permit Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.20 Prohibitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.21 General permits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.22 Emergency permits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.23 Permit conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart D_Program Operation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.30 Application for a permit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.31 Coordination requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.32 Public notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.33 Public hearing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.34 Making a decision on the permit application.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.35 Issuance and effective date of permit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.36 Modification, suspension or revocation of permits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.37 Signatures on permit applications and reports.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.38 Continuation of expiring permits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart E_Compliance Evaluation and Enforcement</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.40 Requirements for compliance evaluation programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.41 Requirements for enforcement authority.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart F_Federal Oversight</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.50 Review of and objection to State permits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.51 Waiver of review.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.52 Program reporting.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">233.53 Withdrawal of program approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_General</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose and scope.</ITAG>(a) This Part specifies the procedures EPA will follow, and the criteriaEPA will apply, in approving, reviewing, and withdrawing approval of Stateprograms under Section 404 of the Act.(b) Except as provided in andSection; 232.3, the State program must regulateall discharges of dredged or fill material into State regulated waters.Partial State programs are not approvable under Section 404. A State'sdecision not to assume existing Corps general permits does not constitutea partial program. The discharges previously authorized by general permitwill be regulated by State individual permits. However, in many cases Stateswill lack authority to regulate activities on Indian lands. This lack ofauthority does not impair a State's ability to obtain full program approvalin accordance with this Part, i.e., inability of a State to regulate activitieson Indian lands does not constitute a partial program. The Secretary willadminister the program on Indian lands if the State does not have authorityto regulate activities on Indian lands.(c) Nothing in this Part precludes a State from adopting or enforcing requirementswhich are more stringent or from operating a program with greater scope,than required under this Part. Where an approved State program has a greaterscope than required by Federal law, the additional coverage is not partof the Federally approved program and is not subject to Federal oversightor enforcement.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note.</T4>_State assumption of the Section 404 program is limited tocertain waters, as provided in section 404(g)(1). The Federal program operatedby the Corps of Engineers continues to apply to the remaining waters inthe State even after program approval. However, this does not restrictStates from regulating discharges of dredged or fill material into thosewaters over which the Secretary retains Section 404 jurisdiction.</ITAG>(d) Any approved State Program shall, at all times, be conducted in accordancewith the requirements of the Act and of this Part. While States may imposemore stringent requirements, they may not impose any less stringent requirementsfor any purpose.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>The definitions in Parts 230 and 232 as well as the following definitionsapply to this Part.(a) <T3>Act</T3> means the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.).(b) <T3>Corps</T3> means the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.(c) <T3>FWS</T3> means the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.(d) <T3>Interstate agency </T3>means an agency of two or more States establishedby or under an agreement or compact approved by the Congress, or any otheragency of two or more States having substantial powers or duties pertainingto the control of pollution.(e) <T3>NMFS</T3> means the National Marine Fisheries Service.(f) <T3>State</T3> means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Guam,the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, theCommonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Trust Territory ofthe Pacific Islands. For purposes of this regulation, the word State alsoincludes any interstate agency requesting program approval or administeringan approved program.(g) <T3>State Director</T3> (<T3>Director</T3>) means the chief administrative officer of any Stateor interstate agency operating an approved program, or the delegated representativeof the Director. If responsibility is divided among two or more State orinterstate agencies, Director means the chief administrative officer ofthe State or interstate agency authorized to perform the particular procedureor function to which reference is made.(h) <T3>State 404 program </T3>or <T3>State program </T3>means a State program which has been approved byEPA under Section 404 of the Act to regulate the discharge of dredged orfill material into certain waters as defined in andSection; 232.2(p).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Confidentiality of information.</ITAG>(a) Any information submitted to EPA pursuant to these regulations maybe claimed as confidential by the submitter at the time of submittal anda final determination as to that claim will be made in accordance withthe procedures of 40 CFR Part 2 and paragraph (c) of this section.(b) Any information submitted to the Director may be claimed as confidentialin accordance with State law, subject to paragraphs (a) and (c) of thissection.(c) Claims of confidentiality for the following information will be denied:(1) The name and address of any permit applicant or permittee,(2) Effluent data,(3) Permit application, and(4) Issued permit.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conflict of interest.</ITAG>Any public officer or employee who has a direct personal or pecuniary interestin any matter that is subject to decision by the agency shall make knownsuch interest in the official records of the agency and shall refrain fromparticipating in any manner in such decision.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart B_Program Approval</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.10 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Elements of a program submission.</ITAG>Any State that seeks to administer a 404 program under this Part shallsubmit to the Regional Administrator at least three copies of the following:(a) A letter from the Governor of the State requesting program approval.(b) A complete program description, as set forth in andSection; 233.11.(c) An Attorney General's statement, as set forth in andSection; 233.12.(d) A Memorandum of Agreement with the Regional Administrator, as set forthin andSection; 233.13.(e) A Memorandum of Agreement with the Secretary, as set forth in andSection;233.14.(f) Copies of all applicable State statutes and regulations, includingthose governing applicable State administrative procedures.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Program description.</ITAG>The program description as required under andSection; 233.10 shall include:(a) A description of the scope and structure of the State's program. Thedescription should include extent of State's jurisdiction, scope of activitiesregulated, anticipated coordination, scope of permit exemptions if any,and permit review criteria;(b) A description of the State's permitting, administrative, judicial review,and other applicable procedures;(c) A description of the basic organization and structure of the Stateagency (agencies) which will have responsibility for administering theprogram. If more than one State agency is responsible for the administrationof the program, the description shall address the responsibilities of eachagency and how the agencies intend to coordinate administration and evaluationof the program;(d) A description of the funding and manpower which will be available forprogram administration;(e) An estimate of the anticipated workload, e.g., number of discharges.(f) Copies of permit application forms, permit forms, and reporting forms;(g) A description of the State's compliance evaluation and enforcementprograms, including a description of how the State will coordinate itsenforcement strategy with that of the Corps and EPA;(h) A description of the waters of the United States within a State overwhich the State assumes jurisdiction under the approved program; a descriptionof the waters of the United States within a State over which the Secretaryretains jurisdiction subsequent to program approval; and a comparison ofthe State and Federal definitions of wetlands.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note._</T4>States should obtain from the Secretary an identificationof those waters of the U.S. within the State over which the Corps retainsauthority under Section 404(g) of the Act.</ITAG>(i) A description of the specific best management practices proposed tobe used to satisfy the exemption provisions of Section 404(f)(1)(E) ofthe Act for construction or maintenance of farm roads, forest roads, ortemporary roads for moving mining equipment.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.12</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Attorney General's statement.</ITAG>(a) Any State that seeks to administer a program under this Part shallsubmit a statement from the State Attorney General (or the attorney forthose State or interstate agencies which have independence legal counsel),that the laws and regulations of the State, or an interstate compact, provideadequate authority to carry out the program and meet the applicable requirementsof this Part. This statement shall cite specific statutes and administrativeregulations which are lawfully adopted at the time the statement is signedand which shall be fully effective by the time the program is approved,and, where appropriate, judicial decisions which demonstrate adequate authority.The attorney signing the statement required by this section must have authorityto represent the State agency in court on all matters pertaining to theState program.(b) If a State seeks approval of a program covering activities on Indianlands, the statement shall contain an analysis of the State's authorityover such activities.(c) The State Attorney General's statement shall contain a legal analysisof the effect of State law regarding the prohibition on taking privateproperty without just compensation on the successful implementation ofthe State's program.(d) In those States where more than one agency has responsibility for administeringthe State program, the statement must include certification that each agencyhas full authority to administer the program within its category of jurisdictionand that the State, as a whole, has full authority to administer a completeState Section 404 program.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Memorandum of Agreement with Regional Administrator.</ITAG>(a) Any State that seeks to administer a program under this Part shallsubmit a Memorandum of Agreement executed by the Director and the RegionalAdministrator. The Memorandum of Agreement shall become effective uponapproval of the State program. When more than one agency within a Statehas responsibility for administering the State program, Directors of eachof the responsible State agencies shall be parties to the Memorandum ofAgreement.(b) The Memorandum of Agreement shall set out the State and Federal responsibilitiesfor program administration and enforcement. These shall include, but notbe limited to:(1) Provisions specifying classes and categories of permit applicationsfor which EPA will waive Federal review (as specified in andSection; 233.51).(2) Provisions specifying the frequency and content of reports, documentsand other information which the State may be required to submit to EPAin addition to the annual report, as well as a provision establishing thesubmission date for the annual report. The State shall also allow EPA routinelyto review State records, reports and files relevant to the administrationand enforcement of the approved program.(3) Provisions addressing EPA and State roles and coordination with respectto compliance monitoring and enforcement activities.(4) Provisions addressing modification of the Memorandum of Agreement.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.14</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Memorandum of Agreement with the Secretary.</ITAG>(a) Before a State program is approved under this Part, the Director shallenter into a Memorandum of Agreement with the Secretary. When more thanone agency within a State has responsibility for administering the Stateprogram, Directors of each of the responsible agencies shall be partiesof the Memorandum of Agreement.(b) The Memorandum of Agreement shall include: (1) A description of waters of the United States within the State overwhich the Secretary retains jurisdiction, as identified by the Secretary.(2) Procedures whereby the Secretary will, upon program approval, transferto the State pending 404 permit applications for discharges in State regulatedwaters and other relevant information not already in the possession ofthe Director. <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note.</T4>_Where a State permit program includes coverage of thosetraditionally navigable waters in which only the Secretary may issue Section404 permits, the State is encouraged to establish in this MOA proceduresfor joint processing of Federal and State permits, including joint publicnotices and public hearings.</ITAG>(3) An identification of all general permits issued by the Secretary theterms and conditions of which the State intends to administer and enforceupon receiving approval of its program, and a plan for transferring responsibilityfor these general permits to the State, including procedures for the prompttransmission from the Secretary to the Director of relevant informationnot already in the possession of the Director, including support filesfor permit issuance, compliance reports and records of enforcement actions. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;233.15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Procedures for approving State programs. </ITAG>(a) The 120 day statutory review period shall commence on the date of receiptof a complete State program submission as set out in andSection;233.10 ofthis Part. EPA shall determine whether the submission is complete within30 days of receipt of the submission and shall notify the State of itsdetermination. If EPA finds that a State's submission is incomplete, thestatutory review period shall not begin until all the necessary informationis received by EPA. (b) If EPA determines the State significantly changes its submission duringthe review period, the statutory review period shall begin again upon thereceipt of a revised submission. (c) The State and EPA may extend the statutory review period by agreement.(d) Within 10 days of receipt of a complete State Section 404 program submission,the Regional Administrator shall provide copies of the State's submissionto the Corps, FWS, and NMFS (both Headquarters and appropriate Regionalorganizations.) (e) After determining that a State program submission is complete, theRegional Administrator shall publish notice of the State's applicationin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and in enough of the largest newspapers in theState to attract statewide attention. The Regional Administrator shallalso mail notice to persons known to be interested in such matters. ExistingState, EPA, Corps, FWS, and NMFS mailing lists shall be used as a basisfor this mailing. However, failure to mail all such notices shall not begrounds for invalidating approval (or disapproval) of an otherwise acceptable(or unacceptable) program. This notice shall:(1) Provide for a comment period of not less than 45 days during whichinterested members of the public may express their views on the State program.(2) Provide for a public hearing within the State to be held not less than30 days after notice of hearing is published in the <T4>Federal Register;</T4>(3) Indicate where and when the State's submission may be reviewed by thepublic;(4) Indicate whom an interested member of the public with questions shouldcontact; and(5) Briefly outline the fundamental aspects of the State's proposed programand the process for EPA review and decision.(f) Within 90 days of EPA's receipt of a complete program submission, theCorps, FWS, and NMFS shall submit to EPA any comments on the State's program.(g) Within 120 days of receipt of a complete program submission (unlessan extension is agreed to by the State), the Regional Administrator shallapprove or disapprove the program based on whether the State's programfulfills the requirements of this Part and the Act, taking into considerationall comments received. The Regional Administrator shall prepare a responsivenesssummary of significant comments received and his response to these comments.The Regional Administrator shall respond individually to comments receivedfrom the Corps, FWS, and NMFS.(h) If the Regional Administrator approves the State's Section 404 program,he shall notify the State and the Secretary of the decision and publishnotice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Transfer of the program to the State shall notbe considered effective until such notice appears in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The Secretary shall suspend the issuance bythe Corps of Section 404 permits in State regulated waters on such effectivedate.(i) If the Regional Administrator disapproves the State's program basedon the State not meeting the requirements of the Act and this Part, theRegional Administrator shall notify the State of the reasons for the disapprovaland of any revisions or modifications to the State's program which arenecessary to obtain approval. If the State resubmits a program submissionremedying the identified problem areas, the approval procedure and statutoryreview period shall begin upon receipt of the revised submission.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.16</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Procedures for revision of State programs.</ITAG>(a) The State shall keep the Regional Administrator fully informed of anyproposed or actual changes to the State's statutory or regulatory authorityor any other modifications which are significant to administration of theprogram.(b) Any approved program which requires revision because of a modificationto this Part or to any other applicable Federal statute or regulation shallbe revised within one year of the date of promulgation of such regulation,except that if a State must amend or enact a statute in order to make therequired revision, the revision shall take place within two years.(c) States with approved programs shall notify the Regional Administratorwhenever they propose to transfer all or part of any program from the approvedState agency to any other State agency. The new agency is not authorizedto administer the program until approved by the Regional Administratorunder paragraph (d) of this section.(d) Approval of revision of a State program shall be accomplished as follows:(1) The Director shall submit a modified program description or other documentswhich the Regional Administrator determines to be necessary to evaluatewhether the program complies with the requirements of the Act and thisPart.(2) Notice of approval of program changes which are not substantial revisionsmay be given by letter from the Regional Administrator to the Governoror his designee.(3) Whenever the Regional Administrator determines that the proposed revisionis substantial, he shall publish and circulate notice to those personsknown to be interested in such matters, provide opportunity for a publichearing, and consult with the Corps, FWS, and NMFS. The Regional Administratorshall approve or disapprove program revisions based on whether the programfulfills the requirements of the Act and this Part, and shall publish noticeof his decision in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. For purposes of this paragraph, substantialrevisions include, but are not limited to, revisions that affect the areaof jurisdiction, scope of activities regulated, criteria for review ofpermits, public participation, or enforcement capability.(4) Substantial program changes shall become effective upon approval bythe Regional Administrator and publication of notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.(e) Whenever the Regional Administrator has reason to believe that circumstanceshave changed with respect to a State's program, he may request and theState shall provide a supplemental Attorney General's statement, programdescription, or such other documents or information as are necessary toevaluate the program's compliance with the requirements of the Act andthis Part.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart C_Permit Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.20</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Prohibitions.</ITAG>No permit shall be issued by the Director in the following circumstances:(a) When permit does not comply with the requirements of the Act or regulationsthereunder, including the Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines (Part 230 of thisChapter).(b) When the Regional Administrator has objected to issuance of the permitunder andSection; 233.50 and the objection has not been resolved.(c) When the proposed discharges would be in an area which has been prohibited,withdrawn, or denied as a disposal site by the Administrator under Section404(c) of the Act, or when the discharge would fail to comply with a restrictionimposed thereunder.(d) If the Secretary determines, after consultation with the Secretaryof the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating, that anchorageand navigation of any of the navigable waters would be substantially impaired.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.21 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General permits.</ITAG>(a) Under Section 404(h)(5) of the Act, States may, after program approval,administer and enforce general permits previously issued by the Secretaryin State regulated waters.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>If States intend to assume existing general permits, theymust be able to ensure compliance with existing permit conditions an anyreporting monitoring, or prenotification requirements.</ITAG>(b) The Director may issue a general permit for categories of similar activitiesif he determines that the regulated activities will cause only minimaladverse environmental effects when performed separately and will have onlyminimal cumulative adverse effects on the environment. Any general permitissued shall be in compliance with the Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines.(c) In addition to the conditions specified in andSection; 233.23, each generalpermit shall contain:(1) A specific description of the type(s) of activities which are authorized,including limitations for any single operation. The description shall bedetailed enough to ensure that the requirements of paragraph (b) of thissection are met. (This paragraph supercedes andSection; 233.23(c)(1) forgeneral permits.)(2) A precise description of the geographic area to which the general permitapplies, including limitations on the type(s) of water where operationsmay be conducted sufficient to ensure that the requirements of paragraph(b) of this section are met.(d) Predischarge notification or other reporting requirements may be requiredby the Director on a permit-by-permit basis as appropriate to ensure thatthe general permit will comply with the requirement (section 404(e) ofthe Act) that the regulated activities will cause only minimal adverseenvironmental effects when performed separately and will have only minimalcumulative adverse effects on the environment.(e) The Director may, without revoking the general permit, require anyperson authorized under a general permit to apply for an individual permit.This discretionary authority will be based on concerns for the aquaticenvironment including compliance with paragraph (b) of this section andthe 404(b)(1) Guidelines (40 CFR Part 230.)(1) This provision in no way affects the legality of activities undertakenpursuant to the general permit prior to notification by the Director ofsuch requirement.(2) Once the Director notifies the discharger of his decision to exercisediscretionary authority to require an individual permit, the discharger'sactivity is no longer authorized by the general permit.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.22 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Emergency permits.</ITAG>(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part, the Director mayissue a temporary emergency permit for a discharge of dredged or fill materialif unacceptable harm to life or severe loss of physical property is likelyto occur before a permit could be issued or modified under procedures normallyrequired.(b) Emergency permits shall incorporate, to the extent possible and notinconsistent with the emergency situation, all applicable requirementsof andSection; 233.23.(1) Any emergency permit shall be limited to the duration of time (typicallyno more than 90 days) required to complete the authorized emergency action.(2) The emergency permit shall have a condition requiring appropriate restorationof the site.(c) The emergency permit may be terminated at any time without process(andSection; 233.36) if the Director determines that termination is necessaryto protect human health or the environment.(d) The Director shall consult in an expeditious manner, such as by telephone,with the Regional Administrator, the Corps, FWS, and NMFS about issuanceof an emergency permit.(e) The emergency permit may be oral or written. If oral, it must be followedwithin 5 days by a written emergency permit. A copy of the written permitshall be sent to the Regional Administrator.(f) Notice of the emergency permit shall be published and public commentssolicited in accordance with andSection; 233.32 as soon as possible but nolater than 10 days after the issuance date.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Permit conditions.</ITAG>(a) For each permit the Director shall establish conditions which assurecompliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory requirements, includingthe 404(b)(1) Guidelines, applicable Section 303 water quality standards,and applicable Section 307 effluent standards and prohibitions.(b) Section 404 permits shall be effective for a fixed term not to exceed5 years.(c) Each 404 permit shall include conditions meeting or implementing thefollowing requirements:(1) A specific identification and complete description of the authorizedactivity including name and address of permittee, location and purposeof discharge, type and quantity of material to be discharged. (This subsectionis not applicable to general permits).(2) Only the activities specifically described in the permit are authorized.(3) The permittee shall comply with all conditions of the permit even ifthat requires halting or reducing the permitted activity to maintain compliance.Any permit violation constitutes a violation of the Act as well as of Statestatute and/or regulation.(4) The permittee shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or preventany discharge in violation of this permit.(5) The permittee shall inform the Director of any expected or known actualnoncompliance.(6) The permittee shall provide such information to the Director, as theDirector requests, to determine compliance status, or whether cause existsfor permit modification, revocation or termination.(7) Monitoring, reporting and recordkeeping requirements as needed to safeguardthe aquatic environment. (Such requirements will be determined on a case-by-casebasis, but at a minimum shall include monitoring and reporting of any expectedleachates, reporting of noncompliance, planned changes or transfer of thepermit.)(8) Inspection and entry. The permittee shall allow the Director, or hisauthorized representative, upon presentation of proper identification,at reasonable times to:(i) Enter upon the permittee's premises where a regulated activity is locatedor where records must be kept under the conditions of the permit,(ii) Have access to and copy any records that must be kept under the conditionsof the permit,(iii) Inspect operations regulated or required under the permit, and(iv) Sample or monitor, for the purposes of assuring permit complianceor as otherwise authorized by the Act, any substances or parameters atany location.(9) Conditions assuring that the discharge will be conducted in a mannerwhich minimizes adverse impacts upon the physical, chemical and biologicalintegrity of the waters of the United States, such as requirements forrestoration or mitigation.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart D_Program Operation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.30 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for a permit.</ITAG>(a) Except when an activity is authorized by a general permit issued pursuantto andSection; 233.21 or is exempt from the requirements to obtain a permitunder andSection; 232.3, any person who proposes to discharge dredged orfill material into State regulated waters shall complete, sign and submita permit application to the Director. Persons proposing to discharge dredgedor fill material under the authorization of a general permit must complywith any reporting requirements of the general permit.(b) A complete application shall include:(1) Name, address, telephone number of the applicant and name(s) and address(es)of adjoining property owners.(2) A complete description of the proposed activity including necessarydrawings, sketches or plans sufficient for public notice (the applicantis not generally expected to submit detailed engineering plans and specifications);the location, purpose and intended use of the proposed activity; schedulingof the activity; the location and dimensions of adjacent structures; anda list of authorizations required by other Federal, interstate, State orlocal agencies for the work, including all approvals received or denialsalready made.(3) The application must include a description of the type, composition,source and quantity of the material to be discharged, the method of discharge,and the site and plans for disposal of the dredged or fill material.(4) A certification that all information contained in the application istrue and accurate and acknowledging awareness of penalties for submittingfalse information.(5) All activities which the applicant plans to undertake which are reasonablyrelated to the same project should be included in the same permit application.(c) In addition to the information indicated in andSection; 233.30(b), theapplicant will be required to furnish such additional information as theDirector deems appropriate to assist in the evaluation of the application.Such additional information may include environmental data and informationon alternate methods and sites as may be necessary for the preparationof the required environmental documentation.(d) The level of detail shall be reasonably commensurate with the typeand size of discharge, proximity to critical areas, likelihood of long-livedtoxic chemical substances, and potential level of environmental degradation.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>EPA encourages States to provide permit applicants guidanceregarding the level of detail of information and documentation requiredunder this subsection. This guidance can be provided either through theapplication form or on an individual basis. EPA also encourages the Stateto maintain a program to inform potential applicants for permits of therequirements of the State program and of the steps required to obtain permitsfor activities in State regulated waters.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.31 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Coordination requirements.</ITAG>(a) If a proposed discharge may affect the biological, chemical, or physicalintegrity of the waters of any State(s) other than the State in which thedischarge occurs, the Director shall provide an opportunity for such State(s)to submit written comments within the public comment period and to suggestpermit conditions. If these recommendations are not accepted by the Director,he shall notify the affected State and the Regional Administrator priorto permit issuance in writing of his failure to accept these recommendations,together with his reasons for so doing. The Regional Administrator shallthen have the time provided for in andSection; 233.50(d) to comment upon,object to, or make recommendations.(b) State Section 404 permits shall be coordinated with Federal and Federal-Statewater related planning and review processes.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.32</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Public notice.</ITAG>(a) Applicability.(1) The Director shall give public notice of the following actions:(i) Receipt of a permit application.(ii) Preparation of a draft general permit.(iii) Consideration of a major modification to an issued permit.(iv) Scheduling of a public hearing.(v) Issuance of an emergency permit.(2) Public notices may describe more than one permit or action.(b) Timing.(1) The public notice shall provide a reasonable period of time, normallyat least 30 days, within which interested parties may express their viewsconcerning the permit application.(2) Public notice of a public hearing shall be given at least 30 days beforethe hearing.(3) The Regional Administrator may approve a program with shorter publicnotice timing if the Regional Administrator determines that sufficientpublic notice is provided for.(c) The Director shall give public notice by each of the following methods:(1) By mailing a copy of the notice to the following persons (any personotherwise entitled to receive notice under this paragraph may waive hisrights to receive notice for any classes or categories of permits):(i) The applicant.(ii) Any agency with jurisdiction over the activity or the disposal site,whether or not the agency issues a permit.(iii) Owners of property adjoining the property where the regulated activitywill occur.(iv) All persons who have specifically requested copies of public notices.(The Director may update the mailing list from time to time by requestingwritten indication of continued interest from those listed. The Directormay delete from the list the name of any person who fails to respond tosuch a request.)(v) Any State whose waters may be affected by the proposed discharge.(2) In addition, by providing notice in at least one other way (such asadvertisement in a newspaper of sufficient circulation) reasonably calculatedto cover the area affected by the activity.(d) All public notices shall contain at least the following information:(1) The name and address of the applicant and, if different, the addressor location of the activity(ies) regulated by the permit.(2) The name, address, and telephone number of a person to contact forfurther information.(3) A brief description of the comment procedures and procedures to requesta public hearing, including deadlines.(4) A brief description of the proposed activity, its purpose and intendeduse, so as to provide sufficient information concerning the nature of theactivity to generate meaningful comments, including a description of thetype of structures, if any, to be erected on fills, and a description ofthe type, composition and quantity of materials to be discharged.(5) A plan and elevation drawing showing the general and specific sitelocation and character of all proposed activities, including the size relationshipof the proposed structures to the size of the impacted waterway and depthof water in the area.(6) A paragraph describing the various evaluation factors, including the404(b)(1) Guidelines or State-equivalent criteria, on which decisions arebased.(7) Any other information which would significantly assist interested partiesin evaluating the likely impact of the proposed activity.(e) Notice of public hearing shall also contain the following information:(1) Time, date, and place of hearing.(2) Reference to the date of any previous public notices relating to thepermit.(3) Brief description of the nature and purpose of the hearing.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.33 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Public hearing.</ITAG>(a) Any interested person may request a public hearing during the publiccomment period as specified in andSection; 233.32. Requests shall be in writingand shall state the nature of the issues proposed to be raised at the hearing.(b) The Director shall hold a public hearing whenever he determines thereis a significant degree of public interest in a permit application or adraft general permit. He may also hold a hearing, at his discretion, wheneverhe determines a hearing may be useful to a decision on the permit application.(c) At a hearing, any person may submit oral or written statements or dataconcerning the permit application or draft general permit. The public commentperiod shall automatically be extended to the close of any public hearingunder this section. The presiding officer may also extend the comment periodat the hearing.(d) All public hearings shall be reported verbatim. Copies of the recordof proceedings may be purchased by any person from the Director or thereporter of such hearing. A copy of the transcript (or if none is prepared,a tape of the proceedings) shall be made available for public inspectionat an appropriate State office.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.34 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Making a decision on the permit application.</ITAG>(a) The Director will review all applications for compliance with the 404(b)(1)Guidelines and/or equivalent State environmental criteria as well as anyother applicable State laws or regulations.(b) The Director shall consider all comments received in response to thepublic notice, and public hearing if a hearing is held. All comments, aswell as the record of any public hearing, shall be made part of the officialrecord on the application.(c) After the Director has completed his review of the application andconsideration of comments, the Director will determine, in accordance withthe record and all applicable regulations, whether or not the permit shouldbe issued. No permit shall be issued by the Director under the circumstancesdescribed in andSection; 233.20. The Director shall prepare a written determinationon each application outlining his decision and rationale for his decision.The determination shall be dated, signed and included in the official recordprior to final action on the application. The official record shall beopen to the public.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.35 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Issuance and effective date of permit.</ITAG>(a) If the Regional Administrator comments on a permit application or draftgeneral permit under andSection; 233.50, the Director shall follow the proceduresspecified in that section in issuing the permit.(b) If the Regional Administrator does not comment on a permit applicationor draft general permit, the Director shall make a final permit decisionafter the close of the public comment period and shall notify the applicant.(1) If the decision is to issue a permit, the permit becomes effectivewhen it is signed by the Director and the applicant.(2) If the decision is to deny the permit, the Director will notify theapplicant in writing of the reason(s) for denial.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.36 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Modification, suspension or revocation of permits.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General.</T3> The Director may reevaluate the circumstances and conditionsof a permit either on his own motion or at the request of the permitteeor of a third party and initiate action to modify, suspend, or revoke apermit if he determines that sufficient cause exists. Among the factorsto be considered are:(1) Permittee's noncompliance with any of the terms or conditions of thepermit;(2) Permittee's failure in the application or during the permit issuanceprocess to disclose fully all relevant facts or the permittee's misrepresentationof any relevant facts at the time;(3) Information that activities authorized by a general permit are havingmore than minimal individual or cumulative adverse effect on the environment,or that the permitted activities are more appropriately regulated by individualpermits;(4) Circumstances relating to the authorized activity have changed sincethe permit was issued and justify changed permit conditions or temporaryor permanent cessation of any discharge controlled by the permit;(5) Any significant information relating to the activity authorized bythe permit if such information was not available at the time the permitwas issued and would have justified the imposition of different permitconditions or denial at the time of issuance;(6) Revisions to applicable statutory or regulatory authority, includingtoxic effluent standards or prohibitions or water quality standards.(b) <T3>Limitations.</T3> Permit modifications shall be in compliance withandSection; 233.20.(c) <T3>Procedures.</T3> (1) The Director shall develop procedures to modify,suspend or revoke permits if he determines cause exists for such action(andSection; 233.36(a)). Such procedures shall provide opportunity for publiccomment (andSection; 233.32), coordination with the Federal review agencies(andSection; 233.50), and opportunity for public hearing (andSection; 233.33)following notification of the permittee. When permit modification is proposed,only the conditions subject to modification need be reopened.(2) Minor modification of permits. The Director may, upon the consent ofthe permittee, use abbreviated procedures to modify a permit to make thefollowing corrections or allowance for changes in the permitted activity:(i) Correct typographical errors;(ii) Require more frequent monitoring or reporting by permittee;(iii) Allow for a change in ownership or operational control of a projector activity where the Director determines that no other change in the permitis necessary, provided that a written agreement containing a specific datefor transfer of permit responsibility, coverage, and liability betweenthe current and new permittees has been submitted to the Director;(iv) Provide for minor modification of project plans that do not significantlychange the character, scope, and/or purpose of the project or result insignificant change in environmental impact;(v) Extend the term of a permit, so long as the modification does not extendthe term of the permit beyond 5 years from its original effective dateand does not result in any increase in the amount of dredged or fill materialallowed to be discharged.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.37</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Signatures on permit applications and reports.</ITAG>The application and any required reports must be signed by the person whodesires to undertake the proposed activity or by that person's duly authorizedagent if accompanied by a statement by that person designating the agent.In either case, the signature of the applicant or the agent will be understoodto be an affirmation that he possesses or represents the person who possessesthe requisite property interest to undertake the activity proposed in theapplication.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.38</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Continuation of expiring permits.</ITAG>A Corps 404 permit does not continue in force beyond its expiration dateunder Federal law if, at that time, a State is the permitting authority.States authorized to administer the 404 Program may continue Corps or State-issuedpermits until the effective date of the new permits, if State law allows.Otherwise, the discharge is being conducted without a permit from the timeof expiration of the old permit to the effective date of a new State-issuedpermit, if any.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart E_Compliance Evaluation and Enforcement</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.40</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Requirements for compliance evaluation programs.</ITAG>(a) In order to abate violations of the permit program, the State shallmaintain a program designed to identify persons subject to regulation whohave failed to obtain a permit or to comply with permit conditions.(b) The Director and State officers engaged in compliance evaluation, uponpresentation of proper identification, shall have authority to enter anysite or premises subject to regulation or in which records relevant toprogram operation are kept in order to copy any records, inspect, monitoror otherwise investigate compliance with the State program.(c) The State program shall provide for inspections to be conducted, samplesto be taken and other information to be gathered in a manner that willproduce evidence admissible in an enforcement proceeding.(d) The State shall maintain a program for receiving and ensuring properconsideration of information submitted by the public about violations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.41</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Requirements for enforcement authority.</ITAG>(a) Any State agency administering a program shall have authority:(1) To restrain immediately and effectively any person from engaging inany unauthorized activity;(2) To sue to enjoin any threatened or continuing violation of any programrequirement;(3) To assess or sue to recover civil penalties and to seek criminal remedies,as follows:(i) The agency shall have the authority to assess or recover civil penaltiesfor discharges of dredged or fill material without a required permit orin violation of any Section 404 permit condition in an amount of at least$5,000 per day of such violation.(ii) The agency shall have the authority to seek criminal fines againstany person who willfully or with criminal negligence discharges dredgedor fill material without a required permit or violates any permit conditionissued under Section 404 in the amount of at least $10,000 per day of suchviolation.(iii) The agency shall have the authority to seek criminal fines againstany person who knowingly makes false statements, representation, or certificationin any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or requiredto be maintained under the Act, these regulations or the approved Stateprogram, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurateany monitoring device or method required to be maintained under the permit,in an amount of at least $5,000 for each instance of violation.(b)(1) The approved maximum civil penalty or criminal fine shall be assessablefor each violation and, if the violation is continuous, shall be assessablein that maximum amount for each day of violation.(2) The burden of proof and degree of knowledge or intent required underState law for establishing violations under paragraph (a)(3) of this section,shall be no greater than the burden of proof or degree of knowledge orintent EPA must bear when it brings an action under the Act.(c) The civil penalty assessed, sought, or agreed upon by the Directorunder paragraph (a)(3) of this section shall be appropriate to the violation.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T2>Note:</T2>_To the extent that State judgments or settlements providepenalties in amounts which EPA believes to be substantially inadequatein comparison to the amounts which EPA would require under similar facts,EPA may, when authorized by Section 309 of the Act, commence separate actionfor penalties.</ITAG>(d)(1) The Regional Administrator may approve a State program where theState lacks authority to recover penalties of the levels required underparagraphs (a)(3)(i)-(iii) of this section only if the Regional Administratordetermines, after evaluating a record of at least one year for an alternativeenforcement program, that the State has an alternate, demonstrably effectivemethod of ensuring compliance which has both punitive and deterrence effects.(2) States whose programs were approved via waiver of monetary penaltiesshall keep the Regional Administrator informed of all enforcement actionstaken under any alternative method approved pursuant to paragraph (d)(1)of this section. The manner of reporting will be established in the Memorandumof Agreement with the Regional Administrator (andSection; 233.13).(e) Any State administering a program shall provide for public participationin the State enforcement process by providing either:(1) Authority which allows intervention of right in any civil or administrativeaction to obtain remedies specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this sectionby any citizen having an interest which is or may be adversely affected,or(2) Assurance that the State agency or enforcement authority will: (i) Investigate and provide written responses to all citizen complaintssubmitted pursuant to State procedures; (ii) Not oppose intervention by any citizen when permissive interventionmay be authorized by statute, rule, or regulation; and (iii) Publish notice of and provide at least 30 days for public commenton any proposed settlement of a State enforcement action. <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart F_Federal Oversight </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.50 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Review of and objection to State permits.</ITAG>(a) The Director shall promptly transmit to the Regional Administrator:(1) A copy of the public notice for any complete permit applications receivedby the Director, except those for which permit review has been waived underandSection; 233.51. The State shall supply the Regional Administrator withcopies of public notices for permit applications for which permit reviewhas been waived whenever requested by EPA. (2) A copy of a draft general permit whenever the State intends to issuea general permit. (3) Notice of every significant action taken by the State agency relatedto the consideration of any permit application except those for which Federalreview has been waived or draft general permit. (4) A copy of every issued permit. (5) A copy of the Director's response to another State's comments/recommendations,if the Director does not accept these recommendations (andSection; 233.32(a)).(b) Unless review has been waived under andSection; 233.51, the RegionalAdministrator shall provide a copy of each public notice, each draft generalpermit, and other information needed for review of the application to theCorps, FWS, and NMFS, within 10 days of receipt. These agencies shall notifythe Regional Administrator within 45 days of their receipt if they wishto comment on the public notice or draft general permit. Such agenciesshould submit their evaluation and comments to the Regional Administratorwithin 50 days of such receipt. The final decision to comment, object orto require permit conditions shall be made by the Regional Administrator.(These times may be shortened by mutual agreement of the affected Federalagencies and the State.)(c) If the information provided is inadequate to determine whether thepermit application or draft general permit meets the requirements of theAct, these regulations, and the 404(b)(1) Guidelines, the Regional Administratormay, within 30 days of receipt, request the Director to transmit to theRegional Administrator the complete record of the permit proceedings beforethe State, or any portions of the record, or other information, includinga supplemental application, that the Regional Administrator determinesnecessary for review. (d) If the Regional Administrator intends to comment upon, object to, ormake recommendations with respect to a permit application, draft generalpermit, or the Director's failure to accept the recommendations of an affectedState submitted pursuant to andSection; 233.31(a), he shall notify the Directorof his intent within 30 days of receipt. If the Director has been so notified,the permit shall not be issued until after the receipt of such commentsor 90 days of the Regional Administrator's receipt of the public notice,draft general permit or Director's response (andSection; 233.31(a)), whichevercomes first. The Regional Administrator may notify the Director within30 days of receipt that there is no comment but that he reserves the rightto object within 90 days of receipt, based on any new information broughtout by the public during the comment period or at a hearing. (e) If the Regional Administrator has given notice to the Director underparagraph (d) of this section, he shall submit to the Director, within90 days of receipt of the public notice, draft general permit, or Director'sresponse (andSection; 233.31(a)), a written statement of his comments, objections,or recommendations; the reasons for the comments, objections, or recommendations;and the actions that must be taken by the Director in order to eliminateany objections. Any such objection shall be based on the Regional Administrator'sdetermination that the proposed permit is (1) the subject of an interstatedispute under andSection; 233.31(a) and/or (2) outside requirements of theAct, these regulations, or the 404(b)(1) Guidelines. The Regional Administratorshall make available upon request a copy of any comment, objection, orrecommendation on a permit application or draft general permit to the permitapplicant or to the public. (f) When the Director has received an EPA objection or requirement fora permit condition to a permit application or draft general permit underthis section, he shall not issue the permit unless he has taken the stepsrequired by the Regional Administrator to eliminate the objection. (g) Within 90 days of receipt by the Director of an objection or requirementfor a permit condition by the Regional Administrator, the State or anyinterested person may request that the Regional Administrator hold a publichearing on the objection or requirement. The Regional Administrator shall conduct a public hearing whenever requestedby the State proposing to issue the permit, or if warranted by significantpublic interest based on requests received.(h) If a public hearing is held under paragraph (g) of this section, theRegional Administrator shall, following that hearing, reaffirm, modifyor withdraw the objection or requirement for a permit condition, and notifythe Director of this decision.(1) If the Regional Administrator withdraws his objection or requirementfor a permit condition, the Director may issue the permit.(2) If the Regional Administrator does not withdraw the objection or requirementfor a permit condition, the Director must issue a permit revised to satisfythe Regional Administrator's objection or requirement for a permit conditionor notify EPA of its intent to deny the permit within 30 days of receiptof the Regional Administrator's notification.(i) If no public hearing is held under paragraph (g) of this section, theDirector within 90 days of receipt of the objection or requirement fora permit condition shall either issue the permit revised to satisfy EPA'sobjections or notify EPA of its intent to deny the permit.(j) In the event that the Director neither satisfies EPA's objections orrequirement for a permit condition nor denies the permit, the Secretaryshall process the permit application.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.51</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Waiver of review.</ITAG>(a) The MOA with the Regional Administrator shall specify the categoriesof discharge for which EPA will waive Federal review of State permit applications.After program approval, the MOA may be modified to reflect any additionsor deletions of categories of discharge for which EPA will waive review.The Regional Administrator shall consult with the Corps, FWS, and NMFSprior to specifying or modifying such categories.(b) With the following exceptions, any category of discharge is eligiblefor consideration for waiver:(1) Draft general permits;(2) Discharges with reasonable potential for affecting endangered or threatenedspecies as determined by FWS;(3) Discharges with reasonable potential for adverse impacts on watersof another State;(4) Discharges known or suspected to contain toxic pollutants in toxicamounts (Section 101(a)(3) of the Act) or hazardous substances in reportablequantities (Section 311 of the Act);(5) Discharges located in proximity of a public water supply intake;(6) Discharges within critical areas established under State or Federallaw, including but not limited to National and State parks, fish and wildlifesanctuaries and refuges, National and historical monuments, wildernessareas and preserves, sites identified or proposed under the National HistoricPreservation Act, and components of the National Wild and Scenic RiversSystem.(c) The Regional Administrator retains the right to terminate a waiveras to future permit actions at any time by sending the Director writtennotice of termination.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Program reporting</ITAG>(a) The starting date for the annual period to be covered by reports shallbe established in the Memorandum of Agreement with the Regional Administrator(andSection; 233.13.)(b) The Director shall submit to the Regional Administrator within 90 daysafter completion of the annual period, a draft annual report evaluatingthe State's administration of its program identifying problems the Statehas encountered in the administration of its program and recommendationsfor resolving these problems. Items that shall be addressed in the annualreport include an assessment of the cumulative impacts of the State's permitprogram on the integrity of the State regulated waters; identificationof areas of particular concern and/or interest within the State; the numberand nature of individual and general permits issued, modified, and denied;number of violations identified and number and nature of enforcement actionstaken; number of suspected unauthorized activities reported and natureof action taken; an estimate of extent of activities regulated by generalpermits; and the number of permit applications received but not yet processed.(c) The State shall make the draft annual report available for public inspection.(d) Within 60 days of receipt of the draft annual report, the RegionalAdministrator will complete review of the draft report and transmit comments,questions, and/or requests for additional evaluation and/or informationto the Director.(e) Within 30 days of receipt of the Regional Administrator's comments,the Director will finalize the annual report, incorporating and/or respondingto the Regional Administrator's comments, and transmit the final reportto the Regional Administrator.(f) Upon acceptance of the annual report, the Regional Administrator shallpublish notice of availability of the final annual report.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 233.53 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Withdrawal of program approval.</ITAG>(a) A State with a program approved under this Part may voluntarily transferprogram responsibilities required by Federal law to the Secretary by takingthe following actions, or in such other manner as may be agreed upon withthe Administrator.(1) The State shall give the Administrator and the Secretary 180 days noticeof the proposed transfer. The State shall also submit a plan for the orderlytransfer of all relevant program information not in the possession of theSecretary (such as permits, permit files, reports, permit applications)which are necessary for the Secretary to administer the program.(2) Within 60 days of receiving the notice and transfer plan, the Administratorand the Secretary shall evaluate the State's transfer plan and shall identifyfor the State any additional information needed by the Federal governmentfor program administration.(3) At least 30 days before the transfer is to occur the Administratorshall publish notice of transfer in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and in a sufficient number of the largest newspapersin the State to provide statewide coverage, and shall mail notice to allpermit holders, permit applicants, other regulated persons and other interestedpersons on appropriate EPA, Corps and State mailing lists.(b) The Administrator may withdraw program approval when a State programno longer complies with the requirements of this Part, and the State failsto take corrective action. Such circumstances include the following:(1) When the State's legal authority no longer meets the requirements ofthis Part, including:(i) Failure of the State to promulgate or enact new authorities when necessary;or(ii) Action by a State legislature or court striking down or limiting Stateauthorities.(2) When the operation of the State program fails to comply with the requirementsof this Part, including:(i) Failure to exercise control over activities required to be regulatedunder this Part, including failure to issue permits;(ii) Issuance of permits which do not conform to the requirements of thisPart; or(iii) Failure to comply with the public participation requirements of thisPart.(3) When the State's enforcement program fails to comply with the requirementsof this Part, including:(i) Failure to act on violations of permits or other program requirements;(ii) Failure to seek adequate enforcement penalties or to collect administrativefines when imposed, or to implement alternative enforcement methods approvedby the Administrator; or(iii) Failure to inspect and monitor activities subject to regulation.(4) When the State program fails to comply with the terms of the Memorandumof Agreement required under andSection; 233.13.(c) The following procedures apply when the Administrator orders the commencementof proceedings to determine whether to withdraw approval of a State program:(1) <T3>Order. </T3>The Administrator may order the commencement of withdrawalproceedings on the Administrator's initiative or in response to a petitionfrom an interested person alleging failure of the State to comply withthe requirements of this Part as set forth in subsection (b) of this section.The Administrator shall respond in writing to any petition to commencewithdrawal proceedings. He may conduct an informal review of the allegationsin the petition to determine whether cause exists to commence proceedingsunder this paragraph. The Administrator's order commencing proceedingsunder this paragraph shall fix a time and place for the commencement ofthe hearing, shall specify the allegations against the State which areto be considered at the hearing, and shall be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Within 30 days after publication of the Administrator'sorder in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, the State shall admit or deny these allegationsin a written answer.The party seeking withdrawal of the State's program shall have the burdenof coming forward with the evidence in a hearing under this paragraph.(2) <T3>Definitions. </T3>For purposes of this paragraph the definition of``Administrative Law Judge,'' ``Hearing Clerk,'' and ``Presiding Officer''in 40 CFR 22.03 apply in addition to the following:(i) ``Party'' means the petitioner, the State, the Agency, and any otherperson whose request to participate as a party is granted.(ii) ``Person'' means the Agency, the State and any individual or organizationhaving an interest in the subject matter of the proceedings.(iii) ``Petitioner'' means any person whose petition for commencement ofwithdrawal proceedings has been granted by the Administrator.(3) <T3>Procedures.</T3>(i) The following provisions of 40 CFR Part 22 [Consolidated Rules of Practice]are applicable to proceedings under this paragraph: (A) Section 22.02_(use of number/gender);(B) Section 22.04_(authorities of Presiding Officer);(C) Section 22.06_(filing/service of rulings and orders);(D) Section 22.09_(examination of filed documents);(E) Section 22.19 (a), (b) and (c)_(prehearing conference);(F) Section 22.22_(evidence);(G) Section 22.23_(objections/offers of proof);(H) Section 22.25_(filing the transcript; and(I) Section 22.26_(findings/conclusions).(ii) The following provisions are also applicable:(A) Computation and extension of time.(<T3>1</T3>) <T3>Computation. </T3>In computing any period of time prescribed or allowedin these rules of practice, except as otherwise provided, the day of theevent from which the designated period begins to run shall not be included.Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal legal holidays shall be included. Whena stated time expires on a Saturday, Sunday or Federal legal holiday, thestated time period shall be extended to include the next business day.(<T3>2</T3>) <T3>Extensions of time. </T3>The Administrator, Regional Administrator,or Presiding Officer, as appropriate, may grant an extension of time forthe filing of any pleading, document, or motion (<T3>i</T3>) upon timely motion of a party to the proceeding, for good causeshown and after consideration of prejudice to other parties, or (<T3>ii</T3>) upon his own motion. Such a motion by a party may only bemade after notice to all other parties, unless the movant can show goodcause why serving notice is impracticable. The motion shall be filed inadvance of the date on which the pleading, document or motion is due tobe filed, unless the failure of a party to make timely motion for extensionof time was the result of excusable neglect.(<T3>3</T3>) The time for commencement of the hearing shall not be extendedbeyond the date set in the Administrator's order without approval of theAdministrator.(B) Ex parte discussion of proceeding. At no time after the issuance ofthe order commencing proceedings shall the Administrator, Regional Administrator,Judicial Officer, Regional Judicial Officer, Presiding Officer, or anyother person who is likely to advise these officials in the decisions onthe case, discuss ex parte the merits of the proceeding with any interestedperson outside the Agency, with any Agency staff member who performs aprosecutorial or investigative function in such proceeding or a factuallyrelated proceeding, or with any representative of such person. Any ex partememorandum or other communication addressed to the Administrator, RegionalAdministrator, Judicial Officer, Regional Judicial Officer, or the PresidingOfficer during the pendency of the proceeding and relating to the meritsthereof, by or on behalf of any party shall be regarded as argument madein the proceeding and shall be served upon all other parties. The otherparties shall be given an opportunity to reply to such memorandum or communication.(C) Intervention.(<T3>1</T3>) <T3>Motion. </T3>A motion for leave to intervene in any proceeding conductedunder these rules of practice must set forth the grounds for the proposedintervention, the position and interest of the movant and the likely impactthat intervention will have on the expeditious progress of the proceeding.Any person already a party to the proceeding may file an answer to a motionto intervene, making specific reference to the factors set forth in theforegoing sentence and paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(C)(<T3>3</T3>) of this section, within ten (10) days after service of themotion for leave to intervene.(<T3>2</T3>) However, motions to intervene must be filed within 15 daysfrom the date the notice of the Administrator's order is published in the<T4>Federal Register</T4>.(<T3>3</T3>) <T3>Disposition</T3>. Leave to intervene may be granted only if the movantdemonstrates that (<T3>i</T3>) his presence in the proceeding would not unduly prolong orotherwise prejudice the adjudication of the rights of the original parties;(<T3>ii</T3>) the movant will be adversely affected by a final order; and(<T3>iii</T3>) the interests of the movant are not being adequately representedby the original parties. The intervenor shall become a full party to theproceeding upon the granting of leave to intervene.(<T3>4</T3>) <T3>Amicus curiae</T3>. Persons not parties to the proceeding who wishto file briefs may so move. The motion shall identify the interest of theapplicant and shall state the reasons why the proposed amicus brief isdesirable. If the motion is granted, the Presiding Officer or Administratorshall issue an order setting the time for filing such brief. An amicuscuriae is eligible to participate in any briefing after his motion is granted,and shall be served with all briefs, reply briefs, motions, and ordersrelating to issues to be briefed.(<T3>D</T3>) Motions. (<T3>1</T3>) <T3>General</T3>. All motions, except those made orally on the record duringa hearing, shall (<T3>i</T3>) be in writing; (<T3>ii</T3>) state the grounds therefore with particularity; (<T3>iii</T3>) set forth the relief or order sought; and (<T3>iv</T3>) be accompanied by any affidavit, certificate, other evidence,or legal memorandum relied upon. Such motions shall be served as providedby paragraph (b)(4) of this section.(<T3>2</T3>) <T3>Response to motions</T3>. A party's response to any written motionmust be filed within ten (10) days after service of such motion, unlessadditional time is allowed for such response. The response shall be accompaniedby any affidavit, certificate, other evidence, or legal memorandum reliedupon. If no response is filed within the designated period, the partiesmay be deemed to have waived any objection to the granting of the motion.The Presiding Officer, Regional Administrator, or Administrator, as appropriate,may set a shorter time for response, or make such other orders concerningthe disposition of motions as they deem appropriate.(<T3>3</T3>) <T3>Decision</T3>. The Administrator shall rule on all motions filed ormade after service of the recommended decision upon the parties. The PresidingOfficer shall rule on all other motions. Oral argument on motions willbe permitted where the Presiding Officer, Regional Administrator, or theAdministrator considers it necessary or desirable.(<T3>4</T3>) <T3>Record of proceedings</T3>. (<T3>i</T3>) The hearing shall be either stenographically reported verbatimor tape recorded, and thereupon transcribed by an official reporter designatedby the Presiding Officer;(<T3>ii</T3>) All orders issued by the Presiding Officer, transcripts oftestimony, written statements of position, stipulations, exhibits, motions,briefs, and other written material of any kind submitted in the hearingshall be a part of the record and shall be available for inspection orcopying in the Office of the Hearing Clerk, upon payment of costs. Inquiriesmay be made at the Office of the Administrative Law Judges, Hearing Clerk,401 M Street SW., Washington, DC 20460;(<T3>iii</T3>) Upon notice to all parties the Presiding Officer may authorizecorrections to the transcript which involve matters of substance;(<T3>iv</T3>) An original and two (2) copies of all written submissionsto the hearing shall be filed with the Hearing Clerk;(<T3>v</T3>) A copy of each such submission shall be served by the personmaking the submission upon the Presiding Officer and each party of record.Service under this paragraph shall take place by mail or personal delivery;(<T3>vi</T3>) Every submission shall be accompanied by acknowledgement ofservice by the person served or proof of service in the form of a statementof the date, time, and manner of service and the names of the persons served,certified by the person who made service; and(<T3>vii</T3>) The Hearing Clerk shall maintain and furnish to any personupon request, a list containing the name, service address, and telephonenumber of all parties and their attorneys or duly authorized representatives.(<T3>5</T3>) <T3>Participation by a person not a party</T3>. A person who is not a partymay, in the discretion of the Presiding Officer, be permitted to make alimited appearance by making an oral or written statement of his/her positionon the issues within such limits and on such conditions as may be fixedby the Presiding Officer, but he/she may not otherwise participate in theproceeding.(<T3>6</T3>) <T3>Rights of parties</T3>. (i) All parties to the proceeding may:(A) Appear by counsel or other representative in all hearing and prehearingproceedings;(B) Agree to stipulations of facts which shall be made a part of the record.(7) <T3>Recommended decision. </T3>(i) Within 30 days after the filing of proposedfindings and conclusions and reply briefs, the Presiding Officer shallevaluate the record before him/her, the proposed findings and conclusionsand any briefs filed by the parties, and shall prepare a recommended decision,and shall certify the entire record, including the recommended decision,to the Administrator. (ii) Copies of the recommended decision shall be served upon all parties.(iii) Within 20 days after the certification and filing of the record andrecommended decision, all parties may file with the Administrator exceptionsto the recommended decision and a supporting brief. (8) <T3>Decision by Administrator. </T3>(i) Within 60 days after certificationof the record and filing of the Presiding Officer's recommended decision,the Administrator shall review the record before him and issue his owndecision. (ii) If the Administrator concludes that the State has administered theprogram in conformity with the Act and this Part, his decision shall constitute``final agency action'' within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 704. (iii) If the Administrator concludes that the State has not administeredthe program in conformity with the Act and regulations, he shall list thedeficiencies in the program and provide the State a reasonable time, notto exceed 90 days, to take such appropriate corrective action as the Administratordetermines necessary. (iv) Within the time prescribed by the Administrator the State shall takesuch appropriate corrective action as required by the Administrator andshall file with the Administrator and all parties a statement certifiedby the State Director that appropriate corrective action has been taken.(v) The Administrator may require a further showing in addition to thecertified statement that corrective action has been taken. (vi) If the state fails to take appropriate corrective action and filea certified statement thereof within the time prescribed by the Administrator,the Administrator shall issue a supplementary order withdrawing approvalof the State program. If the State takes appropriate corrective action,the Administrator shall issue a supplementary order stating that approvalof authority is not withdrawn. (vii) The Administrator's supplementary order shall constitute final Agencyaction within the meaning of 5 U.S. 704.(d) Withdrawal of authorization under this section and the Act does notrelieve any person from complying with the requirements of State law, nordoes it affect the validity of actions taken by the State prior to withdrawal.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-12632 Filed 6-3-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>