<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88106-0020 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-06-88.f2.A1019</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Parts 561, 563 and 563c</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 87-1293] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Uniform Accounting Standards</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: December 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (``Board''), as theoperating head of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (``FSLIC''or ``Corporation'') is amending its regulations applicable to all institutionsthe accounts of which are insured by the FSLIC (``insured institutions'')pertaining to the definition of regulatory capital. First, the final ruledelays the effective date of the Definition of Regulatory Capital Regulation,Board Res. No. 87-259, 52 FR 18340 (May 5, 1987) (``DRC Regulation''),from January 1, 1988 to January 1, 1989 in order to implement a phase-inof uniform accounting standards. Second, the rule revises the DRC regulationby eliminating treatment of certain items under risk analysis reporting(``RAR'') and substituting treatment under generally accepted accountingprinciples (``GAAP''). The DRC regulation, as amended by this rule, wouldbegin the phase-in to GAAP on January 1, 1989; such phase-in would endon December 31, 1993, at which time insured institutions would be requiredto report virtually all components of regulatory capital in accordancewith GAAP or the regulatory accounting practices employed by commercialbanks. This rule is part of the revision of the Board's regulations required bythe Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987 (``CEBA''), Pub. L. No. 100-86,101 Stat. 552. On December 21, 1987, the Board adopted a final rule anda policy statement on the accounting treatment of troubled debt restructurings.<T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1294, to be published in the final rulessection of the<T4> Federal Register</T4>. Additionally, the Board also adopted finalamendments to its regulations pertaining to the classification of assetsand appraisal standards of insured institutions. <T3>See</T3> Board Res. Nos. 87-1296, 87-1295, also to be published inthe final rules section of the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>January 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Christina M. Gattuso, ActingRegulatory Counsel, (202) 377-6649, Jerilyn Rogin, Attorney, (202) 377-7018,Deborah Dakin, Assistant Director, (202) 377-6445, Regulations and LegislationDivision, Office of General Counsel, Federal Home Loan Bank Board, 1700G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552; or W. Barefoot Bankhead, ProfessionalAccounting Fellow, (202) 778-2538, Carol Larson, Professional AccountingFellow, (202) 778-2535, Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision,Federal Home Loan Bank System, 900 Nineteenth Street NW., Washington, DC20006.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> The CEBA requires the Board and theFSLIC to issue regulations prescribing ``uniformly applicable accountingstandards to be used by all insured institutions for the purpose of measuringcompliance with any rule or regulation'' promulgated by the FSLIC or theBoard ``to the same degree that generally accepted accounting principlesare used to determine compliance with rules and regulations of the Federalbanking agencies.'' \1\<NOTE/>  CEBA, tit. IV, secs. 402(b), 415(b)(1).\2\<NOTE/> The Board may suspend the application of any such standardwith respect to any insured institution or transaction if the standardwould result in an institution or its parent being treated differentlythan a bank and its parent on a consolidated basis and if the transactionwas consistent with GAAP when completed. <T3>Id. </T3>The CEBA requires that these regulations ``shall take effecton December 31, 1987.'' <T3>Id. </T3>sec. 402(d). An insured institution that demonstrates to thesatisfaction of the Board or the FSLIC that it is not feasible for it tocomply with those accounting regulations by that date may submit a planfor compliance at a later date to the Board for its approval. That datewould be the earlier of the date the Board determined it would be feasiblefor the institution to comply with the regulation or December 31, 1993.<T3>Id. </T3>sec. 402(d)(2)(B).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ For purposes of section 402 of the CEBA, the term ``Federalbanking agency'' is defined to mean the Comptroller of the Currency, theBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Federal DepositInsurance Corporation. <T3>See id. </T3>secs. 402(b), 415(f).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Section 402(a) of the CEBA amended the Home Owners' LoanAct of 1933, 12 U.S.C. 1461 <T3>et seq.,</T3> which governs federally chartered and insured thrifts.Section 402(b) amended the National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1724 <T3>et seq.,</T3> by which the FSLIC regulates state-chartered, federallyinsured thrifts. Today's rule amends the Board's regulations governingall insured institutions. Thus, these uniform accounting standards applyto both federally and state chartered insured institutions. Before the enactment of the CEBA, the Board issued a final regulation thatwas intended to achieve an objective similar to that set forth by the Congressin the CEBA. This rule, the Definition of Regulatory Capital regulation,was to have taken effect on January 1, 1988. Board Res. No. 87-529, 52FR 18340 (May 15, 1987). The DRC Regulation required, first, that for all periods beginning on orafter January 1, 1988, all financial statements issued by insured institutions,including statements of condition required pursuant to 12 CFR 545.115,and all financial reports filed with the Board be prepared in accordancewith GAAP. Second, the term ``regulatory capital'' was defined to meanthe sum of equity capital as determined in accordance with GAAP plus certainother items based on RAR. Third, the rule eliminated prospectively certainregulatory accounting practices previously permitted by the Board. In light of the passage of CEBA, the Board reviewed the DRC Regulationand proposed to amend it in certain ways that would cause it to conformwith the directives and purposes of that legislation. The final rule adoptedtoday achieves that objective. The Board is aware, however, that today'samendment of a rule that had not yet taken effect may give rise to someuncertainty about when insured institutions are required to implement eachof the affected accounting rules. Accordingly, the Board is attaching,as an Appendix to this preamble, a chart that is intended to serve as aguide to implementation dates. Readers of the chart will note that January1, 1989, is the first date on which insured institutions will be requiredto alter the accounting rules that are currently in effect.\3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The Board notes, however, that effective December 31,1987, institutions are required to provide for loan loss allowances inaccordance with the final classification of assets regulation adopted bythe Board today. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1296, to be published elsewhere in the finalrules section of the<T4> Federal Register</T4>. <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Description of the Proposal </ITAG>On October 5, 1987, the Board proposed to revise its DRC Regulation inorder to implement a phase-in of uniform accounting standards as requiredby the CEBA. Board Res. No. 87-1047, 52 FR 39145 (Oct. 20, 1987). As discussedin detail in the preamble to that proposal, the Board believes that thelegislative history of the CEBA shows a clear congressional intent thatthe Board promulgate a final regulation by December 31, 1987, but phasein GAAP compliance over a period not to extend beyond 1993. <T3>See </T3>52 FR at 39147. Further, the legislative history of section402 of the CEBA makes clear that, in cases where the banking agencies deviatefrom GAAP in their regulatory requirments,\4\<NOTE/> it was Congress' intent to allow the Board discretion tochoose either to adopt those same deviations or to adopt GAAP. <T3>Id.</T3><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ Deviations from GAAP permitted by the Federal bankingagencies are referred to herein as Bank regulatory accounting practicesor ``Bank RAP.'' Accordingly, the Board proposed to delay the effective date of the DRCRegulation from January 1, 1988, to January 1, 1989, in order to phasein uniform accounting standards based on GAAP or Bank RAP as required bythe CEBA. The Board also proposed to modify the DRC regulation to comportwith the CEBA-mandated treatment of certain items as regulatory capitaland to grandfather certain RAR transactions to phase-in the effects ofGAAP on thrifts. Finally, the Board proposed procedures whereby an institutionthat cannot meet the timetable for phase-in of GAAP may file a plan fordelayed compliance to a date no later than December 31, 1993. In the Board'sview, the phase-in to GAAP with the grandfathering provisions make it feasiblefor most thrift institutions to comply with both the reporting requirementsand those regulations that measure compliance with Board regulations thatgovern an institution's regulatory capital requirement.In connection with its proposed rulemaking, the Board held public hearingson November 3 and 4, 1987, during which the public was invited to testifyconcerning all aspects of the proposed regulations issued pursuant to CEBA.Eight hearing participants addressed accounting issues raised in the proposalby way either of formal prepared oral and written statements or in responseto questions and comments by members of the panel. Remarks by participantsin the hearing are summarized below as part of the public comment summary.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Discussion of Comments </ITAG>The Board received 70 public comments in response to the proposal. Of thesecomments, the majority, 32, were submitted by insured institutions; 15were submitted by industry trade associations; 15 were from members ofCongress; 4 were from law firms; 1 was from an individual; 1 was from aninvestment banking firm; 1 was from a consulting company; and 1 was fromthe Financial Accounting Standards Board (``FASB''). Thirty-one commenters expressed general support for the proposal, whileseven commenters opposed the proposal. The remaining commenters, withoutexpressing support or opposition to the proposal, suggested specific modificationsto the proposal. In addition, both supporters and opponents suggested varioustechnical and substantive modifications to the proposal. Although the commentperiod ended on November 19, 1987, the Board has considered late-filedletters in an effort to maximize public participation in the rulemaking.After carefully considering the issues raised by the commenters, whichare discussed more fully below, the Board has determined to adopt the proposalwith certain modifications and clarifications. A. Delay of Effective Date of DRC Regulation In light of the enactment of CEBA the Board proposed to delay the effectivedate of the DRC Regulation until January 1, 1989, for two reasons. First,because amendments to the DRC Regulation were necessary to implement theCEBA's accounting provisions, the Board determined that it would be lessburdensome for insured institutions to alter their reporting requirementsand the manner in which they calculate regulatory capital once, ratherthan twice, within a fairly short period of time. Second, the Board believedthat a more gradual application of new GAAP-based accounting standardscomported with the Congressional mandate to minimize the impact of thenew requirements on insured institutions' regulatory capital levels. The majority of commenters were appreciative of the delay of the effectivedate of the DRC Regulation, noting that it will be helpful in accomplishingthe changes in information systems required by the accounting rules, especiallyfor small institutions for which the transition could be more onerous.One commenter suggested that a more appropriate effective date would beDecember 31, 1993, the end of the overall phase-in period. Two commentersurged that institutions be allowed, at their election, to institute earlyadoption of components of the regulation in the event they have alreadyexpended time and expense preparing to comply with the original January1, 1988, effective date. After consideration of the comments, the Board has determined that January1, 1989, is the most equitable compliance date for the GAAP-based accountingstandards embodied in the DRC Regulation about which insured institutionshave been on notice since April of 1986 when the DRC was proposed. BoardRes. No. 86-427, 51 FR 16542 (May 5, 1986). Accordingly, insured institutionsmust prepare all financial statements and reports to the Board on a GAAPbasis by that date, with the exception for deferred loan losses and gainsand shares in open-end mutual funds, discussed more fully below. In thisway, the Board is convinced, congressional intent that GAAP accountingstandards be phased in as quickly as feasible is best fulfilled. The Boardalso notes that all insured institutions subject to the Securities ExchangeAct of 1934 (``34 Act'') (15 U.S.C. 78a <T3>et. seq.</T3>) have already been reporting on a GAAP basis. In response to the comments requesting that compliance with the DRC Regulationbe allowed prior to the January 1, 1989 effective date, the Board notesthat it does not object to such early compliance and has amended the ruleas proposed to reflect the permissibility of that option. Indeed, the Boardemphasizes that compliance by individual insured institutions with theGAAP-based accounting standards as early as feasible only serves to enhancethe Board's goal to move toward GAAP, consistent with the accounting systemalready required by the federal banking agencies. B. Reporting in Accordance with GAAP The Board proposed to require insured institutions to prepare their financialstatements and reports in accordance with GAAP, with a footnote reconciliationto regulatory capital, effective for all periods ending after January 1,1989. Although most commenters expressed support for the eventual implementationof GAAP reporting, the majority of commenters opposed the January 1, 1989,effective date for GAAP reporting. Those commenters who expressed strongsupport for the 1989 effective date noted that implementation of the GAAPreporting system encourages consistency at the same time as it permitsan accurate depiction of the risk to the FSLIC fund. Moreover, those commentersnoted that converting to a widely recognized GAAP standard, similar tothat required by the federal banking agencies, will foster much neededpublic confidence in the thrift industry and improve the current regulatorystructure. Additionally, these commenters commended the Board for issuingproposals consistent with the CEBA and congressional intent. A few commentersnoted that the January 1, 1989 phase-in date would give institutions adequatetime to adjust their systems to the new reporting requirements. Many commenters,however, asserted that the 1989 date was too soon for institutions feasiblyto implement the new reporting system and to avoid the damage to publicconfidence in the thrift industry that GAAP capital figures may engender.Several of these commenters urged the Board to phase-in the GAAP reportingrequirement over a range of one to five years.Several commenters expressed deep concerns that GAAP reporting, even withthe footnote reconciliation to regulatory capital will reveal poor or negativeGAAP capital positions for institutions that were previously reportingpositive net worth. Therefore, they feared that GAAP reporting would causepublic confusion and damage to individual institutions and the industry.One of these commenters suggested that the public may erroneously interpretthe new GAAP figures to mean that a particular association is poorly managedor is engaging in illegal activities. Another commenter suggested thatfor most reports, a footnote reconciliation serves no useful purpose andmay even be confusing to the average reader. Along these lines, a few commenterswho supported the proposal asserted that the GAAP-to-regulatory capitalreconciliation should not be mandatory since such a reconciliation is unnecessaryfor those institutions that do not rely on non-GAAP items of capital. Fourcommenters suggested that an RAR reporting system with a GAAP reconciliationwould be more appropriate. The Board has considered and understands the concerns raised by the commenters.The Board emphasizes, however, that the CEBA mandates the adoption of GAAP-basedaccounting standards by 1993 and that Congress intended that all financialinstitutions achieve uniform GAAP-based reporting. <T3>See, e.g., </T3>S. Rep. No. 19, 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 20, 55 (1987).Moreover, the Board continues to believe, as it has since it proposed theDRC Regulation in April of 1986, that a GAAP call report that includesa footnote reconciliation to regulatory capital is in the best interestof the Board's supervisory efforts, the thrift industry, and the public.Specifically, GAAP reports from all insured institutions will provide theBoard with a consistent and comprehensive basis for analyzing and comparingthe financial performance and soundness of all insured institutions. TheBoard also believes that the GAAP reports will not confuse the public orcause damage to the industry, as suggested by some commenters, but willinstead provide the public with a uniform basis for analyzing individualinstitutions. In the Board's view, since insured institutions subject tothe 34 Act already report on a GAAP basis, GAAP reporting by all insuredinstitutions will result in less public confusion among reports of insuredinstitutions. The uniform reporting system also will promote confidence in the thriftindustry by dispelling the criticism that certain regulatory accountingpractices have permitted misrepresentation of the true financial conditionof insured institutions. Further, in response to those commenters concernedthat particular institutions may, after January 1, 1989, appear poorlycapitalized, the Board reiterates that an approximation of GAAP equitycapital can be currently derived from the RAR reports filed with the Boardand is available to the public under the Freedom of Information Act. Moreover, with respect to commenters who objected to the inclusion of afootnote reconciliation to regulatory capital in the reports, or suggestedthat reports could appropriately be filed on an RAR basis with a GAAP reconciliation,the Board has chosen to resolve these concerns in favor of the overridingprinciple of uniformity. An overall requirement of GAAP reports with footnotereconciliations to regulatory capital will provide the Board and the publicwith a standard that can be applied universally. Moreover, the footnotereconciliation provides the Board a measure by which to judge an insuredinstitution's compliance with the Board's regulations_most significantly,its compliance with the Board's minimum regulatory capital requirements.The Board notes, however, that it has amended the proposal to change theeffective date from ``all periods ending after January 1, 1989'' to ``allperiods beginning on or after January 1, 1989.'' As the Board stated inthe proposal, it believes that a one year delay of the effective date ofthe DRC Regulation is appropriate in order to minimize the impact of therequirements on insured institutions. The Board realizes that, given thewording of the proposed effective date, the only institutions that effectivelyreceived the benefit of the delay were calendar year filers. Thus, theBoard believes this change is appropriate in order to give all insuredinstitutions the benefit of the delay. The strongest opposition to the effective date for GAAP reporting centeredon the treatment of deferred loan losses and gains (``DLL'') under a GAAPreporting system. Many commenters asserted that it is inequitable for theBoard to suddenly ``change the rules of the game,'' after previous Boardsand the Federal Home Loan Banks have actively encouraged institutions touse the DLL regulation, 12 CFR 563c.14 (1987), as a method of ridding themselvesof low yielding loans and amortizing the resulting losses into expenseover the remaining contractual term of the asset sold. Some of these commentersasserted that the proposed treatment of DLL would cause many institutionsto report negative GAAP capital positions which would, thereby, facilitatedeterioration of public confidence in the thrift industry. One commenterasserted that insured institutions should, under the CEBA, be allowed tocontinue to include DLL on their financial statements indefinitely. Manyof these commenters urged the Board to permit institutions to continueto report DLL on their balance sheets through 1993, or, in the alternative,to gradually phase-out the amount of DLL reported on the balance sheetthrough 1993. A few of these commenters contended that including DLL onthe balance sheet is clearly within the intent of the CEBA. The Board has seriously considered the issue of the reporting of DLL andhas taken into account the concerns expressed by commenters. It has weighedthe benefits of having pure GAAP-based reports by January 1, 1989, againstthe reliance on previous Board policies that many commenters described.The Board is also cognizant that many insured institutions utilized thedevice of DLL to restructure their portfolios in the early 1980s and that,assuming an average loan term of 12 to 15 years, much of this accountingtreatment, if allowed to continue, will expire in any event in the mid-1990s.The Board notes that the CEBA provides that insured institutions may continueindefinitely, for purposes of determining regulatory capital, to includethe amount of deferred loan gains and losses as a component of regulatorycapital. The Board also believes, however, that the CEBA requires it, atleast by 1993, to phase out the reporting of DLL on financial statementsand reports as part of the general mandate to move toward GAAP reporting.Mindful of reliance by many institutions on the previous Board positionwith respect to DLL, as well as the fears expressed by many institutionsthat, absent the ability to report DLL, they will exhibit negative GAAPcapital positions, the Board has determined to alter the rule as proposedin the following way. Institutions that had utilized the DLL regulationprior to January 1, 1988, its sunset date,\5\<NOTE/> may report on their unaudited financial statements and reports100 per cent of their DLL for all quarters through the last quarter of1993. In this way, beginning in January 1, 1994, insured institutions willno longer be permitted to report DLL on their unaudited financial statements.The Board emphasizes, however, that the reporting of DLL until the endof 1993 is permissible only on counterstatements and call reports. Auditedfinancial statements must be prepared on a pure GAAP basis with no deviations.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ The DLL regulation, andSection; 563c.14, provides at subparagraph(f) that authority to utilize DLL ceases as of January 1, 1988. 12 CFR563c.14(f). On a similar issue, a few commenters urged that institutions be permittedto report appraised equity capital (``AEC'') on their balance sheets, atleast until 1993. In contrast to the rationale surrounding the reportingtreatment of DLL, no such argument exists with respect to the reportingof AEC. Insured institutions have known since at least April of 1986, whenthe DRC Regulation was proposed, that the Board intended to do away withthe specialized reporting treatment of AEC. Moreover, the ability of institutionsto elect to report AEC expired on December 31, 1986. Additionally, thetreatment of AEC is not  explicitly singled out in the CEBA legislationas is the treatment of DLL, and no previous Board position existed thatencouraged the use of AEC to increase regulatory capital levels. Accordingly,in the interest of the move toward GAAP reporting, the Board has determinedthat institutions may no longer report AEC on their financial statementsand reports effective for all periods beginning on or after January 1,1989. The proposal also required insured institutions to file their monthly andquarterly reports with the Board on a consolidated basis, consistent withGAAP and Bank RAP, beginning on January 1, 1989. That proposed provisionwould have required that, for reporting purposes and as an aid to the Board'ssupervisory efforts, insured institutions were to consolidate all of theirmajority-owned subsidiaries, including, but not limited to, service corporations,finance subsidiaries and operating subsidiaries. Concerning this issue, fifteen commenters responded. Of these commenters,two were in favor of the concept, suggesting that consolidated reportsbetter reflect the true financial condition of the total insured entitythan unconsolidated reports. Nine commenters expressed general oppositionto the concept, and another described it as the first step toward the undesiredresult of calculating regulatory capital requirements on a consolidatedbasis. Five commenters strongly disagreed with the proposed requirementthat monthly reports be filed on a consolidated basis, claiming that itwould be too burdensome for most institutions. Another four commentersrequested the Board provide for extensions of time, ranging from 20 to45 days, for filing monthly and quarterly reports in order to compensatefor the extra burden presented by consolidated reporting, one of thesewarning that consolidated reports produced on the current time frame mayprove inaccurate. Finally, five commenters addressed an issue that does not arise under theseproposals but is suggested by one of the accounting issues_that of thepossibility of eventual consolidation for purposes of determining requisitelevels of regulatory capital. Four of these commenters argued against suchconsolidated calculation, asserting, for example, that capital positionscannot be monitored on a consolidated basis and that consolidation wouldinhibit parent institutions from investing in finance subsidiaries engagingin certain activities. One commenter suggested that different sorts ofsubsidiaries could be treated either on a consolidated or on an unconsolidatedbasis, depending upon the nature and degree of risk to the FSLIC of thesubsidiary's activities.The Board believes that consolidated reporting is clearly required by theCEBA because it is consistent with GAAP and Bank RAP. However, after considerationof the concerns raised by commenters about the increased burden on institutionsdue to consolidated reporting, the Board has determined to alter the proposalin the following way. In order to afford sufficient time for insured institutionsto develop systems for producing consolidated reports for submission tothe Board, the Board has extended for one year the time for compliancewith this requirement, so that quarterly consolidated reports must be filedfor all periods beginning on or after January 1, 1990. At this time, theBoard has decided to take under advisement the issues of whether monthlyreports should be filed on a consolidated basis, and whether extensionsof the normal filing periods should be granted for consolidated reports.The Board's determinations on these questions will be set forth in theinstructions to the Thrift Financial Report.\6\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ As discussed in the preamble to the final rule on classificationof assets, it should be noted that the consolidated reporting requirementis not meant to foreclose an institution from limiting losses attributableto a subsidiary to its equity investment therein, where the institutionestablishes that it is legally insulated from the subsidiary under applicablecorporation law. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1296 to be published in the final rulessection of the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. With respect to those comments that addressed the possibility of eventualconsolidation for purposes of the Board's minimum regulatory capital requirementregulation, 12 CFR 563.13 (1987), the Board declines to respond to thosecomments at this time. As was noted in the proposal, any changes in theway an institution calculates its minimum capital requirements would beimplemented in conjunction with any proposed changes to section 563.13,and commenters will have ample opportunity to address that issue at thattime. C. The Components of Regulatory Capital The majority of commenters supported the proposed amendments to the definitionof regulatory capital but suggested several modifications to the proposal.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Equity Capital </ITAG>Under the proposal and the DRC regulation, equity capital would be determinedin accordance with GAAP and would represent the difference between therecorded values of an institution's assets and its liabilities, as determinedunder GAAP. <T3>See </T3>FASB <T3>Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts (``SFAS'') No. 6 </T3>(Dec.1985). In light of the Board's decision today to permit institutions to includedeferred loan losses and gains on their unaudited financial statementsand reports and to include the difference between investments in sharesof open-end management companies accounted for pursuant to GAAP and theirhistorical cost, as discussed more fully below, through 1993, the resultingcapital figure would no longer be considered GAAP equity capital. Consequently,today's final rule amends this component of regulatory capital to reflectthe inclusion of deferred loan losses and gains on the unaudited financialstatements of insured institutions and the specialized treatment of investmentsin mutual funds. Specifically, this category of regulatory capital is referredto as ``modified equity capital'' and represents GAAP equity capital plusloan losses and gains deferred pursuant to 12 CFR 563c.14 provided thatan institution has elected to defer such losses or gains prior to January1, 1988, and the difference between investments in shares of open-end managementcompanies accounted for pursuant to GAAP and their historical cost. TheBoard notes that institutions must refer to this component as ``modifiedequity capital'' on their unaudited financial statements and reports, includingcounter statements, so as not to mislead the public with respect to theinstitution's financial presentation. The Board emphasizes that beginningon January 1, 1994, equity capital will be determined in accordance withGAAP with no deviations. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Definitional Capital </ITAG>Several commenters addressed the subject of subordinated debt. Four commentersnoted that the CEBA's inclusion of subordinated debt in regulatory capitalwill assist institutions in raising needed additional capital and at thesame time protect the FSLIC. One commenter strenuously urged the Boardto include subordinated debt in regulatory capital without phasing downits value as it approaches maturity, asserting that Congress never intendedsuch a reductional phase-down and quoting Congressman Hubbard's remarksof August 3, 1987 in support of that proposition. Section 402 of the CEBA provides that ``[n]o provision of this section[404] shall affect the authority of the Corporation to authorize insuredinstitutions to utilize subordinated debt * * * in meeting reserve andother regulatory requirements.'' CEBA, tit. IV, secs. 402(b), 415(d). NotwithstandingCongressman Hubbard's remarks, the Senate Report accompanying S. 790, whichcontained the uniform accounting standards provision that was adopted withoutsubstantive amendment in the CEBA, explicitly states that the Board hasflexibility in determining whether subordinated debt may be included asregulatory capital. While the Board recognizes that subordinated debt affordsprotection to the FSLIC in the event of insolvency of an insured institution,the Board does not believe that such debt should be treated as the equivalentof retained earnings or capital stock for purposes of complying with theBoard's regulatory capital requirements. Accordingly, the Board's currenttreatment of subordinated debt reflects its views that the use of an amortizationschedule that reduces the amount of subordinated debt includable as regulatorycapital as that approaches maturity appropriately recognizes that subordinateddebt is a liability that must be repaid upon maturity. The Board continuesto believe that the amortization schedule takes into account the valueof subordinated debt to institutions and the FSLIC and, consequently, thefinal rule permits institutions to include subordinated debt in regulatorycapital pursuant to the current amortization schedule set forth in andSection;561.13(b)(2). Also as part of definitional capital, the CEBA authorizes general lossallowances to be included as regulatory capital in the same manner as thefederal banking agencies permit. Two commenters supported the Board's proposedtreatment of this item, but one maintained that loss allowances shouldnot be treated as a capital item because it would contradict GAAP.The Board recognizes that general loss allowances are not included as capitalunder GAAP. However, the CEBA explicitly authorizes such loss allowancesto be included as regulatory capital in the same manner permitted by thefederal banking agencies. Since the federal banking agencies currentlypermit general loss allowances to be included as a component of a bank'sprimary capital, the Board is required by the CEBA to permit insured institutionsto include such allowances as regulatory capital at least until the FinancingCorporation issues the last obligations under its borrowing authority.<T3>See </T3>CEBA, tit. IV, secs. 402, 415(a)(5); sec. 416(a). As discussedin the proposal, however, the federal banking agencies are currently reconsideringwhether general loss allowances should be included as capital.\7\<NOTE/> Consequently, the Board may revisit this issue at a laterdate. For the present, however, the final rule permits institutions toinclude general loss allowances as a component of regulatory capital.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ <T3>See </T3>52 FR 5119 (Feb. 19, 1987) (Federal Reserve Board, ``FRB'');52 FR 23045 (June 17, 1987) (Comptroller of the Currency); 52 FR 11476(Apr. 9, 1987) (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation). In the proposal, the Board announced its preliminary decision consistentwith Bank RAP to allow limited life preferred stock (also called nonpermanentpreferred stock or redeemable preferred stock) with an original maturityof 25 years to be included as a component of definitional capital, discountingsuch stock as it approaches maturity. Eight commenters addressed this item.Two commenters objected to the minimum maturity term of 25 years, claimingthat it would alter the character of the stock and make accessing capitalmarkets extremely difficult. Three commenters requested the Board to consideraltering the amortization schedule for these items to conform with thatof subordinated debt to which, it is claimed, it is nearly identical. Onecommenter suggested retaining the current regulatory treatment of limitedlife preferred stock, and another recommended retaining the current treatmentuntil 1993. After carefully considering the issues raised by the commenters, the Boardhas determined not to adopt the treatment of preferred stock outlined inthe proposal. As discussed in the proposal, the Board had preliminarilydetermined to track the treatment of limited life preferred stock thatis currently proposed by the federal banking agencies in order to be consistentwith Bank RAP. After reconsidering this issue, in light of the commentsand fact that the federal banking agencies have not yet adopted their capitalproposals as final rules, the Board has determined to retain its currenttreatment of limited life preferred stock. In the Board's view, its actiontoday is consistent with the intent of the CEBA in that the legislativehistory makes clear that Congress did not intend for the Board and thefederal banking agencies to adopt identical regulatory frameworks; ratherit left the Board the discretion and authority to determine the componentsof capital for insured institutions. <T3>See </T3>S. Rep. No. 19 at 55. Thus, the final rule provides that insuredinstitutions may continue to include as regulatory capital limited lifepreferred stock pursuant to the requirements set forth in andSection; 561.13(b)(3)(i)and (ii). The Board notes that because it is retaining its current treatmentof this item, there is no need to provide for grandfather or sunset provisions.In response to the Board's specific request for comments concerning whetherand to what degree mandatorily convertible securities should be includedas a component of definitional capital, four commenters responded. Onecommenter suggested they be included on the same basis as that permittedby the banking agencies, two others urged that they be included in regulatorycapital in the same way that subordinated debt is included. One commenternoted that since this item converts to forms of permanent equity, it shouldbe counted fully as regulatory capital. One commenter, an investment banking firm that raises capital for thriftsand banks, submitted an extensive comment, arguing that the mandatory convertibledebt instruments it manages should be included in regulatory capital eventhough they carry a maturity of 10 years. This commenter also urged thatthese instruments should not be discounted as they approach maturity. Therationale presented by this commenter is that these instruments are issuedalong with mandatory stock purchase contracts. This combination, the commenterasserted, serves as the functional equivalent of capital, a buffer againstloss to the FSLIC and a permanent addition to the issuer's capital base.After carefully considering the commenters' remarks, the Board has determinedto permit institutions to include mandatory convertible securities as regulatorycapital. Mandatory convertible securities are subordinated debt instrumentsthat are eventually transformed into common or perpetual preferred stockwithin a specified period of time. Generally, there are two types of mandatoryconvertible securities: ``equity contract notes''_securities that obligethe holder to take common or perpetual preferred stock of the issuer inlieu of cash for repayment of principal, and ``equity commitment notes''_securities that are redeemable only with the proceeds from the sale ofcommon or preferred stock. Under the capital adequacy guidelines of the federal banking agencies,bank holding companies are permitted to include both equity contract notesand equity commitment notes as primary capital, whereas banks are onlypermitted to include equity contract notes as primary capital but may includeequity commitment notes as secondary capital. <T3>See </T3>12 CFR 225.42 App. A (1987). After carefully considering thisissue, the Board has determined to permit insured institutions to includeboth equity contract notes and equity commitment notes as regulatory capital.In the Board's view, these securities provide the FSLIC and insured institutionsthe same degree of protection from loss as do other types of subordinateddebt. Specifically, they are subordinated to other obligations of the insuredinstitution and their medium-to-long term nature makes them a reliablebuffer against loss. Moreover, the Board believes that mandatory convertiblesecurities are an important vehicle for increasing capital and therebyprovide greater flexibility to thrifts in meeting capital requirements.The Board also believes, however, that for supervisory purposes it is necessaryto provide guidelines by which institutions may issue such securities andinclude such securities as regulatory capital. Accordingly, the Board hasdirected the Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision (``ORPOS'')to issue a supervisory memorandum that will set forth the criteria whichmust be met in order for institutions to include mandatory convertiblesecurities as capital. The Board wishes to note that such criteria mayinclude percentage limitations and/or other types of limitations for thesetypes of securities. Thus, under today's final rule, insured institutions may include mandatoryconvertible securities as regulatory capital as of January 1, 1989, providedthat such instruments meet the criteria set forth by the ORPOS in a supervisorymemorandum. The Board notes, however, that institutions may not includemandatory convertible securities as regulatory capital prior to such timeas ORPOS issues a supervisory memorandum setting forth the criteria forincluding such securities as capital or January 1, 1989, whichever is earlier.The Board also proposed that pledged certificates and other nonwithdrawableaccounts be eliminated as a component of regulatory capital as of January1, 1989, because they are not included as capital under either GAAP orBank RAP. Three commenters endorsed the Board's proposal to eliminate theseitems, while affording grandfathering treatment to those included in capitalprior to January 1, 1989. One commenter, however, urged that these itemsnot be eliminated because they are buffers against loss and that they shouldbe included, at least partially, in regulatory capital, and another suggestedthat pledged certificates temporarily be retained as a component of regulatorycapital for <T3>de novo </T3>institutions in order to facilitate new services. After reconsidering this issue, the Board has determined to continue topermit institutions to include pledged certificates and other nonwithdrawableaccounts in regulatory capital, without a sunset date. The Board's decisionis based, in part, on the fact that these instruments are very similarto subordinated debt and limited life preferred stock in the degree towhich they provide a buffer against loss for insured institutions and theFSLIC. Moreover, in the Board's view, inclusion of these instruments inregulatory capital is especially important to mutual institutions whoseability to access the capital markets, short of converting to stock formor issuing subordinated debt at prohibitive costs, is limited. While theBoard acknowledges that there have been very few mutual institutions charteredin the past few years, pledged deposits are important to and provide abuffer from loss for newly chartered mutual institutions. Thus, the Boardbelieves that retaining pledged deposits as a component of capital, withoutrequiring that such instruments be eliminated from capital as of 1993,is in the best interests of the FSLIC and the thrift industry as a whole.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. RAR Components of Regulatory Capital </ITAG>In the proposal, the Board proposed to eliminate prospectively RAR forloan origination and commitment fees, options transactions, valuation allowances,and uncollectible interest, and to provide grandfathering treatment forcertain of these items. Additionally, in the DRC Regulation, the Boardeliminated RAR for the sale of real estate by the institution or its subsidiary,for futures transactions, and for the accretion of discounts and the amortizationof premiums on securities; it also provided grandfathering treatment forthese items. Under the DRC regulation, as modified by the proposal, institutionsare permitted to include in regulatory capital the amount representingthe cumulative RAR/GAAP differential for those grandfathered items calculatedunder RAR prior to January 1, 1989. However, institutions would not bepermitted to use RAR in calculating these items after January 1, 1989.Several commenters contended that the inclusion of the RAR/GAAP differentialin regulatory capital is unduly burdensome on institutions because thecomputation of the differential would require institutions to maintainseparate RAR and GAAP accounting systems. One commenter asserted that inmost cases the differential will be inconsequential and thus urged theBoard to require that all transactions after January 1, 1989, be handledon a GAAP basis and all transactions before that date be allowed to runtheir course under RAR. The Board continues to believe that all financial statements and reportsby insured institutions should be prepared in accordance with GAAP (withthe exception for deferred loan losses and gains noted above) on January1, 1989. While in some cases the RAR/GAAP differentials may in fact beinconsequential, the Board is reluctant to continue to permit institutionsto report transactions in accordance with RAR. Moreover, because institutionsare currently required to reconcile their RAR capital to GAAP capital,institutions already must keep two sets of books; consequently, this regulationdoes not impose any additional burden on institutions. Under the final rule adopted today, institutions are required, effectiveJanuary 1, 1989, to account for the above-referenced items in accordancewith GAAP and to report such items in accordance with GAAP on their financialstatements. For purposes of computing regulatory capital, the final rulepermits institutions to include the RAR/GAAP differential for those grandfathereditems as a component of regulatory capital. The Board notes, however, thatinstitutions are not required to include the RAR/GAAP differential as acomponent of regulatory capital. Thus, an institution may, prior to January1, 1989, make an irrevocable election to report all pre-January 1, 1989,transactions in accordance with GAAP and not to compute or add to regulatorycapital the RAR/GAAP differential for those transactions. Institutionsmust make their election with the filing of their first quarterly reportfor the first quarter of 1989 and will be bound by such election for allreporting periods thereafter. The Board wishes to emphasize, however, thatregardless of which option it chooses, an institution may not, after January1, 1989, report any of these grandfathered items on its financial statementsor reports in accordance with RAR. a. <T3>Loan Origination and Commitment Fees. </T3>With respect to the Board'sproposal to require insured institutions to account for loan originationand commitment fees in accordance with GAAP and Statement of FinancialAccounting Standards (``SFAS'') No. 91 as of January 1, 1989, nine commentersresponded. Two commenters urged that, because SFAS No. 91 has an effectivedate of December 15, 1987, either the Board should give insured institutionsthe option to account for loan origination and commitment fees in accordancewith SFAS No. 91 by that date or it should adopt SFAS No. 91 simultaneouslywith the FASB. Another commenter stressed the well-conceived basis of SFASNo. 91 and its importance to the industry. However, five commenters strenuouslyobjected to the Board's adoption of a standard that is in accordance withSFAS No. 91, contending, for example, that it will necessitate time-consumingand expensive accounting procedures that will require extra time to implementbeyond the January 1, 1989 projected date and that it is a misguided andlogically flawed standard that should be resisted by the Board. One commentersuggested that RAR accounting for loan fees be permitted to continue untilJanuary 1, 1989, without the elimination of the differential between RARand GAAP in 1993, because in most cases the differential amount will beinconsequential. Another commenter expressed strong opposition to the inclusionof the RAR/GAAP differential because the computation of that differentialwould require institutions to maintain separate RAR and GAAP accountingsystems, which would be unduly burdensome. This commenter suggested thatthe Board require that all transactions after January 1, 1989, be handledon a GAAP basis and all transactions before that date be allowed to runtheir course under RAR. Under this scenario, it is claimed, most RAR loanfees will have run their course by 1993. While the Board understands the concerns raised by the commenters, it hasnevertheless determined to require insured institutions to account forall loan origination and commitment fees incurred after January 1, 1989in accordance with SFAS No. 91. As the Board discussed in the proposal,it believes that its current regulation for loan fees does not result inas conservative a measure of capital as produced under SFAS No. 91. Moreover,the Board believes its approach today is consistent with that of the otherfederal banking agencies, who currently require banks to account for loanfees under Pre-SFAS No. 91 GAAP, but who have indicated, based on informaldiscussions, that they intend to follow SFAS No. 91. Accordingly, the Boardbelieves that its decision is consistent with the intent of the CEBA, whichmandates that the Board's accounting requirements follow either GAAP orBank RAP. In response to several commenters' concerns, however, the Board will permitinstitutions to begin to account for loan fees under SFAS No. 91 at a dateearlier than January 1, 1989, if they so desire. Moreover, institutionsmay elect to account for all loan fees transactions currently on theirbooks in accordance with GAAP and not include the RAR/GAAP differentialas a component of regulatory capital. The Board wishes to emphasize, however,that regardless of which election an institution makes, it may not, asof January 1, 1989, continue to report loan fees on its financial statementsor reports in accordance with RAR. Finally, the Board notes that it is amending andSection; 563.23-3 to deleteparagraphs rendered unnecessary in light of the Board's decision todayto require institutions to account for loan fees in accordance with GAAP.Specifically, since SFAS No. 91 defines and prescribes accounting treatmentfor charges, credits, and sales or payoffs of loans, the current definitionsand procedures set forth in andSection; 563.23-3 are no longer necessary.b. <T3>Options Transactions. </T3>With respect to the Board's proposal torequire insured institutions to account for options transactions in accordancewith GAAP, six commenters submitted their views. In the proposal, the Boardacknowledged that GAAP is still evolving in this area and has not yet beendefined by a specific FASB Statement of Financial Accounting Standards.All six commenters suggested that the Board continue its current treatmentof options transactions or provide further guidance in this area, untilsome authoritative pronouncements are issued by the FASB.In response to the concerns raised by the commenters, the Board has determinedto continue to provide guidance to institutions with respect to accountingfor options transactions. Thus, institutions may continue to account foroptions transactions in accordance with the guidelines set forth in 12CFR 563.17-5(g)(1987). It should be noted that the Board currently hasoutstanding a proposed rule on accounting for options and that a finalrule may change existing accounting procedures in this area. <T3>See </T3>50 FR 53336 (Dec. 31, 1985). This proposed options rule, ifadopted in final form, would effectively eliminate any differences thatexist between RAR and GAAP as it is currently evolving. Any final actiontaken on that proposal would be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. While the Board has determined to continue toprovide guidance in this area for the present, it should be noted that,at such time as GAAP is defined by an authoritative body such as the FASBor the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the Board willrevisit this issue. The Board notes that because GAAP is undefined for options transactions,the Board, by its action today, is not creating a RAR deviation from GAAP.In fact, as noted above, the treatment of options transactions under theBoard's current regulations and the outstanding proposal is very similarto the treatment of such transactions under GAAP, as it is currently evolving.Thus, the Board is not providing for an RAR/GAAP differential for thisitem since institutions may account for options transactions in accordancewith RAR on their financial statements and reports. c. <T3>Valuation Allowances and Uncollectible Interest. </T3>The Board proposedto eliminate RAR treatment for accounting for uncollectible interest andto delete the RAR/GAAP differential component of regulatory capital forboth uncollectible interest and valuation allowances. While no commentsaddress this aspect of the proposal, the Board wishes to take this opportunityto clarify the final rule. The Board today also is adopting final rules governing classification ofassets and appraisal standards consistent with the practices of the otherfederal banking agencies. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. Nos. 87-1296, 87-1295, to be published in the finalrules section of the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> As described in those final rules, there shouldnot be significant RAR/GAAP differentials for establishing loss allowances.Thus, under today's final rule, this component is no longer appropriatelyincluded in regulatory capital. Accordingly, institutions will be requiredto report loan loss allowances on their financial statements and reportsin accordance with 12 CFR 561.16c; 563.17-2; and 571.1a, as amended todayby Board Res. No. 87-1296. The Board notes that the asset classificationregulation also applies to the accrual of interest on delinquent loanswhich must, in accordance with SFAS No. 5, be reserved when it is probablethat the interest will not be received. <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Accounting Forbearances </ITAG>On the issue of the continued inclusion of accounting forbearances as acomponent of regulatory capital, three commenters responded. One commenterapproved of the Board's treatment of this item, and the other commenteropposed continued inclusion, claiming that, in order to promote uniformityin accounting, specifically granted forbearances from enforcement shouldbe utilized instead. One commenter suggested that, rather than bind institutionsto a 1993 date, the original terms of an accounting forbearance shouldgovern and should be afforded grandfathering treatment. The Board continues to believe that accounting forbearances should be includedas a component of regulatory capital. As the Board noted in the DRC Regulation,the Board believes that such forbearances have often been required to facilitatethe acquisition of a troubled institution and consequently are directlyrelevant to effective supervision and monitoring of risk to the FSLIC.<T3> See </T3>52 FR at 18347. Thus, the Board believes that its decisionto continue to include accounting forbearances as a component of regulatorycapital will benefit both the thrift industry and the FSLIC. The Board wishes to emphasize again that this category of regulatory capitalincludes only accounting forbearances, <T3>i.e.,</T3> deviations from RAR or GAAP for specific accounting transactionsthat were previously authorized or that may be authorized in the future,by the Corporation, the Board, or the Principal Supervisory Agents. Institutionsmay not include as regulatory capital those forbearances granted by theBoard or its designee with respect to an institution's minimum regulatorycapital requirement, whether granted under the capital forbearance regulation,pursuant to a merger or acquisition, or by some other means. Finally, it should be noted that this category of regulatory capital isnot subject to a sunset date. Therefore, it is the Board's intent thatany accounting forbearances granted by the Board or its designee may continueto be included in regulatory capital until the term of the specific accountingforbearance expires.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Sunset Date </ITAG>The Board proposed that, consistent with the CEBA, permission to includecertain items as components of regulatory capital would sunset on December31, 1993. The Board specifically solicited comment concerning whether,instead of a sudden elimination of these items in 1993, it should graduallyphase out these items by a percentage reduction each year until 1993. Eight commenters responded on this point. Two commenters suggested thata phase-down schedule, implemented at the irrevocable option of each insuredinstitution, would be the most appropriate and the least disruptive alternative.Six commenters expressed general support for the idea of a gradual phase-inof GAAP accounting. Three commenters disagreed with a phase-in, advocatinga simple elimination of these items in 1993, one advocating special supervisoryoversight of certain institutions to ensure that proper steps to instituteGAAP accounting procedures are taken during the 5-year period. After carefully considering the comments, the Board has determined to permitinstitutions to make an irrevocable election on January 1, 1989, as towhether they wish to phase-down the amount of grandfathered items includablein regulatory capital through 1993 or whether they wish to include 100percent of grandfathered items as regulatory capital until 1993. Institutionsmust make their election with the filing of the quarterly report for thefirst quarter of 1989 and will be bound by such election for all reportingperiods thereafter. Institutions that elect the phase-down approach willbe permitted to include 100 percent of grandfathered items in regulatorycapital during 1989, 80 percent in 1990, 60 percent in 1991, 40 percentin 1992, 20 percent in 1993 and 0 percent in 1994. In the Board's view,its action today gives management the flexibility to determine which optionis most appropriate for a particular institution. D. Plans for Delayed Compliance The Board proposed to amend 12 CFR 563.23-3 (1987) to permit institutionsto file plans for delayed compliance with the uniform accounting standardsthat fully explain why compliance will not be feasible within the prescribedtimetable. In the preamble to the proposal, the Board cautioned that suchplans would be authorized only with respect to particular aspects of theaccounting requirements and only on an infrequent basis. Although one commenteracknowledged that the proposed rule sufficiently recognized that institutionsmay need to request delayed compliance if the imposed time schedule isnot feasible, four other commenters urged the Board to adopt a much moreliberal and flexible stance in the granting of such plans. The Board has considered these comments and determined that the final rulein respect of plans for compliance should remain as proposed. The Boarddoes not intend to demonstrate inflexibility in this regard and has indeedliberalized other aspects of the proposed rule by, for example, allowinga reporting of deferred loan losses on unaudited financial statements untilthe end of 1993. The Board remains convinced, however, that the bettercourse is a requirement of demonstration by an institution of persuasivereasons and genuine need for delayed compliance with respect to specificaspects of the rule. In this way, the Board believes, the mandate of CEBAwith respect to the adoption of uniform GAAP-based accounting standardsis most faithfully fulfilled. As the Board stated in the proposal, institutions that file plans seekingdelayed compliance not because of an inability to meet the Board requirementsbut because of an unwillingness to prepare financial statements and reportsand to report capital components as required by Board regulations shouldbe aware that such plans will not be approved by the Board. The Board continuesto believe that achieving uniform accounting based on GAAP at the earliestpossible date is in the best interest of the thrift industry and the public.E. Miscellaneous Issues The DRC Regulation provides that insured institutions must record marketableequity securities in accordance with GAAP and SFAS No. 12. Although notactually a part of this proposal, three commenters submitted remarks onthis issue. One commenter suggested that the Board clarify that GAAP treatmentunder SFAS No. 12 for all non-34 Act companies is triggered on January1, 1989, and not before. Two commenters requested that the Board considergranting a regulatory capital exception for mutual funds, permitting institutionsto carry such items at historical cost. One commenter addressed the treatment of ``liquid asset mutual funds.''The portfolios of these funds consist entirely of debt obligations, suchas U.S. government securities that would qualify as liquid assets pursuantto 12 CFR 523.10(g). An investment in this type of mutual fund also qualifiesas a liquid asset under that section. The commenter noted that GAAP permitsdebt obligations of the United States to be carried at cost if the entityhas the intent and the ability to hold the securities to maturity. SFASNo. 12 requires marketable equity securities, such as mutual funds, tobe carried at the lesser of cost or market. Thus, while a thrift couldinvest directly in U.S. government securities and carry that investmentat cost, if the thrift were to invest in a mutual fund the portfolio ofwhich consisted entirely of the same U.S. government securities, the investment,under SFAS No. 12, would have to be carried at the lower of cost or market.The commenter argued that this different accounting treatment would causethrifts to invest directly in U.S. government securities for liquiditypurposes rather than diversifying into investments in mutual funds holdingU.S. government securities. The commenter asserted that SFAS No. 12 shouldnot apply to such liquid assets mutual funds. The commenter urged the Boardeither to (1) value investments in such open-end management investmentcompanies at cost instead of in accordance with GAAP, as set forth in SFASNo. 12 or (2) to add the difference, if any, between cost and market value(if lower than original cost) of such investments as a component of regulatorycapital.The Board has thoroughly considered the arguments proferred by these commentersand has determined that all marketable equity securities, except for investmentsin the shares of open-end management investment companies, as defined inandSection; 523.10 (``liquid asset mutual funds''), shall be accounted forin accordance with GAAP, as set forth in SFAS No. 12. The Board recognizes that the CEBA mandates that the Board follow GAAPor Bank RAP in determining uniform accounting standards for thrifts. Inthis regard, both GAAP and Bank RAP require that investments in marketableequity securities, including mutual funds, be accounted for in accordancewith SFAS No. 12. However, the CEBA also grants the Board the discretionto phase in GAAP requirements over a period of time ending no later than1993. After giving careful consideration to the issues raised by thesecommenters, the Board has amended the final rule in the following way.The Board has determined, as part of the gradual phase-in to GAAP, to permitinstitutions to include on their unaudited financial reports and statementsinvestments in shares of liquid asset mutual funds recorded at historicalcost through year end 1993. This exception applies only to those liquidasset mutual funds that meet the requirements of andSection; 523.10(g)(8);all marketable equity securities, including other types of mutual funds,must be reported in accordance with SFAS No. 12 for all periods beginningon or after January 1, 1989. The Board wishes to emphasize, however, thatas of January 1, 1994 institutions must account for shares in these liquidasset mutual funds in accordance with SFAS No. 12. Three commenters voiced concerns concerning the impact of the RegulatoryFlexibility Act on the proposals. One commenter asserted that the CEBAwas not intended to grant forbearance from compliance with the Act andthat a 30-day comment period was insufficient for small institutions withoutaccess to the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. On this point, the Board wishes to clarify thatsince the enactment of the CEBA on August 10, 1987, all insured institutionshave been on notice that the Board had been ordered by Congress to promulgateregulations that would move the industry toward uniform GAAP-based accountingstandards and that notice to the industry was reiterated when the Boardissued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking. Board Res. No. 87-941,52 FR 33595 (Sept. 4, 1987). Moreover, the Board was admonished by Congressthat these regulations would have an effective date December 31, 1987.Thus, the timetable set by Congress gave the Board no choice but to allowa maximum comment period of 30 days. Two other commenters suggested thatthe uniform accounting standards pose particular burdens for small institutions,one commenter noting that the standards will be overly taxing of a smallinstitution's limited personnel. The Board's regulatory flexibility analysisresponding to this concern appears below. One commenter asserted that one issue of RAP/GAAP inconsistency was leftout of the proposals_that of the conflict between SFAS No. 34 and the Board'smemorandum T-59-3a's six-month rule; this commenter advocated the eliminationof the T-Memorandum's position. After considering this commenter's remarks,the Board has determined that GAAP as set forth in SFAS No. 34, will applyto capitalization of interest on construction projects. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Description of the Final Rule </ITAG>The final rule requires that all unaudited financial statements issuedby insured institutions, including counter-statements, and all financialreports filed with the Board, for all periods beginning on or after January1, 1989, shall be prepared in accordance with GAAP except that insuredinstitutions may report loan losses and gains deferred pursuant to andSection;563.14c and liquid asset mutual fund investments at cost in the body ofsuch statements and reports. Audited financial statements must be preparedin accordance with GAAP with no deviations. All financial statements andreports filed on or after January 1, 1989, shall include, in a footnote,a full and fair reconciliation of modified equity capital (or GAAP capitalif an audited statement) with regulatory capital. For all periods beginning on or after January 1, 1990, institutions mustfile financial statements and reports to the Board on a consolidated basis.The Thrift Financial Report will contain instructions for the format forsuch consolidated reports. The final rule defines regulatory capital as the sum of (1) modified equitycapital; (2) definitional capital, (3) grandfathered RAR components ofcapital, and (4) accounting forbearances. A. Modified Equity Capital Modified equity capital represents the difference between the recordedvalues of an institution's assets and liabilities, as determined in accordancewith GAAP, plus the amount of loan losses and gains deferred pursuant toandSection; 563c.14, and the difference between investments in liquid assetmutual funds under GAAP and their historical cost.In computing modified equity capital, institutions may rely on the proceduresset forth in 12 CFR 563.17-5 (1987) for options transactions and thoseset forth at 12 CFR 561.16c, 563.17-2, and 571.1a for establishing lossallowances. B. Definitional Capital Definitional capital includes qualifying subordinated debt, qualifyingredeemable preferred stock, qualifying mandatory convertible securities,income capital certificates, mutual capital certificates, net worth certificates,accumulated income payments on capital certificates not due and payable,allowances for losses except specific allowances, and pledged depositsand other nonwithdrawable accounts (excluding any treasury shares heldby the insured institution) to the extent such nonwithdrawable accountsare not included in modified equity capital. C. Grandfathered RAR Components of Capital This component of regulatory capital includes only the components of RARpermitted prior to January 1, 1989, for which further elections cannotbe made. Thus, the final rule permits an insured institution to includein regulatory capital the amount representing the cumulative RAR/GAAP differentialfor specific grandfathered items, provided that the insured institutioncalculated and reported such items under RAR prior to January 1, 1989.An insured institution may include in its regulatory capital the amountrepresenting the RAR/GAAP differential for the following items: accountingfor the sales of real estate by the institution or its subsidiary, futurestransactions, appraised equity capital, loan origination and commitmentfees, and accretion of discounts and amortization of premiums on securities.The Board notes that under the final rule an institution may elect notto include the RAR/GAAP differential as a component of regulatory capitalif it so desires. Such an election must be made by the filing of the firstquarterly report of 1989 and is irrevocable. The Board emphasizes, however,that institutions may not, after January 1, 1989, report these grandfathereditems on their financial statements pursuant to RAR. The RAR/GAAP differentialis only computed for purposes of regulatory capital. Finally, the final rule provides that the ability of insured institutionsto include the RAR/GAAP differential for these items as a component ofregulatory capital sunsets on December 31, 1993. The sunset provisionsare described in more detail below. D. Accounting Forbearances Insured institutions may also include in their regulatory capital accountingforbearances previously authorized, or that may be authorized in the future,by the Corporation, the Board, or the Principal Supervisory Agents. Institutionsmay not include as regulatory capital those forbearances granted by theBoard or its designee with respect to an institution's minimum regulatorycapital requirements. E. Sunset Date The final rule provides that, as of December 31, 1993, insured institutionsmay no longer include as regulatory capital the RAR/GAAP differential forappraised equity capital, sales of real estate by the institution or subsidiary,futures transactions, loan origination and commitment fees, and amortizationof premiums and accretion of discounts on securities. Additionally, theability to report investments in liquid asset mutual funds at cost sunsets.Under the final rule, an institution must make an irrevocable electionupon the filing of its first quarterly report of 1989 as to whether itopts for immediate elimination of these items from regulatory capital onDecember 31, 1993 or pro rata elimination of these items pursuant to thefollowing schedule: 100 percent includable as regulatory capital in 1989;80 per cent in 1990; 60 per cent in 1991; 40 per cent in 1992; 20 per centin 1993; and 0 per cent for 1994 and all years thereafter. F. Elimination of Certain RAR Procedures The final rule eliminates altogether prospective authority for insuredinstitutions to rely on the following accounting procedures heretoforepermitted by the Board and representing departures from GAAP. First, the Board's accounting regulations, 12 CFR 563.23-1(f) (1987), areeliminated, and insured institutions and their service corporations mustaccount for the sales of real estate developed by the institution or itsservice corporation in accordance with GAAP. <T3>See </T3>SFAS No. 66. Second, insured institutions must record marketableequity securities in accordance with GAAP, except that investments in liquidasset mutual funds may be carried at cost through year end 1993.<T3> See</T3> SFAS No. 12. Third, the final rule amends 12 CFR 563.17-4(g)(1987) to require institutions to determine gains or losses arising fromfutures transactions in accordance with GAAP. See SFAS No. 80. Fourth,12 CFR 563-23-1 (1987) is amended to require that premiums on securitiesbe amortized and that discounts on securities be accreted in accordancewith GAAP. See SFAS No. 65. Fifth, the final rule eliminates the Board's regulations governing accountingfor loan origination and commitment fees, 12 CFR 563.23-1(g), (1987) andrequires insured institutions to account for such transactions in accordancewith GAAP. <T3>See </T3>SFAS No. 91. Sixth, the rule eliminates 12 CFR 563c.11 (1987) with respect to accountingfor uncollectible interest and requires insured institutions to accountfor this item in accordance with GAAP. <T3>See </T3>SFAS, No. 5. G. Plans for Delayed Compliance The final rule provides that plans for delayed compliance may be filedby insured institutions with their Principal Supervisory Agents. Such plansmust be detailed and explicit, and include the specific components of theuniform accounting standards with which it is unable to comply; the dateand the method by which it proposes to comply with that component priorto December 31, 1993; and any other information the institution deems relevant.In the event a plan for compliance is disapproved in whole or part, thefinal rule provides for an appeal to the Corporation within 30 days ofthe disapproval, which will be acted upon in accordance with the guidelinesset forth at 12 CFR 571.12 (1987). <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Effective Date of Final Rule </ITAG>The final rule becomes effective on January 1, 1989, as of which date allinsured institutions shall compute their regulatory capital pursuant toandSection; 561.13. With respect to the GAAP reporting requirement, all unauditedfinancial statements issued by insured institutions, all financial reportsrequired to be filed with the Board, and all counter statements preparedby insured institutions for all periods beginning on or after January 1,1989 shall be prepared in accordance with GAAP, except that loan lossesand gains deferred pursuant to 12 CFR 563c.14 prior to January 1, 1988,may be reported in the body of such financial statements and reports, andinvestments in liquid asset mutual funds may be carried at cost throughyear end 1993. Effective for all periods beginning on or after January1, 1990, institutions shall prepare financial statements and reports ona consolidated basis pursuant to the instructions that will be set forthin the Thrift Financial Report. Additionally, all such financial statementsand reports must include a footnote reconciliation of modified equity capitalto regulatory capital.Although the effective date of this final rule is January 1, 1989, insuredinstitutions may if they so desire begin accounting for and reporting alltransactions in accordance with GAAP anytime prior thereto. However, suchan election is irrevocable. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 604,the Board is providing the following regulatory flexibility analysis: 1. <T3>Need for and Objectives of the Rule. </T3>These elements are incorporatedabove in ``<T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>''. 2. <T3>Issues Raised by Comments and Agency Assessment and Response. </T3>Theseelements are incorporated above in ``<T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>''. 3. <T3>Significant Alternatives Minimizing Small-Entity Impact and AgencyResponse. </T3>The Small Business Administration defines a small financialinstitution as ``a commercial bank or savings and loan association, theassets of which, for the preceding fiscal year, do not exceed $100 million.''13 CFR 121.13(a). Therefore, small entities to which the final rule appliesinclude insured institutions which had assets totaling $100 million orless as of December 31, 1986, or 1,651 institutions. Because uniformity of accounting practices is the fundamental principleunderlying both this rule and the relevant provisions of the CEBA thatit implements, to treat small institutions differently would be thoroughlyinconsistent with this objective. Therefore, the final rule treats allinstitutions identically regardless of their size. The final rule incorporatesseveral elements intended to grant flexibility to all institutions as explainedmore fully in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Parts 561, 563, and 563c </ITAG>Accounting, Bank deposit insurance, Investments, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Savings and loan associations, Securities. Accordingly, the Board hereby amends Parts 561, 563, and 563c SubchapterD, Chapter V, Title 12, Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER D_FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 561_DEFINITIONS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for 12 CFR Part 561 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 1, 47 Stat. 725, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1421 <T3>et seq.</T3>); sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5B, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec.4, 80 Stat. 824, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425b); sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, asamended (12 U.S.C. 1437); sec. 2, 48 Stat. 128, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1462);sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs. 401-407, 48 Stat.1255-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1730); sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1730a); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>2. Section 561.13 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 561.13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Regulatory capital. </ITAG>Regulatory Capital is the sum of: (a) Modified equity capital, which is defined as the sum of: (1) Equity capital as determined in accordance with generally acceptedaccounting principles; (2) The amount of unamortized loan gains and losses which were deferredpursuant to andSection; 563c.14 of this subchapter; and (3) The difference between investments in shares of open-end managementinvestment companies, as defined in andSection; 523.10(g)(8) of this chapter,accounted for under generally accepted accounting principles and theirhistorical cost;(b) Definitional capital, which is the sum of: (1) Income capital certificates, mutual capital certificates (issued pursuantto andSection; 563.7-4 of this subchapter), outstanding net worth certificatesissued in accordance with Part 572 of this subchapter or that the Corporationis committed to purchase by virtue of andSection; 572.1(c), accumulated annualincome payments on capital certificates not due and payable, allowancesfor losses except specific allowances, pledged certificates and any othernonwithdrawable accounts (excluding any Treasury shares held by the institution)to the extent such nonwithdrawable accounts are not included in modifiedequity capital: <T3>Provided, </T3>that for any nonpermanent instrument qualifying as regulatorycapital under paragraph (b)(1) of this andSection; 561.13, either (i) theremaining period to maturity or required redemption (or time of any requiredsinking fund or other prepayment or reserve allocation with respect tothe amount of such prepayment or reserve) is not less than one year, or(ii) the redemption or prepayment is only at the option of the issuinginsured institution and such payments would not cause the insured institutionto fail or continue to fail to meet its regulatory capital requirementunder andSection; 563.13 of this subchapter;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Provided further, </T3>that capital stock may be included as regulatorycapital without limitation if it would otherwise qualify but for a provisionpermitting redemption in the event of a merger, consolidation, or reorganizationapproved by the Corporation when the issuing institution is not the survivor,or a provision permitting a redemption when the funds for redemption areraised by the issuance of permanent stock; (2) Subordinated debt securities issued pursuant to andSection; 563.8-1 ofthis subchapter: <T3>Provided, </T3>that an institution whose application to include subordinateddebt in net worth pursuant to andSection; 563.8-1 was approved prior to December5, 1984, shall be permitted to continue to include 100 percent of the principalamount of such subordinated debt as regulatory capital until the remainingperiod to maturity (or time of any required sinking fund or other prepaymentor reserve allocation with respect to the amount of such prepayment orreserve) is less than one year: <T3>Provided further, </T3>that an institution that had filed a substantiallycomplete application pursuant to andSection; 563.8-1 prior to December 5,1984, shall be permitted to include 100 percent of the subordinated debtissued pursuant to such application as regulatory capital until the remainingperiod to maturity (or time of any required sinking fund or other prepaymentor reserve allocation with respect to the amount of such prepayment orreserve allocation with respect to the amount of such prepayment or reserve)is less than one year if such subordinated debt otherwise is in compliancewith the requirements of andSection; 563.8-1 and if such application is notamended in any material respect subsequent to December 5, 1984: <T3>Provided further, </T3>that, except as otherwise provided in paragraph(b)(2) of this andSection; 561.13 and unless otherwise approved by the Corporationin writing, subordinated debt securities issued pursuant to andSection; 563.8-1after December 5, 1984, may be included as regulatory capital only in accordancewith the following schedule:  <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s25,8 </C>  <H1>Years to maturity of outstanding subordinated debt </H1><H1>Percent included in regulatory capital</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">Greater than or equal to 7 <D>100 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Less than 7 but greater than or equal to 6 <D>86 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Less than 6 but greater than or equal to 5 <D>71 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Less than 5 but greater than or equal to 4 <D>57 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Less than 4 but greater than or equal to 3 <D>43 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Less than 3 but greater than or equal to 2 <D>29 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Less than 2 but greater than or equal to 1 <D>14 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Less than 1 <D>0</D></ITAG></ITAG>  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">For purposes of determining the principal amount outstanding of anobligation issued at a discount that exceeds 10 percent of the face amount,the issuing institution shall treat as principal only the gross considerationactually received upon issuance plus the accrued interest not payable untilmaturity, as of the date of the computation. In the case of an instrumentsold at a discount that exceeds 10 percent and that bears no stated rateof interest, the amount that can be added to principal each period is anamount equal to the accrued interest payable computed on the ``level-yield''or ``interest'' method. For purposes of computing the amount of subordinateddebt includable as regulatory capital pursuant to paragraph (b)(2) of thisandSection; 561.13, the issuing institution must determine the effectivematurity of each portion of the principal amount outstanding of the subordinateddebt that is subject to required sinking fund payments, other requiredprepayments, and required reserve allocations and calculate the percentageamount of each portion of the principal amount outstanding that may beincluded pursuant to the schedule set forth in paragraph (b)(2) of thisandSection; 561.13; (3)(i) Preferred stock that is redeemable at the option of the issuer (A)that was issued prior to July 23, 1985, or (B) that was issued on or afterJuly 23, 1985, was approved prior to issuance pursuant to andSection; 563.1of this subchapter and states that no redemption may be made by the issuinginsured institution if, after giving effect to such redemption, the insuredinstitution would fail to meet its regulatory capital requirement underandSection; 563.13 of this subchapter; (ii) Mandatorily redeemable preferred stock that (A) was issued prior toJuly 23, 1985 or (B) was issued pursuant to andSection; 563.7-5 of this subchapteron or after July 23, 1985, was approved as to its form prior to issuancepursuant to andSection; 563.1 of this subchapter, and was approved in writingby the Corporation for inclusion as regulatory capital, before or afterits issuance, pursuant to andSection; 563.7-5: <T3>Provided, </T3>that unless otherwise approved by the Corporation inwriting, mandatorily redeemable preferred stock issued on or after July23, 1985, may be included as regulatory capital only in accordance withthe schedule set forth in paragraph (b)(2); (4) Mandatory convertible securities to the extent not included in modifiedequity capital, <T3>provided that </T3>such securities meet the criteria set forth by theOffice of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision in Supervisory Memoranda.(c) The sum of the following items determined in accordance with risk analysisreporting in effect prior to January 1, 1989 that an insured institutionhas included in computing and reporting its regulatory capital to the Corporationprior to January 1, 1989: (1) Appraised equity capital (as defined in andSection; 563.13(c) of thissubchapter);(2) The amount of unamortized loan gains and losses which were deferredpursuant to andSection; 563c.14 of this subchapter to the extent such deferredgains and losses are not included in modified equity capital; (3) The amount of the following items computed by an insured institutionin accordance with risk analysis reporting in effect prior to January 1,1989, and included in its financial statements prior to January 1, 1989.An institution may include an amount that represents the sum of the differencesbetween the treatment of the following items under generally accepted accountingprinciples and the treatment under risk analysis reporting prior to January1, 1989: (i) Sales of real estate developed by the institution or its subsidiary;(ii) Futures transactions; (iii) Accretion of discounts and amortization of premiums on securities;(iv) Loan origination and commitment fees; and (d) Accounting forbearances permitted under risk analysis reporting, whichshall include all accounting forbearances and other accounting practicesauthorized by the Corporation, the Board, or its Principal SupervisoryAgents. (e) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this andSection;561.13, the term ``regulatory capital'' does not include any capital instrumentor security that may be included as regulatory capital pursuant to anyof those paragraphs of andSection; 561.13 if such capital instrument or securityis held by a service corporation or other subsidiary, regardless of theorganizational form of that entity, in which the insured institution directlyor indirectly (1) owns, controls, or holds with power to vote, or holdsproxies representing 10 percent or more of the voting shares or rightsin such entity, or (2) invested in or contributed to such entity more than10 percent of such entity's capital, unless inclusion of regulatory capitalis specifically approved by the Corporation in writing. (f) ``<T3>Sunset</T3>'' provisions. Authority to include items listed in paragraphs(a)(2), (a)(3), (c)(1) and (c)(3) of this andSection; 561.13 as a componentof regulatory capital will cease as of December 31, 1993. Institutionsmay make an irrevocable election upon the filing of their first quarterlyreport for 1989 to phase-out these items over the period beginning January1, 1989, and ending December 31, 1993, pursuant to the following schedule:100 percent of these items are includable in regulatory capital for 1989;80 percent in 1990; 60 percent in 1991; 40 percent in 1992; 20 percentin 1993; and 0 percent in 1994 and all years thereafter. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 563_OPERATIONS  </ITAG>3. The authority citation for 12 CFR Part 563 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 1, 47 Stat. 725, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1421 <T3>et seq.</T3>); sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5B, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec.4, 80 Stat. 824, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425b); sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, asamended (12 U.S.C. 1437); sec. 2, 48 Stat. 128, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1462);sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs. 401-407, 48 Stat.1255-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1730); sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1730a); Reorg. Plan. No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>4. Section 563.23-1 is amended by revising the heading of the section toread as follows; by revising paragraph (b); and by removing paragraphs(c) through (f); to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.23-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Premiums and discounts with respect to loans. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) <T3>Purchase at a discount. </T3>If an insured institution purchases aloan at discount, the discount shall be differed by a credit to an accountdescriptive of deferred income and shall thereafter be credited to incomein accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.5. Section 563.23-3 is amended by revising paragraphs (c) and (d); andby adding a new paragraph (e) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.23-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Accounting principles and procedures. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) By no later than the period beginning on or after January 1, 1989,all unaudited financial statements and financial reports to the Corporationshall be prepared on the basis of generally accepted accounting principles,except that loan losses and gains deferred pursuant to andSection; 563c.14of this subchapter may be included on such financial statements and reports,and investments in shares of open-end management companies, as definedin andSection; 523.10(g)(8) of this chapter, may be carried at historicalcost in such statements and reports. All such financial statements andreports shall include a full and fair disclosure of the reconciliationof modified equity capital, as defined in andSection; 561.13(a) of this subchapter,to regulatory capital, as defined in andSection; 561.13 of this subchapter.Loan losses and gains deferred pursuant to andSection; 563c.14 of this subchapter,and investments in shares of open-end management investment companies,as defined in andSection; 523.10(g)(8) of this chapter, accounted for athistorical cost, may be reported on such financial statements and reportsonly for and until the last reporting period of 1993.(d) By no later than the period beginning on or after January 1, 1989,Statements of Condition shall be prepared on the basis of generally acceptedaccounting principles, except that loan losses and gains deferred pursuantto andSection; 563c.14 of this subchapter may be included on such Statementsof Condition, and investments in shares of open-end management companies,as defined in andSection; 523.10(g)(8) of this chapter, may be carried athistorical cost on such Statements of Condition. All such Statements ofCondition shall include a full and fair disclosure of the reconciliationof modified equity capital, as defined in andSection; 561.13(a) of this subchapterwith regulatory capital, as defined in andSection; 561.13 of this chapter.Loan gains and losses deferred pursuant to andSection; 563c.14 of this subchapter,and investments in shares of open-end management companies, as definedin andSection; 523.10(g)(8) of this Chapter, accounted for at historicalcost, may be reported only for and until the last period of 1993. EachStatement of Condition shall include in bold type in the body of the statementthe following language: ``Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation(``FSLIC''), an agency of the U.S. government, insures all depositors'savings up to $100,000 in accordance with the rules and the regulationsof the FSLIC.'' In addition, the footnote reconciliation of equity capitalto regulatory capital continued in such statements shall include the followinglanguage: ``Regulatory capital is the basis by which the Federal Home LoanBank Board determines whether an institution is insolvent and whether aninstitution is meeting its regulatory capital requirement.'' (e)(1) An insured institution seeking to delay its compliance with theuniform accounting standards set forth in this andSection; 563.23-3 or andSection;561.13 of this subchapter shall file a plan with its Principal SupervisoryAgent (``PSA''). (2) The plan shall set forth the following: (i) The specific components of the uniform accounting standards with whichthe insured institution is unable to comply (``excepted components'');(ii) A timetable setting forth the date, in no event later than December31, 1993, by which the insured institution proposes to comply with eachexcepted component; and (iii) Any other information that the insured institution believes is relevantto its determination that it is not feasible for the institution to complywith each excepted component. (3)(i) The Principal Supervisory Agent shall act on such plans in accordancewith the guidelines set forth at andSection; 571.12 of this subchapter. (ii) In reviewing a plan, the PSA shall consider all relevant information,including, but not limited to, (A) The institution's plan submitted pursuant to this section; (B) Other information available to the PSA regarding the insured institution;(C) The ability of other institutions in the region to comply with theuniform accounting standards; and (D) The extent to which any relevant grandfathering or phase-in of theuniform accounting standards affects any excepted component in the institution'splan. (4) In the event that the PSA disapproves a plan for delayed compliancein whole or in part, the institution may appeal the disapproval to theCorporation within thirty days of the disapproval. The Corporation shallact on such appeal in accordance with the guidelines set forth at andSection;571.12 of this subchapter. The Corporation, in reviewing the disapproval,shall take into consideration all relevant factors, including those listedin paragraph (e) of this section. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 563c_ACCOUNTING REQUIREMENTS </ITAG>6. The authority citation for Part 563c continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464);secs. 402-403, 407 Stat. 1256-1257, 1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1725-1726,1730); secs. 3(b), 12-14, 23, 48 Stat. 822, 892, 894-895, 901, as amended(15 U.S.C. 78c(b), m, n, w); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR1943_48 Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563c.11</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed and Reserved]. </ITAG>7. Section 563c.11 is removed and reserved.<ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John F. Ghizzoni, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">[<T4>Editorial Note: </T4>This appendix will not appear in the Code of FederalRegulations.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix._Uniform Accounting Standards Guide to Implementation Dates\8\</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L0,tp0,p0,8/9,g1,t1,i1,s150,r100 </C>  <H1>  </H1><H1>  </H1> I. Reporting Requirements <ITAG tagnum="2">A. <T3>General: </T3>insured institutions must prepare all financial statementsand reports in accordance with GAAP, except that deferred loan losses andgains may be included in the body of unaudited statements and reports andinvestments in mutual funds, as defined in andSection; 523.10(g)(8) may becarried at historical cost; must include footnote reconciliation of modifiedequity capital with regulatory capital <D>All periods beginning on or after January 1, 1989. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">B. <T3>Deferred Loan Losses and Gains </T3>(``DLL''): insured institutionsmay continue to report DLL on their unaudited financial statements andreports, through year end 1993 <D> Insured institutions may report: 100% of DLL for 1989 through yearend 1993; 0% of DLL thereafter. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">C. <T3>Mutual Funds: </T3>insured institutions may report their investmentsin shares of open-end management investment companies, as defined in 12CFR 523.10(g)(8), at historical cost through year end 1993 on unauditedfinancial statements and reports <D>Insured institutions may report investments in liquid asset mutual fundsat cost through year end 1993; in accordance with SFAS No. 12 for all yearsthereafter. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">D. <T3>Appraised Equity Capital </T3>(``AEC''): insured institutions may <T3>not </T3>report AEC on their financial statements and reports <D> All periods beginning on or after January 1, 1989. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">E. <T3>Consolidated Reporting: </T3>insured institutions must file financialstatements 1, and reports on a consolidated basis <D> All periods beginning on or after January 1, 1990. </D></ITAG>II. Components of Regulatory Capital <ITAG tagnum="2">A. Modified Equity Capital: equals GAAP capital plus DLL plus the differencebetween investments in liquid asset mutual funds accounted for under GAAPand their historical cost <D> Must be computed for all periods beginning on or after January 1, 1989.For periods beginning on or after January 1, 1994, equity capital mustbe determined in accordance with GAAP with no deviations. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">B. Definitional Capital </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="3">Subordinated debt </ITAG><D>May be included now in amounts specified in 12 CFR andSection; 561.13(c);unchanged by amendment to DRC Regulation.  </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Qualifying redeemable preferred stock </ITAG><D>May be included now in amounts specified in 12 CFR andSection; 561.13(d);unchanged by amendment to DRC Regulation. </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Qualifying mandatory convertible securities </ITAG><D>May be included for all periods beginning on or after January 1, 1989,subject to guidelines to be issued by ORPOS. </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Income capital certif1cates </ITAG><D>May be included now; unchanged by amendment to DRC Regulation. </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Mutual capital certificates </ITAG><D>May be included now; unchanged by amendment to DRC Regulation.  </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Allowances for losses, except for specific allowances </ITAG><D>May be included now; unchanged by amendment to DRC Regulation. </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Pledged Deposits and other nonwithdrawable accounts \9\ </ITAG><D>May be included now; unchanged by amendment to DRC Regulation.  </D><ITAG tagnum="12">C. RAR Components of Regulatory Capital </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="3">Cumulative RAR/GAAP differential </ITAG><T3>may be </T3>included for: <D>Differential </D><T3>may be </T3>included as a component of regulatory capital from January1, 1989 through December 31, 1993. <ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Institutions may elect immediate exclusion of differential from regulatorycapital on January 1, 1989; must file election to exclude immediately orphase-out by January 1, 1994. Institutions that elect to phase-out thedifferential must do so in accordance with the following schedule: </D><P> 100% of differential-1989 </P><P> 80% of differential-1990 </P><P> 60% of differential-1991 </P><P> 40% of differential-1992 </P><P> 20% of differential-1993 </P><P> 0% of differential-1994. </P><ITAG tagnum="4">Sales of real estate (by institutions or their subsidiaries) <D>Institutions may not report all items on their financial statementsin accordance with RAR for any period beginning on or after January 1,1989. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Futures transaction <D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Appraised equity capital <D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Loan origination and commitment fees <D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Accretion of discounts/amortization of premiums on securities <D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">D. Accounting forbearances <D>May be included now; unchanged by amendment to DRC Regulation.</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">\8\ This chart is intended as a summary guide for ease of reference.In case of any inconsistency between it and the regulatory language, theregulatory language will control.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">\9\ Does not include treasury shares held by the institution or nonwithdrawableaccounts included as modified equity capital.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 87-29868 Filed 12-31-87; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>