<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881122-0112 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-22-88.f2.A1111</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-498]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Houston Lighting and Power Co.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendmentto Facility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. NPF-76, issuedto Houston Lighting and Power Company (the licensee), for operation ofthe South Texas Project, Unit 1, located in Matagorda County, Texas.The proposed amendment would revise the Unit 1 Technical Specifications(TS) to the Combined Technical Specifications for Units 1 and 2, add placingthe positive displacement pump in a lock-out condition during cold overpressurization,add a reactor coolant pump seal isolation charging header pressure interlockand modify the administrative section of the Technical Specifications.Each of these are addressed separately below.Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave more findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the request for amendmentinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated,or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated, or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety.The South Texas Project Electric Generating Station (STPEGS) Unit 1 operatinglicense includes the Technical Specifications for the operation of Unit1. At the time Unit 2 receives an operating license, Houston Lighting andPower Company (HLandamp;P) will receive Technical Specifications that areapplicable for both units, i.e., Combined Technical Specifications. Toimplement the Combined Technical Specifications on Unit 1, the Unit 1 licenserequires administrative changes.The Commission has provided guidance for the application of criteria forno significant hazards consideration determination by providing examplesof amendments that are considered not likely to involve significant hazardsconsiderations (51 FR 7751). These examples includes example (i), a purelyadministrative change to technical specifications: for example, a changeto achieve consistency throughout the technical specifications, correctionof an error or a change in nomenclature.The changes associated with the section of the proposed amendment for theCombined Technical Specifications are administrative in nature and, therefore,are within the scope of the example. Since this section of the amendmentinvolves changes that are encompassed by an example for which no significanthazards consideration exists, the staff has made a proposed determinationthat this section of the amendment involves no significant hazards consideration.The section of the proposed amendment regarding the positive displacementpump (PDP) adds to the Technical Specifications the placement of the positivedisplacement pump in a lock-out condition before reaching a cold overpressuremitigation system activation condition. The proposed change would implementthe lock-out as a surveillance in the overpressure protection system.The Houston Lighting andamp; Power Company reviewed the proposed change anddetermined, and the staff agrees that:(1) This section of the proposed amendment does not involve a significantincrease in the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated.No hardware changes or methods of operation are altered as a result ofthe amendment. The actual PDP lock-out provisions are already addressedin plant operating procedures. This change elevates the PDP lock-out tothe same status as the other affected pumps (i.e., charging and high headsafety injection).(2) This section of the proposed amendment does not create the possibilityof a new or different kind of accident from any accident previously evaluated.This change formalizes, in the Technical Specifications, operational requirementsalready implemented by the plant. In addition, no hardware changes areinvolved with this change.(3) This section of the proposed amendment does not involve a significantreduction in the margin of safety. No changes to the plant from a hardwareor operational standpoint are made as a result of this change. The proposedtechnical specification requirement (the locking-out of the PDP) is alreadyincluded in plant operating procedures. Since the proposed specificationsadd additional surveillance requirements to verify that the PDP is locked-out,all margins of safety are maintained.The section of the proposed amendment regarding the reactor coolant pumpseal isolation proposes to incorporate the reactor coolant pump seal isolationcharging header pressure interlock into the Technical Specifications byspecifically addressing operability and surveillance requirements for thecharging header pressure interlock circuit. The interlock circuit providesa trip signal if the charging header pressure is low. The proposed changeincorporates the surveillance requirements in the appropriate tables. The Houston Lighting and Power Company reviewed the proposed change anddetermined, and the staff agrees that: (1) This section of the proposed amendment does not involve a significantincrease in the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated.No hardware changes are required as a result of this change. The proposed amendment will provide the containment isolation functionassociated with this interlock with the same technical specification statusas other containment isolation functions. (2) This section of the proposed amendment does not create the possibilityof a new or different kind of accident from any accident previously evaluated.No hardware changes are made which would create any new failure or accidentsequences. Conditions could exist wherein the plant was in the proposedaction statement and a spurious or actual Phase ``A'' isolation could occur.The STPEGS Emergency Operating Procedures (EOP's) address this scenarioadequately in that continued operation of the reactor coolant pumps isnot allowed if seal injection flow is lost and Component Cooling waterflow is not available to the RCP thermal barrier. The EOP's also provideguidance to the operators to attempt to restore seal injection as soonas possible. (3) This section of the proposed amendment does not involve a significantreduction in the margin of safety. The proposed changes include the SealInjection Isolation Valve Interlock function in the Technical Specificationsto clarify plant response to a failure of this circuit. There is no changein the margin of safety. The proposed action statement maintains plantconditions which satisfy safety analysis assumptions and allows for anorderly response to an inoperable circuit. The Houston Lighting and Power Company proposed four changes to the administrativesection of the Technical Specifications. The first change involves thecomposition of the Plant Operations Review Committee. The change requiresthat if the Technical Services Manager does not meet the qualificationsof a Radiation Protection Manager, the committee will be augmented by amember who meets the qualifications. The second change further definesthe quorum requirements for the Nuclear Safety Review Board by indicatingthat a majority of the board members must be present for a quorum to exist.The third change specifies the minimum approval authority for plant procedures.For procedures other than station administrative procedures, the PlantManager, Plant Superintendent or other responsible department head willapprove procedures prior to implementation. The fourth change specifiesthat procedures will be reviewed periodically. The Commission has provided guidance for the application of criteria forno significant hazards consideration determination by providing examplesof amendments that are considered not likely to involve significant hazardsconsiderations (51 FR 7751), these examples include example (i), A purelyadministrative change to technical specifications: a change to achieveconsistency throughout the technical specifications, correction of an error,or a change in nonmenclature. The changes associated with this section of the amendment are administrativein nature and, therefore are within the scope of the example. Since theapplication for this section of the amendment involves changes that areencompassed by an example for which no significant hazards considerationexists, the staff has made a proposed determination that this section ofthe amendment involves no significant hazards consideration. The staff has reviewed the proposed amendment and the licensee's no significanthazards consideration determination. Based on the review of the proposedareas of change and the above discussions, the staff proposes to determinethat the proposed amendment does not involve a significant hazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Comments should be addressed to the Rules and Procedures Branch, Divisionof Rules and Records, Office of Administration, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication dateand page number of this<T4> Federal Register</T4> notice. By December 22, 1988, the licensee may file a request for a hearing withrespect to issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operatinglicense, and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceedingand who wishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file awritten petition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitionsfor leave to intervene must be filed in accordance with the Commission's``Rules of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part2. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filedby the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing BoardPanel will rule on the request and/or petition, and the Secretary or thedesignated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a notice of hearingor an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene must setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which the petitioner wishes to intervene.Any person who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, the petitioner shall file a supplement tothe petition to intervene which must include a list of the contentionswhich are sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for eachcontention set forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall belimited to matters within the scope of the amendment under consideration.A petitioner who fails to file such a supplement which satisfies theserequirements with respect to at least one contention will not be permittedto participate as a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the request for amendment involves nosignificant hazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendmentand make it effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearingheld would take place after issuance of the amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice such that failure to act in a timely way would result, for example,in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission may issue the licenseamendment before the expiration of the 30-day notice period, provided thatits final determination is that the amendment involves no significant hazardsconsideration. The final determination will consider all public and statecomments received. Should the Commission take this action, it will publisha notice of issuance and provide for opportunity for a hearing after issuance.The Commission expects that the need to take this action will occur veryinfrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 1717 H Street, NW.,Washington DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during thelast ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitionerpromptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to WesternUnion at (800) 325-6000 (in Missouri (800) 342-6700). The Wetern Unionoperator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the followingmessage addressed to Jose A. Calvo: petitioner's name and telephone number;date petition was mailed; plant name; and publication date and page numberof this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel-Rockville, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, and to Jack R. Newman, Esq., Newman andHoltzinger, P.C., 1615 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20036, attorney forthe licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, that the request should begranted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1) (i) through (v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment which is available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at theWharton Junior College Library, J.M. Hodges Learning Center, 911 BolingHighway, Wharton, Texas 77488 and Austin Public Library, 810 GuadalupeStreet, Austin, Texas 78701.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 16th day of November 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jose A. Calvo, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate-IV Division of Reactor Projects-III,IV, V and Special Projects Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-26995 Filed 11-21-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>