<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88808-0040 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-08-88.f2.A1039</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 152 / Monday, August 8, 1988 /Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Immigration and Naturalization Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">8 CFR Part 245a</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[INS Number 1022R-88]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Adjustment of Status for Certain Aliens</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Immigration and Naturalization Service, Justice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Section 201 of the Immigration Reform and Control Actof 1986 (IRCA) provides for the legalization of certain aliens who havebeen residing illegally in the United States since before January 1, 1982.This section directs the Attorney General to adjust the status of a temporaryresident alien to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residenceif the alien meets certain requirements. This proposed rule addresses theadjustment of status of temporary resident aliens to that of aliens lawfullyadmitted for permanent residence.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments must be received on or before September 7, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Written comments should be mailed in triplicate toTerrance M. O'Reilly, Deputy Assistant Commissioner, Legalization, Immigrationand Naturalization Service, 425 ``I'' Street, NW., Washington, DC 20536,or delivered to Room 5250 at the same address.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Terrance M. O'Reilly, Deputy AssistantCommissioner, Legalization, (202) 786-3658.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The Immigration Reform and ControlAct of 1986 (IRCA), Pub. L. 99-603 was enacted on November 6, 1986. TheService published implementing regulations at 52 FR 16205, May 1, 1987,and amending regulations at 52 FR 43843, November 17, 1987, 53 FR 9274,March 21, 1988, 53 FR 9862, March 28, 1988, and at 53 FR 23382, June 22,1988. This proposed rule outlines the procedures the Immigration and NaturalizationService will use to adjust the status of temporary resident aliens to permanentresidence. For the convenience of the public, the Service is combiningin this proposed rule the regulations at stated in the May 1, 1987 finalrule, and as amended in the November 17, 1987 interim rule, and the June22, 1988 final rule regulations with respect to the regulations at 245a.3.At 53 FR 18096, May 20, 1988, the Service published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> a notice making available to the public the preliminaryworking draft regulations. More than 170 copies of the preliminary workingdraft were forwarded to requesters. As a result, 135 individuals and interestedorganizations submitted written comments. The comments were reviewed andgiven serious consideration. The Service appreciates the time and effortput forth by all concerned parties.Under the provisions of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986a temporary resident alien who has resided in the United States for a periodof eighteen (18) months may make application for permanent resident statusduring the twelve month period beginning on the day after the temporaryresidence period has been completed. Since the beginning date of the applicationperiod falls on a weekend, the Service will, for the mutual convenienceof all concerned, begin accepting applications on November 7, 1988, thefirst workday after November 6, 1988. The Service realizes that an applicationcould be received at Regional Processing Facilities prior to November 7,1988 or prior to the date an alien would be considered eligible to filean application. Therefore, as a convenience to the public, the Serviceintends to hold such applications up to 60 days prior to the alien's eligibilitydate. In these instances, the application will be considered as ``filed''on the applicant's eligibility date.The Service proposes to process applications for adjustment of status topermanent residence by temporary resident aliens by utilizing a processingmethod that features direct mail of applications to four Regional ProcessingFacilities located at Williston, Vermont (Eastern); Lincoln, Nebraska (Northern);Dallas, Texas (Southern); and Laguna Niguel, California (Western). Afterpreliminary processing of applications at the Regional Processing Facilities,applicants will be interviewed at selected Service offices throughout thecountry.Several commentors addressed the processing method outlined in the preliminaryworking draft and suggested that the Service should allow filing of applicationsat legalization and other field offices. The Service considered this asan option to direct mail of applications to the Regional Processing Facilities(RPF), but to do so would mean an increase in operational costs. In orderto offset these costs, an increase in the application fees would be necessary.The Service does not wish to set an application fee above the absoluteminimum needed to successfully fund the permanent resident phase of theprogram. In addition, the Service has enjoyed success in the direct mailingof applications to Regional Service Centers. Consequently, the Serviceproposes to utilize the processing method described in the previous paragraph.However, district offices may choose to permit drop-off services for personswho wish to present their applications in person. These applications willbe forwarded to the RPF with fee, and will not be considered filed untilreceived at the RPF. No interview will be conducted at the drop-off site.The following summarizes the proposed processing method. The adjustmentof status of temporary resident aliens to permanent residence is to consistof five major segments: Pre-submission of applications; Regional ProcessingFacility processing (pre-interview); INS field and legalization officeprocessing; Regional Processing Facility processing (post-interview); andImmigration Card Facility (ICF) processing.In the pre-submission of applications segment the Service will distributeinformation and forms for the adjustment to permanent resident phase ofthe legalization program. The Service will conduct a public informationcampaign and outreach activities. This is in addition to outreach and educationefforts by various public and private organizations.In the RPF processing (pre-interview) segment, all pre-interview processingtasks (e.g., data entry, fee receipting, etc.) will take place.The applicants will be interviewed as well as processed for an Alien RegistrationCard (I-551) during the INS field and legalization office processing segment.The interview may also consist of an English language/U.S. history andgovernment examination for those applicants who wish to demonstrate theirabilities in this area.In the RPF processing (post-interview) segment, appeal processing and otherpost-interview procedures will occur.In the final segment, the ICF processing segment, Alien Registration Card(I-551) production will be completed and the card will be mailed to theaddress specified by the alien, which may be the address of his or herauthorized representative.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of the Proposed Rule</ITAG>Section 245a.1(h) is being amended to permit intending residents to fulfillemployment duties abroad without having their absence from the United Statesaffect their ability to meet applicable residence requirements for adjustmentfrom temporary resident to permanent resident status. A few commentorssuggested expanding the definition. These comments were considered andthe definition will be changed to allow the Service the flexibility topermit brief and casual absences from the United States that reflect anintention on the part of the alien to adjust to permanent residence. Section245a.3(b)(2) will also be amended to reflect this change.New andSection; 245a.1(r) is being added to define the term in ``good-standing''as used in referring to qualified designated entities (QDEs) under 8 CFR245a.3(b)(5). Numerous comments were received concerning this definition.Several commentors suggested that the Service should extend the cooperativeagreements with QDEs. The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA)in section 201 provides for filing of applications for temporary residentstatus with either the Attorney General or with a qualified designatedentity. The statute does not provide for a like situation for the filingof applications for permanent residence. Consequently, the Service willneither extend nor expand QDE cooperative agreements. Other commentorssuggested revisions to the definition. The Service considered these commentsand will retain the definition appearing in the preliminary working draft,with one exception_that being the insertion of the phrase, ``prior to January30, 1989,'' pertaining to cooperative agreements which were not allowedto lapse by the Service.New andSection; 245a.1(s) is being added to define the term ``satisfactorilypursuing'' as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)(II) of the Act. Some commentorssuggested that the definition set too high a level of course attendance.The length of the course was also cited as being too long. Other commentorssuggested that the Congressional intent to require a serious effort tolearn English and the history and government of the United States is notmet because a sixty (60) hour course is insufficient. The Service believesthe statute is clear in requiring a demonstration of basic citizenshipskills. A course designed to achieve these skills should be of sufficientlength to comply with Congressional intent yet not be overly burdensomeon the applicant. Consequently, the Service is proposing a definition whichincorporates a minimum attendance period of thirty (30) hours and a minimumcourse length of one hundred (100) hours. Many commentors suggested theService recognize the good faith effort shown by many aliens who have alreadyenrolled and completed courses in basic citizenship skills. The Serviceagrees and is proposing that individuals who enrolled in courses that meetthe requirements set forth in the proposed definition on or after May 1,1987, will be considered satisfactorily pursuing a course of study recognizedby the Attorney General. Serious concern by commentors from the more populousareas of the country that applicants will be hard pressed to find sufficientcourse opportunities in the timeframe available has led the Service toconsider alternative means of meeting the ``satisfactorily pursuing'' requirement.As a result, four (4) additional options are proposed for applicants inaddition to the attending of courses as discussed above. By providing theseoptions, sufficient opportunities will be available for applicants to meetthe satisfactorily pursuing requirement. One commentor questioned how courseproviders could receive financial assistance. Financial assistance grants(SLIAG) are authorized by section 204 of the Immigration Reform and ControlAct of 1986. Under the grant program, $1 billion less an amount termedthe ``federal offset'', is appropriated each year for FY 1988 through FY1991 to defray part of state and local costs associated with providingpublic assistance, public health assistance and educational services toaliens granted lawful resident status pursuant to sections 245A, 210, or210A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), as amended, by IRCA.The Secretary of Health and Human Services administers the SLIAG Program.New andSection; 245a.1(t) is being added to define the term ``minimal understandingof ordinary English'' as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i) of the Act. Thecomments received were mostly favorable and supported the definition aswritten. The Service, therefore, will make no change in the proposed definition.New andSection; 245a.1(u) is being added to define the use of a curriculumin a course of study recognized by the Attorney General. One commentorsuggested that the content of the Federal Citizenship texts should notbe used exclusively in formulating the curriculum of a course of study.Another commentor favored the definition as written. The Service will changeits proposed definition to provide for the Federal Citizenship Text servingas a basis for curriculum development and also provide for the use of textswith similar content. The definition is also changed to reflect the changemade in andSection; 245a.1(s) pertaining to the minimum length of a course.Section 245a.3(a) is amended to provide for the acceptance of applicationsat Regional Processing Facilities. Commentors expressed their concern aboutdetermining the date temporary residence was granted. The date an alienwas adjusted to temporary residence is addressed in andSection; 245a.2(s)and is the date indicated on the fee receipt Form I-689.Section 245a.3(b)(4)(i) is being amended to accurately reflect the wordingfound in the statute regarding the basic citizenship skills requirements.Section 245a.3(b)(4)(ii) is being amended to include those individualswho are physically unable to comply with the requirements of 8 CFR 245a.3(b)(4)(i)and also to limit the applicability of the basic citizenship skills requirementsto individuals who are 16 years or older and under the age of 65. The Serviceproposes as an exercise of discretion to waive on a blanket basis all applicantsunder the age of 16 and 65 years of age or older without formal applicationfor waiver, as well as applicants who are physically unable to comply.These proposed changes resulted from a review of numerous comments andreconsideration by the Service of this section.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(iii) is being added to address the examinationfor basic citizenship skills. Numerous comments were received concerningandSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(iii). Commentors were concerned about the lengthof time between examinations in those instances where an individual didnot first pass the examination for basic citizenship skills. One commentorrecommended a time period of six (6) months be provided between examinations.Several commentors suggested the Service develop questions apart from thosefound in the Federal Textbooks on Citizenship to be used in the examination.One commentor suggested applicants should have unlimited examination opportunity.In consideration of all the comments received on this section, the Servicewill now propose to test an applicant's ability to read and write Englishby excerpts from the Federal Textbooks on Citizenship at the elementaryliteracy level. In addition, due consideration will be given to the applicant'seducation, background, age, length of residence in the United States, opportunitiesavailable and efforts made to acquire basic citizenship skills and anyother relevant factors. The Service will also provide for a six (6) monthtime period between examinations unless the applicant requests to be examinedsooner. The Service recognizes that a flexible approach for examining basiccitizenship skills is called for in order to continue to operate a generousand liberal legalization program as Congress intended.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(iv) is being added to address the providingof a ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' to satisfy the basic citizenshipskills requirements. Several commentors asked whether the Certificate ofSatisfactory Pursuit could be presented at the time of interview as opposedto at the time of filing an application. Other commentors suggested thatit was not clear whether an applicant had to be enrolled in a recognizedcourse of study at the time of application for permanent residency. TheService proposes that Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit be presentedeither at the time of filing or at the time of interview. In addition,applicants need not be enrolled in a recognized course of study at thetime of application of permanent residency. The term ``certificate'' hasreplaced ``affidavit'' in this section as the Service feels it has a clearermeaning.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(v) is being added to set the time period afterwhich the Service will accept enrollment in a recognized course of studyand issuance of Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit. That time periodis subsequent to May 1, 1987. The Service has set this time period as May1, 1987 as it is the date the implementing regulations were published inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>.Section andSection; 245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter is being amended to allowfor the certification of educational programs by district directors locallyas the need arises, as well as the certification of national programs bythe Outreach Program of INS. It is also being amended to clarify the meaningof qualified designated entities as used in this section. Commentors suggestedthat district directors maintain and publicize lists of recognized coursesand that sufficient courses be recognized by a district director to addressthe needs of the district. Some comments were received that suggested theService set a maximum fee that course providers could charge. In responseto these suggestions and for clarification purposes the Service is proposingtwo new sections. Section 245a.3(b)(6), explains the method whereby courseproviders who are already covered under andSection; 245a.3(b)(5) will beidentified by district directors. Section 245a.3(b)(7) explains the feestructure. The Service feels that the district director knows the needsof his or her district and therefore is the proper authority to ensurea sufficient number of course providers. Guidelines for approving additionalrecognized courses of study will be issued under separate cover. No maximumfee standard will be imposed; however, reasonable fees should be established.If a district director and/or the Director of the Outreach Program believesthat a fee charged is excessive, this factor alone can justify either refusalto certify or de-certify a course provider.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(8) is being added to provide information on theFederal Textbooks on Citizenship. Seven commentors suggested that new materialsbe designed in lieu of the Federal Textbooks on Citizenship. As previouslyaddressed the Service has proposed that the texts be used as a basis forcourse instruction and that other similar texts can be used. This sectionaddresses the availability of the Federal Textbooks for interested parties.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(9) is being added to address the maintenance ofstudent records by course providers.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(10) is being added to address the issuance of theCertificate of Satisfactory Pursuit (I-699).New andSection; 245a.3(b)(11) is being added to provide for the ``designatedofficial'' who will have the authority to sign Certificates of SatisfactoryPursuant.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(12) is being added to provide for the on-site monitoringof courses of study recognized by the Attorney General. Many comments werereceived suggesting limiting the scope of INS on-site monitoring or delegatingthe monitoring in whole or in part to other agencies or organizations suchas the States (Department of Education). The monitoring of course providersis necessary both to ensure that the providers are conducting adequatecourses and to ensure that the alien public's needs are adequately served.The Service wishes to work in concert with the various state and localagencies to ensure course instruction is proper and meets the intent ofthe legislation that applicants achieve a basic understanding of citizenshipskills. The Service does not intend to closely monitor established bona-fideeducational providers but instead will direct most efforts toward providerswho are entering into course instruction for the first time.New andSection; 245a.3(b)(13) is being added to implement certain standardsfor qualifications of teachers providing instruction in courses of studyrecognized by the Attorney General as defined at andSection; 245a.3(b)(5)of this chapter. Implementation of a set of standards is necessary becausesuch courses vary from providers who have had extensive experience in educationalservices for limited English speakers to new programs with untested skills.Three commentors supported the section as written and agreed with the flexibilityrelating to the selection of teachers.Section 245a.3(d)(1) is amended to provide for the filing of an applicationfor change of status to that of a permanent resident alien by direct mailingthe application to the Regional Processing Facility. Several commentorsexpressed concern over mailing applications to the Regional ProcessingFacility. This issue was addressed previously in this proposed rule concerningthe processing method. The Service feels direct mail is a less costly wayto operate the permanent resident application phase of the LegalizationProgram and in many instances, will be more convenient to the alien publicin the applications can be submitted without taking time off work, etc.The Service realizes however, that local district practices (e.g., dropboxes) may be already in operation for direct mail to Regional ServiceCenters, or may be added at legalization offices as a convenience to thepublic. If drop-box service is made available by the district director,the alien public may certainly avail itself of this alternate way to submitapplications.Section 245a.3(d)(2) is amended to provide for the Regional ProcessingFacility directors' use of discretion to temporarily retain documents forforensic examination. Several commentors suggested the Service not requirethe submission of original documents through the mail. The Service agreesand will change the section to reflect that documentation can be providedby supplying copies certified true and correct by the alien's representativepursuant to andSection; 204.2(j) (1) or (2). The Service reserves the right,however, to request original documentation as necessary. Original documentationcan either be requested by the director, Regional Processing Facility,or the district director.New andSection; 245a.3(d)(4) is being added to provide for the submissionof medical examination results of Form I-693 only for those applicantswho applied for temporary residence and submitted an I-693 which did notreflect that a serologic test was performed to determine the presence orabsence of antibody against HIV, the etiologic agent of acquired immuno-deficiencysyndrome (AIDS). As of December 1, 1987, the Immigration and NaturalizationService required serologic testing for HIV infection as part of the medicalexamination process for aliens applying for lawful resident status underthe provisions of IRCA. Several commentors suggested the Service be morespecific in the regulations that a complete medical examination is notrequired of applicants. The Service is changing this section accordingly.New andSection; 245a.3(d)(5) is being added to provide for the extensionof the validity of the temporary resident card (I-688) during the pendencyof an application for permanent residence made under this chapter. Onecommentor agreed with the section as written. Extending the I-688 of anapplicant as necessary is an on-going Service procedure and this sectionrestates existing Service policy.New andSection; 245a.3(d)(6) is being added to provide for the denial ofan application for permanent residence for lack of prosecution. Severalcommentors suggested that this section be changed in various ways to providefor a second opportunity for an applicant to respond before the denialof the application. Upon consideration the Service concurs and will changethis section to provide for a second notice and additional time periodof sixty (60) days.Section 245a.3(e) is amended to provide for interviews taking place atother than Service Legalization Offices. Several commentors suggested thatconfidentiality of the applicant's information would be threatened if interviewsare conducted at other than Service offices. the confidentiality of theinformation supplied by the applicant for the permanent residence phasewill be ensured by retention of the application at the Regional ProcessingFacility in most cases. Adjudication usually will consist of limited computerterminal data review and update by field personnel. A new andSection; 245a.3(n)is being added to this proposed rule to further address confidentiality.Two commentors suggested that interviews be mandatorily waived for individualsunder 14. The Service feels that as the need arises individuals may haveto be interviewed concerning various aspects of the case. Consequently,the Service does not agree that a blanket waiver of the interview requirementis warranted.Section 245a.3(g)(4) is being amended to clarify that it is not necessaryto file a formal waiver application in order to apply the special rulefor determination of public charge.Section 245a.3(i) is amended to provide for the retention by a temporaryresident alien of the temporary resident card (I-688) in the case of anadverse decision. One commentor agreed with the section as written. Othercommentors suggested clarification be provided with respect to retentionof the temporary resident card (I-688) where an adverse decision is renderedon an application. The Service feels that an adverse decision is not finaluntil the appeal period has tolled. Consequently, this section will bechanged to provide for retention of a temporary resident card until suchtime as the appeal time has tolled or until the expiration date of thecard, whichever is later. In addition, one commentor suggested that theService provide that applicants who have been denied be allowed to submitanother application as long as the applicant submits the application withinthe one-year application period. The Service agrees and is changing thissection accordingly.Section 245a.3(j) is amended to provide for the submission of a brief tosupport an appeal after the thirty (30) day period allowing for receiptof an appeal has passed. This section is also amended to provide for reviewof the Record of Processing (ROP) after an appeal has been properly filed.Several commentors suggested longer periods be allowed for submission ofappeals. The Service believes the time periods provided are sufficientfor a party to submit an appeal and any supporting briefs. Consequently,the Service will not change the appeal periods. The Service will add, forclarification purposes, language to the section concerning the date fromwhich the thirty (30) calendar days begins to toll for the submission ofa brief to the Regional Processing Facility.Section 245a.3(1) is amended to provide for certification to the AdministrativeAppeals Unit of decisions on appealed cases subsequently remanded backto either the Regional Processing Facility director or the district director.This section is also amended to provide for certification by district directors.Comments were generally in support of the section as written.Section 245a.3(m) is amended to reflect the fact that the adjustment dateshall be the date of approval of the application for permanent residence.The date of adjustment is being changed to be consistent with other Serviceadjustment actions.New andSection; 245a.3(n) is being added to address confidentiality duringthe permanent residence phase of the Legalization Program. Several commentorsexpressed their concern about confidentiality. The Service desires to reinforcethe confidentiality provisions of IRCA and therefore is adding this newsection.In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Commissioner of Immigration andNaturalization certifies that this rule does not have a significant adverseeconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. This rule isnot a major rule within the meaning of section 1(b) of E.O. 12291, nordoes this rule have federalism implications warranting the preparationof a Federal Assessment in accordance with E.O. 12612.The Information Collection Requirements contained in this regulation havebeen submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for clearance underthe provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 8 CFR Part 245a</ITAG>Aliens, Temporary resident status, Permanent resident status.Accordingly, Chapter I of Title 8 of the Code of Federal Regulations isamended as follows.1. The authority citation for Part 245a is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 99-603, 100 Stat. 3359, 8 U.S.C. 1101 noteand Pub. L. 100-204, 101 Stat. 1331.</ITAG>2. The heading for Part 245a is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 245a_ADJUSTMENT OF STATUS TO THAT OF PERSONS ADMITTED FOR LAWFULTEMPORARY OR PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS UNDER SECTION 245A OF THE IMMIGRATIONAND NATIONALITY ACT, AS AMENDED BY PUB. L. 99-603, THE IMMIGRATION REFORMAND CONTROL ACT OF 1986, AND PUB. L. 100-204, SECTION 902</ITAG>3. In andSection; 245a.1, paragraph (h) is revised and paragraphs (r), (s),(t), and (u) are added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(h) The term ``brief and casual'' as used in section 245A(b)(3)(A) of theAct, means temporary trips abroad as long as the alien establishes a continuingintention to adjust to lawful permanent resident status. However, suchabsences must comply with andSection; 245a.3(b)(2) of this chapter in orderfor the alien to maintain continuous residence as specified in the Act.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(r) A qualified designated entity in good-standing with the Service meansthose designated entities whose cooperative agreements were not suspendedor terminated by the Service or those whose agreements were not allowedto lapse by the Service prior to January 30, 1989, (the expiration dateof the INS cooperative agreement for all designated entities).(s) Satisfactorily pursuing as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)(II) ofthe Act means:(1) An applicant for permanent resident status has attended a recognizedprogram for at least 30 hours of a minimum 100-hour course as appropriatefor his or her ability level, and is demonstrating progress according tothe performance standards of the English/citizenship course prescribedby the recognized program in which he or she is enrolled (as long as enrollmentoccurred on or after May 1, 1987, course standards include attainment ofparticular functional skills related to communicative ability, subjectmatter knowledge, and English language competency, and attainment of theseskills is measured either by successful completion of learning objectivesappropriate to the applicant's ability level, or attainment of a determinedscore on a test or tests, or both of these); or (2) An applicant presents a high school diploma or general equivalencydiploma (GED) from a school in the United States; or (3) An applicant has attended for a period of one year, a state recognized,accredited learning institution and that institution certifies such attendance;or(4) An applicant has attended courses conducted by employers, social, community,or private groups certified (retroactively if necessary) by the districtdirector or the Director of the Outreach Program; or(5) An applicant passes a proficiency test for legalization, such testbeing given by qualified administrators (e.g., State Departments of Education),indicating that the applicant has reached a specific level of knowledgeequivalent to a 30-hour enrollment in a designated course as outlined inparagraph (1) of this definition, and submits a ``statement of intent''that further education in any necessary area will be pursued.(t) Minimal understanding of ordinary English as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)of the Act means an applicant can satisfy basic survival needs and routinesocial demands. The person can handle jobs that involve following simpleoral and very basic written communication. (u) Curriculum shall mean a defined outline for an instructional program.Minimally, it prescribes WHAT is to be taught. It can also include suggestionsfor HOW, WHEN, and WITH WHAT MATERIALS. The curriculum must: (1) Include the content of the Federal Citizenship Text series as the basisfor curriculum development (other texts with similar content may also beused); (2) Be designed to provide at least 100 hours of instruction per classlevel; (3) Be relevant and educationally appropriate for the program focus andthe intended audience; and(4) Be available for examination and review by INS as requested. 4. Section 245a.3 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for adjustment from temporary to permanent resident status.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Application period for permanent residence. </T3>An alien who has residedin the United States for a period of eighteen (18) months after the grantingof temporary resident status may make application for permanent residentstatus during the twelve-month period beginning on the day after the requisiteeighteen months' temporary residence has been completed. The date of adjustmentto lawful temporary residence status is the date indicated on the fee receipt,Form I-689. Applications for lawful permanent residence under section 245A(b)(1)of the Act will be accepted when received at the Regional Processing Facilitiesbeginning on November 7, 1988. Applications received at the Regional ProcessingFacilities prior to the beginning of an alien's twelve-month applicationperiod will be held by the Service and processed but will not be consideredfiled until the beginning of the alien's twelve-month application period.(b) <T3>Eligibility. </T3>Any alien physically present in the United Stateswho has been lawfully admitted for temporary resident status under section245A(a) of the Act, such status not having been revoked or terminated,may apply for adjustment of status to that of an alien lawfully admittedfor permanent residence if the alien: (1) Applies for such adjustment during the one-year period beginning withthe nineteenth month that begins after the date of alien was granted suchtemporary resident status; (2) Establishes continuous residence in the United States since the datethe alien was granted such temporary residence status. An alien shall beregarded as having resided continuously in the United States for the purposesof this part if, at the time of applying for adjustment from temporaryto permanent resident status, no single absence from the United Stateshas exceeded thirty (30) days, or the aggregate of all absences has notexceeded ninety (90) days between the date of granting of lawful temporaryresident status and applying for permanent resident status unless the aliencan establish that due to emergent reasons, the return to the United Statescould not be accomplished with the time period(s) allowed; A single absencefrom the United States of more than 30 days, or aggregate absences of morethan 90 days during the period for which continuous residence is requiredfor adjustment to permanent residence, shall break the continuity of suchresidence, unless the temporary resident can establish to the satisfactionof the district director that he or she did not, in fact, abandon his orher residence in the United States during such period; (3) Is admissible to the United States as an immigrant, except as otherwiseprovided in paragraph (f) of this section; and has not been convicted ofany felony, or three or more misdemeanors; and (4)(i)(A) Can demonstrate that he or she either meets the requirementsof section 312 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, (relatingto minimal understanding of ordinary English and a knowledge and understandingof the history and government of the United States); or (B) Is satisfactorily pursuing a course of study recognized by the AttorneyGeneral to achieve such an understanding of English and such a knowledgeand understanding of the history and government of the United States. (ii) The requirements of paragraph (b)(4) of this section must be met byeach applicant who is 16 years or older, except that these requirementsare waived at the discretion of the Attorney General, for those individualsunder the age of 16 and those 65 years of age or older. These requirementsmay also be waived for those who are physically unable to comply. (iii)(A) Literacy and basic citizenship skills requirements for applicantswho demonstrate that they meet the requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A)of this section: The ability of an applicant to speak and understand Englishshall be determined from answers to questions normally asked in the courseof the interview and processing for permanent resident status. An applicant'sability to read and write English shall be tested by excerpts from oneor more parts of the Federal Textbooks on Citizenship at the elementaryliteracy level. The test of a petitioner's knowledge and understandingof the history and form of government of the United States shall be givenin the English language. The scope of the testing shall be limited to subjectmatter covered in the revised (1987) Federal Textbooks on Citizenship andto the review questions provided at the end of each chapter. In choosingthe subject matter and in phrasing questions, due consideration shall begiven to the extent of the applicant's education, background, age, lengthof residence in the United States, opportunities available and effortsmade to acquire the requisite knowledge, and any other elements or factorsrelevant to an appraisal of the adequacy of his or her knowledge and understanding.(B) An applicant who fails to pass the English literacy or educationaltests at the time of the interview, or other designated period of testing,shall be afforded a second opportunity after six (6) months (or earlier,at the request of the applicant) to pass the tests or submit an ``Affidavitof Satisfactory Pursuit'' of a course of study recognized by the AttorneyGeneral before the application for permanent residence is denied.(iv) An applicant who plans to satisfy the English language and basic citizenshipskills requirements of IRCA by satisfactorily pursuing a course of studyrecognized by the Attorney General must submit a ``Certificate of SatisfactoryPursuit'' issued by the designated school or program official attestingto the applicant's satisfactory pursuit of the course of study as definedat andSection; 245a.1(s) of this chapter. Such applicant shall not then berequired to demonstrate that he meets the requirements of andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(i)(A)of this chapter in order to be granted lawful permanent residence providedhe is otherwise eligible. A ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' maybe submitted either at the time of filing Form I-698, subsequent to thetime of application and prior to the interview, or at the time of the interview.An applicant need not, necessarily, be enrolled in a recognized courseof study, at the time of application for permanent residency. (v) Enrollment in a recognized course of study as defined in andSection;245a.3(b)(5) and issuance of a ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit''must occur subsequent to May 1, 1987.(5) A course of study in the English language and in the history and governmentof the United States shall satisfy the requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(i)of this section if: (i) It is sponsored or conducted by an established public or private institutionof learning recognized as such by a qualified state certifying agency,or by an institution of learning approved to issue Forms I-20 in accordancewith andSection; 214.3 of this chapter, or by a qualified designated entitywithin the meaning of section 245A(c)(2) of the Act, in good-standing withthe Service, or is certified by the district director in whose jurisdictionthe program is conducted, or is certified by the Director of the OutreachProgram nationally, and (ii) The course materials for such instruction include textbooks publishedunder the authority of section 346 of the Act.(6) <T3>Notice of Participation. </T3>All courses of study recognized underandSection;245a.3(b)(5) which are already conducting or will conduct Englishand U.S. history and government courses for temporary residents must submita Notice of Participation to the district director in whose jurisdictionthe program is conducted or to the Director of the Outreach Program fornational programs. The Notice of Participation shall be in the form ofa letter typed on the letterhead of the course provider (if available)and contain the following information: (i) The complete addresses and telephone numbers of sites where courseswill be offered, and class schedules. (ii) The complete names of persons at sites in charge of conducting Englishand U.S. history and government courses of study. (iii) A statement that the course of study will issue ``Certificates ofSatisfactory Pursuit'' to temporary resident enrollees according to INSregulations. (iv) A list of designated officials of the recognized course of study authorizedto sign ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'', and samples of theiroriginal signatures. (v) A statement that if a course provider charges a fee to temporary residentenrollees, the fee will be in accordance with the reasonable standard setby the district director or the Director of the Outreach Program.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The Notice of Participation shall be submitted to the district directorwithin thirty (30) days after publication of this Final Rule in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Acceptance of ``Certificates of SatisfactoryPursuit'' may be delayed if the course provider fails to submit the Noticeof Participation within the requisite timeframe. Each district directorshall compile and maintain lists of recognized courses within his or herdistrict. (7) <T3>Fee Structure. </T3>No maximum fee standard will be imposed by theAttorney General. However, if it is believed that a fee charged is excessive,this factor alone will justify non-certification of the course providerby INS as provided in andSection;245a.3(b) (10) and/or (12) of this section.(8) Citizenship textbooks, for the use of applicants for lawful permanentresidence under section 245A of the Act receiving instruction in or underthe supervision of a course of study recognized by the Attorney Generalunder the provisions of andSection;245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter in preparationfor permanent residence, shall be prepared and distributed by the Service,pursuant to andSection;332b.3 of this chapter, to appropriate representativesof public schools. These textbooks may otherwise be purchased from theSuperintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC20402, and are also available at certain public institutions. (9) <T3>Maintenance of Student Records. </T3>Course providers conducting coursesof study recognized under andSection;245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter shall maintainfor each student the following information and documents: (i) Name. (ii) A-number (90 million series). (iii) Date of enrollment. (iv) Date of termination. (v) Attendance records. (vi) Assessment records. (vii) Photocopy of signed ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' issuedto the student. (10) <T3>Issuance of Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit (I-699). </T3>(i) Eachrecognized course of study shall prepare a standardized certificate thatis signed by the designated official. The ``Certificate of SatisfactoryPursuit'' shall be issued to an applicant who has attended a recognizedcourse of study for at least 30 hours of a minimum 100-hour course as appropriatefor his or her ability level, and is demonstrating progress according tothe performance standards of the English and U.S. history and governmentcourse prescribed. Such standards shall conform with the provisions ofandSection;245a.1(s) of this chapter. (ii) The district director shall reject a ``Certificate of SatisfactoryPursuit'' if it is determined that the certificate is fraudulent or wasfradulently issued. (iii) The district director shall reject a ``Certificate of SatisfactoryPursuit'' if it is determined that the course provider is not complyingwith INS regulations. In the case of non-compliance, the district directorwill advise the course provider in writing of the specific deficienciesand give the provider thirty (30) days within which to correct such deficiencies.(iv) District directors will accept ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit''from course providers once it is determined that the deficiencies havebeen satisfactorily corrected. (v) Course providers which engage in fraudulent activities or fail to conformwith INS regulations will be removed from the list of INS approved programsand the INS will not accept ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' fromthese providers. (11) <T3>Designated official. </T3>(i) The designated official is the authorizedperson from each recognized course of study whose signature appears onall ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' issued by that course; (ii) The designated official must be a regularly employed member of theschool administration whose office is located at the school and whose compensationdoes not come from commissions for recruitment of foreign students. (iii)(A) The head of the school system or school, the director of the QualifiedDesignated Entity, the head of a program approved by the Attorney General,or the president or owner of other institutions recognized by the AttorneyGeneral must designate a ``designated official''. Such designated officialmay not delegate this designation to any other person. Each school or institutionmay have up to three (3) designated officials at any one time. In a multi-campusinstitution, each campus may have up to three (3) designated officialsat any one time; (B) Each designated official shall have read and otherwise be familiarwith the ``Requirements and Guidelines for Courses of Study Recognizedby the Attorney General''. The signature of a designated official shallaffirm the official's compliance with INS regulations; (C) The name, title, and sample signature of each designated official shallbe attached to and submitted with each ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit''.(12) <T3>Monitoring by INS. </T3>(i) INS Outreach personnel in conjunction withthe district director shall monitor the course providers in each districtin order to:(A) Assure that the program is a course of study recognized by the AttorneyGeneral under the provisions of andSection; 245a.3(b)(5).(B) Verify the existence of curriculum as defined in andSection; 245a.1(u)on file for each level of instruction provided in English language andU.S. history and government classes.(C) Assure that ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' are being issuedin accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(10).(D) Assure that records are maintained on each temporary resident enrolleein accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(9).(E) Assure that fees (if any) assessed by the course provider are in accordancewith andSection; 245a.3(b)(7).(ii) If there is reason to believe that the service is not being providedto the applicant, INS will issue a 24-hour minimum notice to the serviceprovider before any site visit is conducted.(iii) If it is determined that a course provider is not performing accordingto the standards established in either andSection; 245a.3(b) (10) or (12)of this chapter, the district director shall institute decertificationproceedings. Notice of Intent to Decertify shall be provided to the courseprovider. The course provider has 30 days within which to correct performanceaccording to standards established. If after the 30 days, the districtdirector is not satisfied that the basis for decertification has been overcome,the course provider will be decertified.(13)(i) Courses of study recognized by the Attorney General as definedat andSection; 245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter shall provide certain standardsfor the selection of teachers. Since some programs may be in locationswhere availability of qualified staff is limited or non-existent, or wherebudget constraints restrict options, teacher selections should includeas many of the following qualities as possible:(A) Specific training in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages(TESOL);(B) Experience as a classroom teacher with adults;(C) Cultural sensitivity and openness;(D) Familiarity with competency-based education;(E) Knowledge of curriculum and materials adaptation;(F) Knowledge of a second language; and(G) Flexibility.(c) <T3>Ineligible aliens. </T3>(1) An alien who has been convicted of a felony,or three or more misdemeanors.(2) An alien who has assisted in the persecution of any person or personson account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular socialgroup or political opinion.(3) An alien who was previously granted temporary resident status pursuantto section 245A(a) of the Act who has not filed an application for permanentresident status under section 245A(b)(1) of the Act during the one yearperiod which began with the nineteenth month that begins after the datethe alien was granted such temporary status.(4) An alien who was not previously granted temporary resident status undersection 245A(a) of the Act.(d) <T3>Filing the application. </T3>The provisions of Part 211 of this chapterrelating to the documentary requirements for immigrants shall not applyto an applicant under this part.(1) The application must be filed on Form I-698. The application will bemailed to the designated Regional Processing Facility having jurisdictionover the applicant's residence. Form I-698 must be accompanied by the documentsspecified in the instructions.(2) The submission of original documents is not required at the time offiling Form I-698. Copies certified as true and correct by a qualifieddesignated entity in good-standing or by an alien's representative in theformat prescribed andSection; 204.2(j) (1) or (2) of this chapter may besubmitted with Form I-698. Original documents must be presented when, andif, requested by the Service. Official government records, employment oremployment-related records maintained by employers, unions, or collectivebargaining organizations, medical records, school records maintained bya school or school board or other records maintained by a party other thanthe applicant which are submitted in evidence must be certified as trueand correct by such parties and must bear their seal or signature or thesignature and title of persons authorized to act in their behalf. At thediscretion of the district director and/or the Regional Processing Facilitydirector, original documents may be kept for forensic examination.(3) A separate application (I-698) must be filed by each eligible applicant.All fees required by andSection; 103.7(b)(1) of this chapter must be submittedin the exact amount in the form of a money order, cashier's check or certifiedbank check. No personal checks or currency will be accepted. Fees willnot be waived or refunded under any circumstances.(4) Applicants who filed for temporary resident status prior to December1, 1987, are required to submit the results of a serologic test for theHIV virus on Form I-693, ``Medical Examination of Aliens Seeking Adjustmentof Status, (Pub. L. 99-603)'', completed by a designated civil surgeon.Such applicant is not required to have a complete medical examination.(5) If necessary, the validity of an alien's temporary resident card (I-688)will be extended in increments of six (6) months until such time as thedecision on an alien's properly filed application for permanent residencebecomes final.(6) An application deficient in any way shall be returned to the applicantwith request for correction, additional information, and/or documentation.If response to this request is not received within 60 days, a second andfinal request for correction, additional information, and/or documentationshall be made. If the second request is not complied with within 60 days,the application will be denied for lack of prosecution.(e) <T3>Interview. </T3>Each applicant, regardless of age, must appear at theappropriate Service office and must be fingerprinted for the purpose ofissuance of Form I-551. Each applicant shall be interviewed by an immigrationofficer, except that the interview may be waived for a child under 14,or when it is impractical because of the health or advanced age of theapplicant. An applicant failing to appear for the first scheduled interviewmay, for good cause, be afforded a second interview opportunity.(f) <T3>Numerical limitations. </T3>The numerical limitations of sections 201and 202 of the Act do not apply to the adjustment of aliens to lawful permanentresident status under section 245A(b) of the Act.(g) <T3>Applicability of exclusion grounds</T3>_(1) <T3>Grounds of exclusion not to be applied. </T3>The following paragraphsof section 212(a) of the Act shall not apply to applicants for adjustmentof status from temporary resident to permanent resident status: (14) workersentering without labor certification; (20) immigrants not in possessionof valid entry documents; (21) visas issued without compliance of section203; (25) illiterates; and (32) graduates of non-accredited medical schools.(2) <T3>Waiver of grounds of excludability. </T3>Except as provided in paragraph(g)(4) of this section, the Service may waive any provision of section212(a) of the Act only in the case of individual aliens for humanitarianpurposes, to assure family unity, or when the granting of such a waiveris otherwise in the public interest. In any case where a provision of section212(a) of the Act has been waived in connection with an alien's applicationfor lawful temporary resident status under section 245A(a) of the Act,no additional waiver of the same ground of excludability will be requiredwhen the alien applies for permanent resident status under section 245A(b)(1)of the Act. In the event that the alien becomes excludable under any provisionof section 212(a) of the Act subsequent to the date temporary residencewas granted, a waiver of the ground of excludability, if available, willbe required before permanent resident status may be granted.(3) <T3>Grounds of exclusion that may not be waived. </T3>Notwithstanding anyother provisions of the Act the following provisions of section 212(a)of the Act may not be waived by the Attorney General under paragraph (g)(2)of this section:(i) Paragraphs (9) and (10) (criminals);(ii) Paragraph (15) (public charge) insofar as it relates to an applicationfor adjustment to permanent residence by an alien other than an alien whois eligible for benefits under Title XVI of the Social Security Act orsection 212 of Pub. L. 93-66 for the month in which such alien is grantedlawful temporary residence status under subsection (a);(iii) Paragraph (23) (narcotics), except for a single offense of simplepossession of thirty grams or less of marijuana;(iv) Paragraphs (27) (prejudicial to the public interest), (28) (communists),(29) (subversive);(v) Paragraph (33) (participated in Nazi persecution).(4) <T3>Special rule for determination of public charge. </T3>An alien whohas a consistent employment history which shows the ability to supporthimself or herself and his or her family even though his or her incomemay be below the poverty level is not excludable under paragraph (g)(3)(ii)of this section. The alien's employment history need not be continuousin that it is uninterrupted. It should be continuous in the sense thatthe alien shall be regularly attached to the workforce, has an income overa substantial period of the applicable time, and has demonstrated the capacityto exist on his or her income and maintain his or her family without recourseto public cash assistance. This regulation is prospective in that the Serviceshall determine, based on the alien's history, whether he or she is likelyto become a public charge. Past acceptance of public cash assistance withina history of consistent employment will enter into this decision. The weightgiven in considering applicability of the public charge provisions willdepend on many factors but the length of time an applicant has receivedpublic cash assistance will constitute a significant factor. It is notnecessary to file a waiver in order to apply the Special Rule for Determinationof Public Charge.(5) <T3>Public cash assistance and criminal history verification. </T3>Declarationsby an applicant that he or she has not been the recipient of public cashassistance and/or has not had a criminal record are subject to a verificationof facts by the Service. The applicant must agree to fully cooperate inthe verification process. Failure to assist the Service in verifying informationnecessary for proper adjudication may result in denial of the application.(h) <T3>Departure. </T3>An applicant for adjustment to lawful permanent residentstatus under section 245A(b)(1) of the Act who was granted lawful temporaryresident status under section 245A(a) of the Act, shall be permitted toreturn to the United States after such brief and casual trips abroad, aslong as the alien reflects a continuing intention to adjust to lawful permanentresident status. However, such absences from the United States must notexceed the periods of time specified in andSection; 245a.3(b)(2) of thischapter in order for the alien to maintain continuous residence as specifiedin the Act.(i) <T3>Decision. </T3>The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision,and, if the application is denied, of the reason therefor. An applicationwill not be denied if the denial is based on adverse information not previouslyfurnished to the Service by the alien without providing the alien an opportunityto rebut the adverse information and to present evidence in his or herbehalf. A party affected under this part by an adverse decision is entitledto file an appeal on Form I-694. An alien whose application is denied willnot be required to surrender his or her temporary resident card (I-688)until such time as the appeal period has tolled, or until expiration dateof the I-688, whichever date is later. If the applicant believes that thegrounds for denial have been overcome, he or she may submit another applicationwith fee provided that the application is submitted within his or her one-yearapplication period.(j) <T3>Appeal process. </T3>An adverse decision under this part may be appealedto the Associate Commissioner, Examinations (Administrative Appeals Unit)(the appellate authority designated in andSection; 103.1(f)(2) of this chapter).Any appeal with the required fee shall be filed with the Regional ProcessingFacility within thirty (30) days after service of the Notice of Denialin accordance with the procedures of andSection; 103.3(a) of this chapter.An appeal received after the thirty (30) day period has tolled will notbe accepted. The thirty (30) day period for submitting an appeal beginsthree days after the notice of denial is mailed. A brief may be submittedwith the appeal form or submitted up to thirty (30) calendar days fromthe date of receipt of the appeal form at the Regional Processing Facility.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">For good cause shown, the time within which a brief supporting anappeal may be submitted may be extended by the Administrative Appeals Unit(AAU). If a review of the Record of Proceeding (ROP) is requested by thealien or his or her legal representative and an appeal has been properlyfiled, an additional thirty (30) days will be allowed for this review fromthe time the Record of Proceeding is photocopied and mailed.(k) <T3>Motions. </T3>The Regional Processing Facility director may sua spontereopen and reconsider any adverse decision. When an appeal to the AssociateCommissioner, Examinations (Administrative Appeals Unit) has been filed,the INS director of the Regional Processing Facility may issue a new decisionthat will grant the benefit which has been requested. The director's newdecision must be served on the appealing party within forty-five (45) daysof receipt of any briefs and/or new evidence, or upon expiration of thetime allowed for the submission of any briefs.(l) <T3>Certifications. </T3>The Regional Processing Facility director or districtdirector may, in accordance with andSection; 103.4 of this chapter, certifya decision to the Associate Commissioner, Examinations (AdministrativeAppeals Unit) when the case involves an unusually complex or novel questionof law or fact. The decision on an appealed case subsequently remainedto either the Regional Processing Facility director or the district directorwill be certified to the Administrative Appeals Unit.(m) <T3>Date of adjustment to permanent residence. </T3>The status of an alienwhose application for permanent resident status is approved shall be adjustedto that of a lawful permanent resident as of the date of approval.(n) <T3>Limitation on access to information and confidentiality. </T3>(1) Noperson other than a sworn officer or employee of the Department of Justiceor bureau of agency thereof, will be permitted to examine individual applications.For purposes of this part, any individual employed under contract by theService to work in connection with the Legalization Program shall be consideredan ``employee of the Department of Justice or bureau or agency thereof''.(2) No information furnished pursuant to an application for legalizationunder this section shall be used for any purpose except: (i) To make a determination on the application; or, (ii) For the enforcement of the provisions encompassed in section 245A(c)(6)of the Act, except as provided in paragraph (n)(3) of this section. (3) If a determination is made by the Service that the alien has, in connectionwith his or her application, engaged in fraud or willful misrepresentationor concealment of a material fact, knowingly provided a false writing ordocument in making his or her application, knowlingly made a false statementor representation, or engaged in any other activity prohibited by section245A(c)(6) of the Act, the Service shall refer the matter to the UnitedStates Attorney for prosecution of the alien or of any person who createdor supplied a false writing or document for use in an application for adjustmentof status under this part. (4) Information obtained in granted I-698 applications and contained inthe applicant's file is subject to subsequent review in reference to futurebenefits applied for (including petitions for naturalization and permanentresident status for relatives). <ITAG tagnum="84">Attachment </ITAG>Although not a part of the CFR, the following Immigration and NaturalizationService forms were developed as a result of the Immigration Reform andControl Act of 1986. The reproductions are not official forms and shouldnot be copied or used in any way and are being included for informationalpurposes only. <ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-10-M005 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration(s) 2 395-399 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-10-C </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: July 18, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Richard E. Norton, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Commissioner, Examinations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-17754 Filed 8-5-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-10-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>