<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881110-0024 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-10-88.f2.A1023</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Mine Safety and Health Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">30 CFR Parts 56 and 57</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Safety Standards for Explosives at Metal and Nonmetal Mines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Mine Safety and Health Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This proposed rule updates and clarifies the Mine Safetyand Health Administration's (MSHA) safety standards for explosives at metaland nonmetal mines. These revisions upgrade existing provisions consistentwith technological advances in mining, eliminate duplicative and unnecessarystandards, reduce recordkeeping requirements, and provide alternative methodsof compliance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Written comments and requests for public hearings on theproposed rule must be received on or before January 9, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Send comments to the Office of Standards, Regulationsand Variances; MSHA; Room 631, Ballston Towers No. 3; 4015 Wilson Boulevard,Arlington, Virginia 22203.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Patricia W. Silvey, Director,or Yvonne Johnson, Project Officer, Office of Standards, Regulations, andVariances, MSHA, (703) 235-1910.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Rulemaking Background</ITAG>This proposed rule is part of MSHA's comprehensive review of its metaland nonmetal safety and health standards. MSHA announced the availabilityof a draft proposal on August 20, 1984 (49 FR 33087), and invited publiccommentDuring the review process, MSHA received suggestions and recommendationsfrom many commenters. Many substantive changes consistent with commenters'suggestions, the specific goals of Executive Order 12291, the RegulatoryFlexibility Act, and the Paperwork Reduction Act have been made. The proposed rule arranges the standards in Subpart E of Parts 56 and 57into related categories. They are: storage; transportation; use; electricblasting; nonelectric blasting; extraneous electricity; equipment/tools;maintenance; and general restrictions. Each standard is provided with atitle for easier accessibility. Definitions pertaining to Subpart E precedethe standards in andSection; 56/57.6000. Of twenty-five existing definitionsin andSection; 56/57.2 relating to explosives, fourteen are revoked, fiveare added and one is substantively modified. In the following discussion,the designation ``56/57'' indicates that the standards applies to bothParts 56 and 57. To aid in comparing the existing standards with the revised standards,this document includes a derivation table and a distribution table whichcross-reference the existing standard numbers with the proposed standardnumbers. MSHA specifically solicits further comment on each proposed standardand definition. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Discussion and Summary of the Proposed Rule</ITAG>A. General DiscussionHazards associated with explosive materials have historically been a leadingcause of many serious injuries and fatalities in metal and nonmetal mines.Precautions to safeguard against these hazards are an essential part ofany effective mine safety program. Generally, Subpart E standards focus upon hazards which may be presentwhen persons use or work near explosive material at metal and nonmetalmines. The safety measures that are necessary depend upon the nature ofthe hazards involved. In some instances, the standards prohibit certainactions so as to avoid a situation which could lead to a premature detonation.Other standards set out correct procedures to be followed when workingwith explosive material. New developments in the field have been reviewedand are addressed where necessary. These include: nonelectric initiationsystems such as shock tube systems, gaseous initiation systems, and miniaturizeddetonating cord systems; the use of sequential timers and other in-holeblast delay techniques; and bulk mixing and loading technology. B. TransfersTwo standards are transferred to Subpart F, Drilling and Rotary Jet Piercing.Existing standard 56/57.6107 prohibits the drilling of holes where thereis danger of intersecting a charged or misfired hole. Existing standard56/57.6135 prohibits collaring holes in bootlegs. These standards willbe renumbered 56/57.7055 and 56/57.7056 respectively. A clarifying changehas been made to the wording of standard 56/57.6107. The phrase ``charged''hole has been replaced with ``a hole containing explosives, blasting agentsor detonators'' to make the wording consistent with language used in proposedSubpart E. C. DeletionsExisting standard 56.6046, which requires that vehicles containing explosivesor detonators be maintained in good condition and be operated at a safespeed and in accordance with all safe operating practices, is proposedfor deletion since other standards address the maintenance or safe operationof vehicles. Existing standard 56/57.6108, which requires that fuse andigniters be stored in a cool, dry place away from oils or grease is proposedfor deletion since both safety fuse and igniter cord are defined as Class``C'' explosives and are covered under MSHA's storage requirements forexplosives. Existing standard 56.6132, which requires delay connectorsto be treated and handled with the same safety precautions as detonators,is proposed for deletion because delay connectors are defined as detonators.Existing standard 56/57.6139 requires that blasting areas shall not bere-entered after firing until concentrations of smoke, dust, and fumeshave been reduced to limits determined by the air quality standards. Thisstandard is proposed for deletion since the hazards are addressed by thepost-blast examination requirements of proposed standard 56/57.6306 andby the allowable concentrations of blast-generated gases in the existingAir Quality standards. However, MSHA solicits additional comments on thisissue. Existing standard 56/57.6140, concerning extraneous electricity is proposedfor deletion as redundant with other standards dealing with extraneouselectricity.The existing introductory statement, designated 56/57.6000, states thatthe term ``explosives'' includes ``blasting agents.'' Commenters suggesteddeletion of the introductory statement. MSHA agrees and proposes to includespecific language in the standards which clarifies the applicability ofeach standard with respect to blasting agents and explosives.Commenters objected to the requirement of preproposal draft standard 56.6330that holes be stemmed as unrelated to safety and unnecessary. Explosivemanufacturers, many users, and MSHA recognize that the practice of stemmingincreases the efficiency of explosive materials and contributes to safetyby minimizing flyrock and reducing the need for secondary blasting. However,the safety aspects of flyrock and secondary blasting are addressed in proposedstandards 56/57.6306 and 56/57.6312. For example, proposed standard 56/57.6306(e)requires all persons to be out of the blast area or in a protected locationwhen the blast is fired. The practice of stemming can, therefore, be leftto the discretion of the mine operator, and the stemming requirement isdeleted from the proposed rule.D. Incorporation by ReferenceExisting standard 56/57.6020 incorporates by reference ``the current AmericanTable of Distances for Storage of Explosives'' published by the Instituteof Makers of Explosives (IME). The draft proposal incorporated directlyinto the standard the pertinent parts of the Table and the National FireProtection Association's table, ``Separation Distances of Ammonium Nitrateand Blasting Agents from Explosives or Blasting Agents'' (NFPA 492-1976).Commenters suggested deleting any reference to either table because thetables are set out in existing Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearm(BATF) standards. While a long-standing interagency agreement providesfor MSHA enforcement of BATF standards, MSHA believes that specific hazardsunique to mining exist on mine property and dictate the use of tables whichspecifically address them. For example, the IME table provides excellentsafety guidance but is primarily directed at protecting areas outside ofmine property. Accordingly, MSHA has replaced the incorporation by referencewith tables of distances specifically directed toward mining. Thus, forPart 57 the term of ``inhabited buildings'' is replaced with ``mine buildings,underground mine openings, fans, dams and electric substations'' to addressthe risk to miners, including underground miners, from the initiation ofa surface storage facility. For Part 56, the definition is replaced with``mine buildings, dams, and electric substations'' to afford protectionat surface operations.E. Performance LanguageIn developing the proposed rule, performance-oriented criteria was usedrather than specification language, where appropriate. With performance-orientedlanguage, a proposed standard sets out aspects of the safe use of explosivematerial as an objective to be met. As long as the safety objective isachieved, the agency allows the operator to use the compliance method thatis most appropriate. However, in standards where a necessary and acceptedmargin of protection is provided and where safety is enhanced by a precisestatement of a specific requirement, specifications are retained.The distances used in the various proposed standards are taken from recommendationsof consensus standards, expert organizations, and manufacturers' publications.To illustrate, areas around magazines must be kept clear of combustiblematerials for specified distances because fires initiated by nearby lightningstrikes have resulted in the explosion of magazines. The footage requirementsof the applicable standard conform with IME Publication No. 3, ``SuggestedRegulations'' (Section 5.6 r and s), 1985 edition, BATF regulations 27CFR 55.215, 1987 compilation, and the NFPA Code 495, (Section 6-8 MiscellaneousSafety Precautions), 1985 edition.In cases where the potential source of ignition in a mine environment iselectricity, the current could pass through such alternative conductivepaths as: (1) The earth, (2) damp timbers, (3) metal pipelines, (4) machineryhousings, (5) track rails, (6) metal fences, or (7) a conductive rock stratathat lies on top of or between two nonconductive strata. The use of electricdetonators, spark-sensitive explosive material and new forms of blastingagents and explosives reinforce the need for a routinely implemented separationdistance.The agency retains specific separation requirements from sources of electricityand fire in standards that address electrical distribution circuits; electricalsubstations; welding and other sparks; and open flames and smoking. Thedistances used are taken from the IME Safety Library publications, theAtlas Powder Company ``Handbook of Electric Blasting'' (1976), the Dupont``Blaster's Handbook'' (1978), Bureau of Mine's Circular 54 and the NationalFire Protection Association (NFPA) Code 495 (1985).F. Definitions``Active workings.'' The proposed rule deletes the definition of ``activeworkings.'' Where relevant, the proposed standards include specific languagerelating to the places where persons work or travel.``American Table of Distances.'' The proposed rule deletes the definitionof ``The American Table of Distances'' because the table is not includedin the proposed standards.``Attended.'' This newly defined term allows for flexibility in securingareas containing explosive materials, including areas to be blasted. Itis performance-oriented and allows for electronic or video monitoring devicesas well as the actual presence of an individual.``Blasting agent.'' The proposed definition updates the existing referencepertaining to any substance classified as a blasting agent. ``Blast area.'' The proposed rule changes the phrase ``blasting area''to ``blast area'' for consistency. The characteristics to be consideredin determining the blast area have been listed in the definition in orderto more clearly state its intent. The presence of ``gases'' is added asa determinant of the blast area since toxic gases associated with blastingcan cause serious injury and death. The MSHA air quality standards establishthe permissible exposure limits for toxic gases. The term ``shock wave''has been added to clarify the term ``concussion.''``Blasting cap.'' The proposed rule deletes the existing definition of``blasting cap''. The term is commonly understood to be a detonator whichis initiated by a safety fuse.``Blasting circuit.'' The existing MSHA definition of ``Blasting circuit''limiting the term to electric circuits is inappropriate. As a result ofnew technology, many non-electric blasting circuits are now in use. Theproposed rule contains no definition for blasting circuit because the termcan apply to either electric or nonelectric circuits. Where used, its applicationis made clear by the language of the standard.``Blast site.'' This newly defined term describes the area where specificsafety precautions must be taken during loading of blastholes. The termis taken from the Institute of Makers of Explosives (IME) Publication No.12, (January , 1985) ``Glossary of Commercial Explosives Industry Terms''.The ``Blast site'' is considerably smaller in size than the ``blast area''and is intended to provide protection for miners engaged in blasthole loadingactivities and miners engaged in other non-blasting activities in the vicinity.Activity at the blast site unrelated to loading increases the probabilityof injury associated with explosives-handling. Only activities relatedto loading would be permitted within the blast site. The distance set outin the definition is a reasonable distance to separate the loading operationsfrom other operations which may interfere with preparations for the blastor be affected by a premature detonation of a limited size. Mining activitiessuch as drilling, overburden removal, mucking and hauling would be permittedto continue uninterrupted at the mine at a distance which would not interferewith loading activities. This area of inactivity will provide assurancethat mine vehicles will not damage the explosive materials being handledor disturb the blastholes being loaded. It will also minimize the possibilityof injury to miners from a premature detonation and reduce the likelihoodthat miners' activities such as drilling or mucking could cause a prematuredetonation. This definition includes not only ``loaded holes'' but also``holes to be loaded.'' This inclusion recognizes that the entire loadingprocess often progresses at a rapid rate. It assures that miners engagedin non-blasting activities will not be within the 50 foot protected areaunknowingly. ``Blasting switch.'' MSHA adopts the suggestion of several commenters thatwe retain the definition of ``blasting switch.'' The term defines the switchused in powerline shooting and is used in several standards.``Booster.'' The proposed rule deletes the existing definition becausethe term ``booster'' is not used in the proposed standards.``Capped Fuse.'' The proposed rule deletes the existing definition becausethe term ``capped fuse'' is not used in the proposed standards.``Capped primer.'' The proposed rule deletes the existing definition becausethe term ``capped primer'' is not used in the proposed standards. ``Delay connector.'' The proposed rule deletes the existing definitionbecause the proposed definition for the term ``detonator'' addresses delayconnector.``Detonating cord.'' The proposed rule clarifies the existing definition.The phrase ``used to initiate other explosives'' is added to assure thatdetonating cord is not confused with other initiating devices. ``Detonator.'' The existing definition is revised for clarity by includingexamples of commercially available detonating devices. In response to commentsreceived, MSHA has clarified the definition by adding that ``detonator''does not include detonating cord. The proposed definition states that detonatorsmay be either ``Class A'' or ``Class C'' detonators as classified by theDepartment of Transportation (DOT). DOT makes this classification on thebasis of its test results. When more than 90 percent of the devices testedin a package explode practically simultaneously, they are classified asClass A detonators. Class A detonators, as packaged, are more likely tomass detonate than Class C detonators. Extra caution must be exercisedwhen storing, transporting or using Class A detonators.``Electric blasting cap.'' The proposed rule deletes this definition becausethe term ``electric blasting cap'' is readily understood by persons inthe mining community who use and handle explosives. ``Explosive.'' The proposed definition clarifies the existing definitionby stating that the DOT document referenced is a 1986 publication. It isproposed to continue to use the DOT classification of materials to determinethose substances that are to be treated as explosives and blasting agents.The classification is used industry-wide and provides an accurate groupingof materials having similar characteristics as determined through DOT tests.The labeling of explosives according to this classification is in widespreaduse and provides an effective identification system. Classification labelsare placed on products by the manufacturer and are present when these productsare brought onto mine property. Mine operators are familiar with theselabels and can readily identify the nature of the explosive material.The Agency is aware that DOT is proposing to revise its existing classificationsystem for packaging of hazardous substances (52 FR 16482, May 5, 1987and 52 FR 42772, November 6, 1987). In these documents, DOT states thatwork has begun in another rulemaking action to address the testing, classingand packaging of explosives and that a notice of proposed rulemaking willbe issued. MSHA is following these rulemakings closely. Upon publicationof a final rule amending the existing explosives classification system,MSHA will determine the advisability of incorporating the new classificationscheme into its rule. ``Explosive material.'' This newly defined term includes ``explosives,''``blasting agents'' and ``detonators'' as explosive material and is usedmany times throughout the proposed rule. It eliminates repetition of theterms ``explosives'', ``blasting agents'', and ``detonators'' and allowsfor the deletion of the introductory application statement appearing asexisting standard 56/57.6000.``Flashpoint.'' The proposed rule adopts the definition used in SubpartC, Fire Prevention and Control, Section 56/57.4000. This definition conformswith the definition of ``flash point'' in the National Fire ProtectionAssociation's ``Flammable and Combustible Liquid Code,'' NFPA 30-1981.Flash point is defined as the minimum temperature at which a liquid releasessufficient vapor to form a flammable vapor-air mixture near the surfaceof the liquid.``Igniter cord.'' The proposed definition is retained with editorial changes.The definition is necessary to avoid confusion with other initiating devices.``Laminated partition.'' In response to comments received, MSHA has addedthis definition to clarify what may be used as an equivalent alternativeto four inches of hardwood separating detonators from other explosive material.MSHA clarified the term in the draft proposal by stating that the materialsmust be bonded and consist of minimum nominal dimensions. The definitionis derived from the IME Pamphlet Number 22, January 1, 1985. The phrase``laminated partition'' appears in standards 57/57.6133 and 56/57.6201.``Loading.'' The definition is added to standardize and clarify this importantaspect of blasting activities. The use of ``charge'' as synonymous with``load'' has resulted in some confusion within the mining community. MSHAproposes the exclusive use of ``load'' as descriptive of the process ofplacing explosive material in a hole or against material to be blasted.``Magazine.'' The proposed rule would delete the term ``magazine'' sinceit is commonly understood in the mining community. The construction requirementsfor a surface magazine appear in proposed standard 56/57.6132. ``Mass Detonation.'' The draft proposal definition of ``mass detonation''is deleted because the term is not used in the proposed rule.``Misfire.'' The complete or partial failure of explosive material to detonateas planned. The proposed definition substitutes the terms ``explosive material''for ``blasting charge'' and ``detonate'' for ``explode'' for consistencyin terminology. Misfires have occurred for a variety of reasons, includinguse of inappropriate, damaged or deteriorated explosive material.``Multi-purpose dry-chemical fire extinguisher''. The proposed rule adoptsthe definition used in Subpart C, Fire Prevention and Control, andSection;56/57.4000, which defines multi-purpose dry-chemical fire extinguishersas those meeting at least the nationally recognized criteria for extinguisherswith a 2-A:10-B:C rating. These extinguishers are appropriate for use onfires involving combustible solids, flammable and combustible liquids,and electric equipment. Approval organizations such as the UnderwritersLaboratories, Inc. and the Factory Mutual Research Corporation test andlist fire extinguishers meeting this rating. Because fire equipment manufacturersdesignate the weight of dry-chemical agent in an extinguisher by ``nominal''weight rather than by ``minimum'' weight, the definition uses the term``nominal'' and clarifies that the nominal weight must be at least 4.5pounds.``Non-electric delay blasting cap''. The proposed rule deletes the existingdefinition because the term ``non-electric delay blasting cap'' is notused in the proposal. ``Powder chest''. The proposed rule deletes the existing definition forthe term ``powder chest'' since it is commonly understood in the miningcommunity, and the construction requirements for a powder chest are containedin standard 56/57.6132.``Safety switch''. The proposed rule makes editorial revisions to the existingdefinition of ``safety switch'' for clarity and consistency. ``Water gel'' or ``Slurry''. The proposed rule deletes the existing definitionof water gel because the term is not used in the proposal. The proposedrule editorially revises the existing definition of slurry. ``Working place''. The proposed rule deletes the existing definition sincethe term is not used in any proposed standard.G. Section-by-Section AnalysisThe following analysis examines the proposed rule and its effect on existingstandards.<ITAG tagnum="81">Storage_Surface and Underground</ITAG>Section 56/57.6100 Separationof explosive material.This proposed standard combines and clarifies existing standards 56/57.6002and 56/57.6008 and expands the coverage of 56/57.6008 to include all formsof blasting agents rather than only ammonium nitrate-fuel oil (ANFO). Existingstandard 56/57.6002 addresses the need to store detonators away from explosivesand blasting agents because of the sensitivity of detonators. Paragraph(a) of the proposed standard would require continuation of this practice.Storing detonators separately would reduce the chances of accidental detonationof other explosive material. Existing standard 56/57.6008 deals with the contamination of explosivematerials by ingredients such as fuel oil (from ANFO mixes) and other blastingagents. This contamination could cause deterioration of the explosive materialsand lead to misfires. In paragraph (b) of the proposed standard, MSHA adoptsthe language suggested by one commenter to apply the standards to otherblasting agents in addition to ANFO. This is necessary to keep pace withnew forms of blasting agents introduced. One commenter suggested that theword ``physically'' be retained in the proposed standard. However, sinceany separation must be ``physical'', it is not necessary to use the term.Section 56.610 Areas around storage facilitiesThe proposed standard clarifies the intended coverage of existing standard56/57.6005. The standard addresses the combustion hazards which can existnear a magazine from either the natural growth of vegetation or the accumulationof other materials which would support combusion. Fires believed to beinitiated by nearby lighting strikes have resulted in the explosions ofseveral magazines. For this reason, it is imperative to keep areas aroundmagazines clear of combustible materials. The proposed rule requires theclearance of combustible materials from areas surrounding magazines andfacilities which store explosive material. The language of the standardconforms with BATF regulations (27 CFR 55.215 Housekeeping), and with IME,Publication No. 3, ``Suggested Regulations'' (Sec 5.6 r and s), 1985 edition.There appears to be a general consensus in the explosive community that150anddegrees; F is an excessive and potentially dangerous temperature forexplosive material. In some cases, tempetures much below 150anddegrees;Fhave been shown to be a hazard. Paragraph (a) reflects a considerationthat low intensity rubbish, brush, and dry grass fires would not normallyexceed this temperature at the magazine if a 25 foot clearance is maintained.Paragraph (b) requires a separation of 50 feet between storage facilitiesand stored combustibles, such as mine timbers and fuels. Fires from thesesources noramlly burn with higher intensity, and distances greater thanthose needed for protection from rubbish and brush fires are required toassure than an excessive temperature is not reached. Both of these distancesare the recognized industry consensus figures as published in the NationalFire Protection Association (NFPA) Code 495, Chapter 3, Section 6-8, 1985edition, as well as in other BATF and IME publications. In addition, combustible liquids have occasionally been stored in the vicinityof a storage facility. MSHA is considering additional language to requirethat ground around storage facilities slope away for drainage, as a precautionin case a tank containing combustible liquid ruptures. The Agency solicitsspecific comment on this issue. The phrase relating to ``unnecessary combustible materials'' is deletedsince no combustible material should be allowed to accumulate or be storednear magazines. Live trees 10 feet or taller are less combustible thanthe other substances covered by the standard. Removal of these trees isnot required.Section 56/57.6102 Storage practices This propsoed standard addresses the storage of explosive material in magazines,and combines existing standards 56/57.6007 and 56/57.6011. Under the proposal,explosive material would be stored in a stable manner, not more than eight(8) feet high with the brand and grade readily identifiable. Explosivematerial shall also be stored in a manner which facilitates use of theoldest stock first. Implementation of these requirements would minimizethe migration of sensitizing agents within storage containers and assurethat explosive materials are not crushed or dropped, possibly resultingin unplanned detonation. The requirements also assure stability of thestacked explosive material, while providing ease of handling and readyidentification. Many of the explosive materials on the market today havea predetermined shelf life. Misfires have occurred as a result of usingoutdated stock. The requirement for storage to facilitate the rotationof stock addresses this hazard. The existing requirement in 56/57.6007relating to the storage of explosive material with ``top sides up'' isdeleted. While this language is intended to further the stability of thestacked material, the Agency believes paragraph (c) of the proposed standardrequiring storage in a stable manner assures stability.The proposal requires that explosives be stored in closed nonconductivecontainers except that nonelectric detonating devices may be stored onnonconductuve racks. Existing standard 56/57.6011 requires explosive materialcontainers to be closed. Several existing standards including andSection;andSection;56/57.6020, 57.6050, and 57.6056 address the nonsparking and nonconductivenature of containers. Comenters noted that this requirement would prohibitaccepted safe practices such as storing delay connectors in labeled, openbins and opening containers of rolled detonating cord to cut and removespecific lengths. The nonconductive containers and nonconductive rack requirementsof this standard provide protection equivalent to closed containers andallow for deletion of this requirement with respect to nonelectric detonatingdevices. The term ``explosive material'' is used for uniformity with otherstandards and adds clarity. Consistent with commenters' suggestions, thetitle has been revised. BATF requires that a record be kept of the inventory of many storage facilitiesbecause of the possibility of theft and subsequent use. This recordkeepingrequirement is not contained in the MSHA regulation because it does notpertain to the on-site safety of miners at work.Sections 56/57.6130 Storage facilitiesExisting standard 56/57.6001 states that detonators and explosives otherthan blasting agents shall be stored in magazines. The proposed rule alsoaddresses storage facilities for blasting agents in recognition of themany new types of products on the market. The proposal contains the generalrequirements for magazines, bins, tanks, and certain other facilities suchas droptrailers, which would allow for the storage of blasting agents inthese facilities. MSHA's preproposal included new language requiring thatfacilities be ``well-ventilated.'' Commenters recommended use of the term``ventilated'', stating that ``well-ventilated'' was vague. MSHA adoptsthis suggestion, and notes that it is consistent with existing ventilationrequirements of BATF. MSHA also adopts the phrase in paragraph (c) suggestedby one commenter that bins or tanks be `` * * * locked or attended, orotherwise made inaccessible to unauthorized entry.''In addition, MSHA solicits comment on an alternative to requiring compliancewith specific Tables of Distances. This alternative would require thatstorage facilities be located so that, in the event of an explosion, theywill not create a hazard to occupants in mine buildings and will not damagemine openings, mine ventilation fans, dams or electric substations. TheMSHA Tables of Distances could be included as a nonmandatory appendix togive guidance to mine operators. This option would ensure that hazardswould not occur, while giving operators the flexibility to use barriersto other means of protection as well as distance.Sections 56.6131 and 57.6131 Location of storage facilitiesExisting standard 56/57.6020 addresses construction, location and housekeepingcriteria for surface magazines and incorporates by reference the IME ``AmericanTable of Distances''. Proposed standard 56/57.6131 addresses the locationof surface magazines. Proposed standard 56/57.6132 addresses constructionand housekeeping criteria for surface magazines. Commenters suggested deletionof the incorporation because the subject is covered by BATF standards whichare enforced by MSHA under an Interagency Agreement. BATF regulations includethe ``American Table of Distances'', the ``Table of Distances for Storageof Low Explosives'', and the ``Table of Separation Distances of AmmoniumNitrate and Blasting Agents from Explosives or Blasting Agents''. Thesetables principally address the safety of individuals off the mine property.They have been deleted from the proposed standard which is restructuredto provide increased safety for miners at the mine site.MSHA is proposing to include its own tables of separation distances asAppendix I of this Supart. The IME ``American Table of Distances'', May1983, and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) ``Table of SeparationDistances'' (NFPA 492-1976) as published in NFPA 495-1985, form the basisof the MSHA tables. It should be emphasized that the MSHA tables are specificallydeveloped for hazards unique to the mining environment. The IME and NFPAtables remain a primary source of separation distances in other situationsand should be referred to in those cases. MSHA's tables would not conflictwith BATF regulations, which the Agency will continue to enforce underan interagency agreement.MSHA recognizes that some mines do not have sufficient surface area tocomply with the tables. For these mines, MSHA allows an exception basedon performance criteria. The criteria are intended to provide protectionfrom the hazards of a surface storage facility detonation. Such a detonationcould endanger mine employees in nearby buildings. It could also pose adanger to other employees, especially underground miners, if a mine opening,electric substation, dam or mine ventilation fan were damaged. The standardrequires a mine operator to take these hazards into consideration whenselecting a storage facility location. In addition to natural or artificialbarriers, features such as the natural topography of the ground can beconsidered in determining the location of the facility when it is not possibleto comply with the tables. An example of an acceptable location could bewithin natural earth formations outside the blast area. Another could bea storage facility placed in an excavation into the toe of a highwall inan abandoned portion of the mine. MSHA is specifically soliciting commentson the appropriateness of its tables, the specific distances referencedin the tables and examples were deviations from the tables might be necessary.Paragrpah (b) addresses inadvertent damage to a magazine and detonationof its explosive material contents caused by flyrock from a blast or byelectrical sources generated from severed powerlines. The requirement thatstorage facilities be located outside of the blast area is a new proposalto address the accidents, fatalities and injuries that have occured inrecent years from flyrock.The existing requirement for location of magazines ``away from'' powerlinesis clarified in this proposal as ``a sufficient distance from powerlinesso that the powerlines, if damaged, would not contact the storage facility.''This proposal provides assurance that energized powerlines, when severedby an accident or a storm, will not cause a fire at the storage facilityor introduce an electrical current which could cause detonation of itscontents.All blasting agents can be affected by heat generated from electric sourcesand therefore are included in the coverage of this standard. The referenceto fuel storage areas in the existing standard has been deleted and isaddressed in proposed standard 56/57.6101.The Agency believes that there will be a little or no additional cost associatedwith the proposed requirement. MSHA requests data to determine whetherany facilities will be affected by the changes in the proposed rule.Section 56/57.6132 Magazine requirementsExisting standard 56/57.6020 addresses construction, location and houskeepingcritieria for surface magazines. Proposed standard 56/57.6131 addressesthe location of surface magazines. Proposed standard 56/57.6132 addressesconstruction and housekeeping criteria for surface magazines.Paragraphs (a) and (b) of the proposed standard modify paragraph (c) ofthe existing standard. The structural integrity requirements of paragraph(a) are proposed as suggested by commenters. the magazine must provideprotection of its contents from the elements and from potential impactwhich could alter the sensitivity of the explosive material or cause adetonation. A structurally sound magazine also enhances safety by contributingto the security of the stored explosive materials.Paragraph (b) of the proposed rule contains requirements which provideprotection from the sparks and heat of nearby fires which could cause adetonation.Paragraph (c) addresses the hazard of magazine detonation by the impactof a bullet on the explosive materials stored within. The large quantitiesof materials stored magnify the destructive forces which are generatedif a detonation occurs. Three of the last ten magazine explosions werecaused by bullets penetrating the magazine. Various methods for achievingbullet resistance are detailed in BATF regulations and IME Safety LibraryPublication No. 3. These documents are commonly used to evaluate what isan acceptable level of bullet resistance. They do not include the word``reasonably''. For that reason the proposed standard deletes the word``reasonably'' which appears in the existing standard.Paragraph (d) addresses the bonding and grounding of magazines. The existingstandard requires electrical bonding and grounding if constructed of metal.Several commenters suggested that these requirements be deleted. MSHA agreeswith comments with respect to grounding of metal magazines. A metal magazineresting on the earth will likely dissipate static electricity without agrounding rod. Secondly, metal structures are an effective shield fromlightning and offer a satisfactory path to earth when the metal is resting,uninsulated, on the ground. A Bureau of Mine's research contract report,``Evaluation of Surface Storage Facilities for Explosives, Blasting Agentsand Other Explosive Material'', June 1, 1983, concluded that metal magazinesdo not have to be grounded and recommended that metal portions of nonmetalmagazines be bonded together and grounded to assure that all metal portionsare at the same electrical potential. The proposed rule deletes the requirementfor grounding of metal magazines but requires that metal portions of nonmetalmagazines be bonded and grounded to prevent internal build-up of electricalenergy which could detonate the explosive material stored. The proposalalso clarifies that welds, rivets and securely tightened bolts are acceptablemethods for magazine bonding.Paragraph (e) requires that the magazines have nonsparking materials onthe inside. Sparking material is prohibited inside a magazine because ofthe potential for a spark-generated detonation of the magazine contents.This provision editorially revises the existing standard.Paragraph (f) addresses the need for ventilation in a magazine. The existingstandard requires ``* * * adequate and effectively screened ventilationopenings near the floor and ceiling''. The performance-oriented proposedstandard provides that the magazine must be ventilated to control dampnessand excessive heating. Dampness increases the likelihood of deteriorationand misfires. Excessive heat or fumes increase the likelihood fo detonationor deterioration of explosive material.Paragraph (g) editorially modifies the existing standard which requiresdanger signs to be located so that a bullet passing through the face ofthe sign will not strike the magazine.Paragraph (h) of the existing standard requires that magazines be ``keptclean and dry in the interior, and in good repair''. The reference to ``goodrepair'' has been deleted from the proposed rule because it is coveredby the ``structurally sound'' requirements of paragraph (a). The proposedrule retains the ``clean and dry'' requirements in paragraph (h) however,in recognition of two concerns. First, if accumulations of rain, snow,and mud are not removed, they may contaminate the explosive materials andalter their chemical nature. Improper detonation can result. In addition,blasting agents are often stored in these magazines with more sensitiveexplosives. Minor spills of blasting agents which occur during handlingin the magazine must be cleaned up to prevent contamination of the explosives.Paragraph (i) is a new provision which addresses fire and explosion hazardsthat can exist from improper lighting equipment installed in a magazine.This proposal is consistent with the BATF requirement which allows battery-activatedsafety lights or battery-activated safety lanterns in explosives storagemagazines. The IME Publication andplusmin;3, andSection; 5.4.5, provides guidancefor safe lighting of a magazine.Paragraph (j) editorially revises the existing requirement dealing withthe fire and explosion hazards that can exist with improper heating devicesin magazines. The standard would allow heating of magazines in a mannerwhich assures that hazards will not be introduced into the magazine. TheIME Publication andplusmin;3, andSection; 5.4.5, provides guidance for safeheating of a magazine. Paragraph (k) editorially revises existing paragraph (h) which requiresthat magazines be kept locked securely when left unattended. This provisionis designed to protect against vandalism. Paragraph (l) permits storage of essential nonsparking equipment neededto clean, maintain and operate the facility. The existing standard doesnot allow any extraneous material in the magazine. Allowing essential equipmentto be stored in the magazine would not affect the safe storage of explosivematerial, but would assure that the magazine is effectively maintained.Section 56/57.6133 Powder chests This proposed standard modifies existing standard 56/57.6159 concerningstationary of mobile powder chests for the short-term storage of limitedquantities of explosive material. The exisiting standard applies to bothsurface and underground operations. The proposed standard applies onlyto surface areas since proposed standard 57.6161 deals with auxiliary storagefacilities underground. Paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), and (f) of the existing standard have beenedited for clarity and appear in the proposed standard without substantivechange as paragraph (a). Paragraph (e) of the existing standard is revisedand set out as proposed paragraph (b). The proposed standard permits alternativemethods for the storage of detonators depending on their classificationby the DOT. The agency recognizes that when dealing with small quantitiesof Class C detonators, protection can be achieved with 4-inches of hardwood,laminated partition or equivalent. Some commenters requested clarification of the word ``equivalent'' in thephrase ``4-inches of hardwood or the equivalent''. MSHA added the definedterm ``laminated partition'' as an example of equivalent protection buthas also retained ``equivalent'' to allow for advances in mining technologyand flexibility in compliance. <ITAG tagnum="81">Storage_Underground Only </ITAG>Section 57.6160 Main facilities MSHA recognizes that underground storage of explosive material is a commonpractice. This new provision addresses hazards associated with the improperstorage and location of main underground facilities. The inherently hazardousnature of stored explosives necessitates that certain safety precautionsbe taken, particularly in a mine environment which may contain high electriccurrent, conductive ore bodies, heavy equipment and nearby activity. The proposed standard, in response to public comment, omits certain draftproposal language. The draft proposal required that facilities be locatedso that fumes could not course to working places. Fumes from explosivematerials stored in a wellmaintained facility present no problem when thefacility and the mine are ventilated. However, the proposal provides thatthe main facility shall be located so that a fire or explosion in the storagefacilities will not prevent escape of miners from the mine. The requirementsof this standard are taken from Bureau of Mines Circular 54, and IME SafetyLibrary publications. The distances in the Bureau of Mines circular havebeen in effect during the times when the modes of transportation in undergroundmines have evolved. Various modes of transportation have differing potentialfor impact on storage facilities. These distances have proven effectivefor rail haulage and more recently diesel-powered rubber-tired haulage.Section 57.6161 Auxiliary facilities This proposed standard combines existing standards 57.6027, 57.6029, and57.6030 which address facilities used to store explosive material nearwork places. This standard is consistent with the general practice in themining community of providing wooden, box-type facilities near the workplace. Paragraph (a) would allow alternatives to ``box-type'' facilitiesaddressed in existing standards 57.6027 and 57.6029 by permitting the useof other facilities which provide equivalent impact resistance and confinement.Original shipping containers often provide some degree of protection andconfinement during transportation. However, construction of paper and plasticproducts does not adequately protect the contents from deterioration causedby impact and moisture in the mining environment during auxiliary storage.Auxiliary storage facilities are used in areas other than ``working faces'',the phrase appearing in existing standard 57.6027. For example, explosivematerial is occasionally stored near crushers and chutes. MSHA has substitutedthe phrase ``work places'' since precautions are necessary wherever explosivematerials are stored. Paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(5), (b)(6) and (b)(9) are taken from theexisting standards and provide that auxiliary facilities be posted andprotected against environmental conditions such as sparks, moisture, anddetonation from other storage facilities. The 25 foot separation distancein paragraph (b)(9) is taken from Bureau of Mines Circular 54 and providesassurance that accidentally initiated detonators will not influence theother stored explosive material. Paragraphs (b)(3) and (b)(4) are new provisions designed to protect thecontents of auxiliary storage facilities from exposure to the mine environmentand particularly to prevent moisture from contaminating and desensitizingthe contents. Paragraph (b)(7) is a new provision addressing hazards whichoccur when equipment or electrical charges contact the explosive materials.The 15 foot separation from haulageways and electrical equipment is lessthan that for main storage facilities but assures clearance and separationnear auxiliary facilities. Since generally the size of equipment and theelectrical current would be less in these areas than in areas near mainstorage facilities, less clearance and separation would be required. Paragraph (b)(8) is a new provision limiting the amount of explosive materialstored in auxiliary facilities near the underground work site. These facilitiesbeing near work areas are exposed to harsher conditions than a main storagefacility. They may be subjected to rougher handling, environmental factorssuch as water, and the potential to be struck by mine equipment, and arestriction on quantity is warranted. One commenter stated that the two-day supply restriction contained in thepreproposal draft could create significant logistical problems. After reevaluatingthe amounts of explosive materials used at an individual work site, thesize and material handling capabilities of the affected mines, and theprotection provided by the construction requirements for the auxiliaryfacility, MSHA proposes to increase the storage limit to a one-week supply.This limit will minimize the hazards of unplanned detonation of large amountsof explosives by work site activities and protect the stored materialsfrom deterioration, while permitting efficient scheduling of explosivematerials delivery to work areas throughout the mine. MSHA estimates that 5 percent of the facilities contain an average supplyof two weeks of explosive material. To comply with the proposal, thesemines would increase their deliveries from 26 times per year to 52 timesper year. An average of additional hours per delivery is required. Theadditional annual operating cost for small mines would be $17,781 and forlarge mines, $51,985. MSHA solicits comments on these preliminary estimates.MSHA's preliminary analysis has not attributed any benefits to this newrequirement because none of the injuries or fatalities that occurred inthe past ten years would have been prevented by compliance. Hence, MSHAsolicits comments on any benefits resulting from it. Paragraph (b)(10) is a new requirement which addresses situations whereunauthorized access can be gained to an underground work site during timeswhen the mine is not working or is occupied by a few workers in areas wherethe auxiliary facilities are not present. The locked facility will assurethat on-site miners and subsequently returning miners will not be endangeredby unauthorized use of the stored explosive materials. <ITAG tagnum="81">Transportation </ITAG>Section 56/57.6200 Delivery to storage or blastsite areas The proposed standard modifies language addressing the need to avoid delayin the transportation of explosive materials to the blast site or storagefacility. The phrase in existing andSection; 56/57.6048 ``* * * over routesand at times that expose a minimum number of persons'' has been deletedsince it has resulted in some unnecessarily circuitous routes being used,possibly increasing the overall risk. Section 56/57.6201 Separation of explosive material Existing standard 56/57.6040 requires that explosives and detonators betransported in separate vehicles unless separated by 4-inches of hardwoodor the equivalent, and makes no distinction between Class A and Class Cdetonators. The proposed rule distinguishes between Class A and Class Cdetonators and specifies the transportation requirements for each. MSHA's preproposal draft would have prohibited a detonator subject to massdetonation (a Class A detonator) from being transported in the same vehicleor conveyance as explosives or blasting agents. Several commenters objectedto this prohibition and suggested that MSHA allow the use of the laminatedpartition container specified in the IME Safety Library Publication 22,``Recommendations for the Safe Transportation of Detonators in a Vehiclewith Certain Other Explosive Materials.'' The Agency has adopted the suggestionthat the IME container be allowed. However, to provide additional protectionfrom the mass detonation hazard, MSHA is also requiring that appropriatepackaging be used whenever Class A detonators are transported. This packaging,provided by the manufacturer, conforms with the DOT requirements for transportationof explosive material. These requirements limit the number of detonators,their total weight and their movement within the package and would reducethe likelihood of mass detonation. MSHA's proposed standard would prohibitall Class A detonators, and Class C detonators in quantities of more than1000, from being transported in a vehicle or conveyance with explosivesor blasting agents unless the detonators are maintained in the originalpackaging as shipped from the manufacturer and separated from the explosivesor blasting agents by 4-inches of hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent.The Institute of Makers of Explosives' Booklet No. 22 may be used as referencematerial for Class A and Class C detonator separation. A fire-initiating detonator in the vehicle could also detonate explosives.This hazard is greatly enhanced if the detonators are Class A. The DOTclassification of detonators as Class A or Class C is based on tests involvingquantities of 1000 detonators. Class A detonators are likely to mass detonate.The use of Class A detonators is becoming more prominent with the developmentof safer, less-sensitive explosives and blasting agents. Class C detonatorsare not likely to mass detonate. When the detonators are Class C, up to1000 (the quantity tested by DOT) may be transported with other explosivematerial if separated from the explosive material by 4-inches of hardwood,laminated partition or equivalent. Class C detonators transported in quantitiesof more than 1000 must be treated as Class A detonators, in conformancewith the Institute of Makers of Explosives' Booklet No. 22. The proposal retains the concept of laminate construction but also includeslanguage allowing for use of an ``equivalent'' protection. This languageprovides flexibility in compliance while clarifying that a laminated partitionis acceptable. MSHA specifically solicits comments concerning the mannerin which the separation of explosive material and Class A detonators isaddressed.Vehicles referred to in this proposed standard include carriers such astrucks, front-end loaders, railcars, and personnel carriers. A conveyancerefers to various types of shaft and slope cages used to carry personsor materials. There is little or no additional cost associated with the proposed standard.Some mines may have to transport Class A detonators separately if theyare not maintained in their original packaging as shipped and separatedfrom explosives by 4-inches of hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent.MSHA believes the cost to be minimal and request data to determine thenumber of affected mines and any cost that they might incur. Section 56/57.6202 Vehicles This proposed standard modifies, combines and clarifies existing standards56/57.6042; 56/57.6043; 56/57.6044; 56/57.6047; 56/57.6050; 56/57.6053;56/57.6065; 56/57.6077; and 56/57.6200. It addresses the hazard of an unplanneddetonation of explosive materials during transportation on a mine vehicle.Detonation can result from vehicle fires, vehicle accidents, or constructionof a vehicle with inappropriate materials. In paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2), the proposal addresses construction requirements,warning signs and operational safeguards. The term ``suitable'' is deletedand the term ``substantially constructed'' is replaced with a more preciseterm ``structurally sound.'' Several changes have been made to allow greaterflexibility in vehicle construction. The phrase ``secured to a nonconductivepallet'' has been added as an alternative for compliance with sides andtailgate requirements. Paragraph (a)(3) clarifies MSHA's intent as to where explosive materialshall be located during transportation by vehicle. The proposal would clarifythat the carrying of explosive material in the passenger area of a vehicleis not permitted. Paragraph (a)(4) clarifies existing andSection; 56/47.6042 which requiresmore than one extinguisher on vehicles used to transport explosive materials.The term ``suitable'' is replaced with the phrase ``multipurpose dry-chemicalfire extinguishers.'' Multipurpose dry-chemical fire extinguishers are``suitable'' for fighting all classes of fires that would be expected tooccur on a vehicle used to transport explosive materials. These vehiclesusually have more than one person aboard. Providing two extinguishers allowsfor more than one person to fight the fire. In addition, tire fires canrekindle after the flame has been extinguished and the second extinguishermay be needed for resuppression. When faced with the hazards presentedby fire near explosive or detonators, the need readily available fire extinguishersis of critical importance. The presence of two fire extinguishers on avehicle containing explosives or detonators could greatly reduce responsetime in fighting a fire. Under the proposal, an automatic fire suppressionsystem can be used as an alternative to one of the extinguishers. Paragraph (a)(5) is a new provision requiring vehicles to be vented unlesstransporting in bulk. While it may not be possible to vent bulk deliveryvehicles, it is practical to vent other vehicles containing explosive materialto avoid the build-up of heat and moisture which can result in prematuredetonation. Existing standard 56/57.6043 requires posting of proper warning signs onvehicles containing explosives or detonators. Paragraph (a)(6) clarifieswhat ``proper'' warning signs would be and is consistent with languageused in other posting sections of the proposed rule. Paragraph (a)(7) clarifies the phrase ``necessary attendants'' used inexisting standard 56/57.6053, by substituting the phrase ``persons necessaryfor handling the explosive material''. Paragraph (a)(8) combines existing standards 56/57.6065 and 57.6077 concerningthe need to attend vehicles during transportation of explosive material.Attendance provides vehicles security as well as protection for nearbyminers against a runaway vehicle. The scope of the standard has been broadenedto include blasting agents. While blasting agents are less sensitive thanexplosives, they still require special precautions. The terms ``attended''and ``loading'' are defined terms in the proposed rule. Paragraph (a)(9) addresses inadvertent movement of parked vehicles containingexplosive material to prevent runaway vehicle accidents which could causedetonation of the contents. Paragaraph (a)(9)(i) is taken from existingstandard 56/57.6044. The phrase ``blocked securely against rolling'' inexisting standard 56.57.6044, is replaced by paragraph (a)(9)(ii) whichrequires wheel chocking only if the possibility of movement exists. Paragraph(a)(9)(iii) is a new provision which allows the engine to run while thevehicle is parked if it powers a device being used in the loading operation.Although commenters suggested that paragraph (a)(9) duplicates proposedmobile equipment standards 56/57.9036 and 56/57.9037, it contains additionalspecific requirements applicable to the hazards associated with explosivematerial. Paragraph (b) makes editorial changes to existing standards 56/57.6047and 56/57.6050 dealing with the hazard of spark-producing material in thecargo space with explosives. Sparks produced during transit or in an accidentcould detonate the entire load. MSHA agrees with the commenter who suggestedthat blasting agents should not be included in the coverage since theyare not spark-sensitive. The preproposal requirements applicable to bulk dispensing vehicles arecontained in paragraph (c). Existing standard 56/57.6200 deals with thetransportation and dispensing of blasting agents. The language has beenwritten to address the dispensing of all types of bulk explosive material.The proposed rule retains the requirement for protection against internalpressure and frictional heat when screw conveyors are used. This protectionaddresses potential fires and explosions in the vehicle. In the draft proposalMSHA used the word ``excessive'' to clarify the intended degree of internalpressure and frictional heat to be avoided in screw conveyor. MSHA agreeswith a commenter that the word ``excessive'' is unnecessary and has deletedit from the proposed rule. Commenters objected to draft proposal languagerequiring venting ``to allow free movement of air around the cargo'', statingthat such a regulation would be impossible to comply with. MSHA agreesthat compliance would be impractical and has deleted this language. Existingstandard 56/57.6200 prohibited zinc or copper exposed in the cargo spacewhen blasting agents are transported. The proposal extends the requirementto vehicles used for dispensing any type of bulk explosive materials. Astechnology has evolved, bulk explosive material other than blasting agentshas sometimes included chemicals which can react with zinc or copper. Section 56/57.6203 Locomotives This proposal combines existing standards 56/57.6041 and 56/57.6051 coveringtransportation of explosive materials on top of locomotives and in carsbeing pushed or towed by locomotives. Locomotives are normally poweredthrough direct-current trolley wires, batteries or diesel engines. Allthree sources have the potential to generate heat or sparks which couldcause a fire and unplanned detonation of the explosive material. Additionally,locomotives are not equipped with an enclosed space for material hauling.Any materials transported on top of a locomotive are subject to dislodgingand subsequent impact during transit or in an accident. When explosive material is transported in a car being propelled by a trolley-poweredlocomotive, a potential for electrical sparking and short circuits exist.These cars must be covered and electrically insulated. In addition, fallof ground or other impact can present a hazard to exposed explosive material.The required cover would protect the explosive material from impact. Section 56/57.6204 Hoists The proposal combines and clarifies existing standards 56/57.6054, 57.6075and 57.6076 and addresses hazards encountered when conveying explosivematerial on hoists. The proposal broadens coverage to include surface operations.Many surface operations such as slate and dimension-stone mines utilizehoists to allow miners to enter and leave the work area. The proposed surface and underground standards are identical with the exceptionthat the underground standard requires hoisting to be stopped in compartmentsadjacent to those transporting explosive material. This exception is necesaryto address the use of the large compartmentalized hoists used in some undergroundmetal and nonmetal mines. Paragraph (a) of the proposal would assure that hoist operators at surfacemines as well as underground operations are notified that explosive materialis being transported. Paragraph (b) of the proposal requires containment of the explosive materialin a structurally sound container to prevent shifting of the cargo whichcould cause detonation by impact or by sparks. The manufacturers' containers,usually cardboard boxes or plastic bags, are acceptable, provided theyare secured to a nonconductive pallet and no sparks can be generated. Paragraph (c) prohibits the transporting of persons on a hoist conveyanceor mantrip containing explosive material. This provision minimizes theprobability of injury during a hoisting accident involving explosive material.Section 56/57.6205 Conveying explosives by hand This proposed standard combines existing standards 56/57.6056 and 56/57.6057.To reflect the intent of the standard to isolate explosives from the elementsduring conveyance, the term ``closed, nonconductive containers'' replacesthe phrase ``substantial nonconductive containers'' used in the existingstandard. Draft proposal language expanding the coverage to include ``blastingagents'' has been deleted as suggested by one commenter, since blastingagents are not spark-sensitive. Language was added requiring detonatorsand other explosive material to be carried in separate containers. Thispractice follows the principle that detonators and other explosive materialshould be kept separate until loading so that accidental initiation ofdetonators will not cause detonation of other explosive material. Othereditorial changes have been made for clarity. <ITAG tagnum="81">Use_Surface and Underground</ITAG>Section 56/57.6300 Control of blastingoperationsThe proposed standard combines and clarifies existing standards 56/57.6090and 56/57.6091 dealing with direction and supervision of blasting operations.MSHA proposes that only trained and experienced persons direct the specifictasks involved in blasting operations. Several commenters felt the existingstandards are redundant with present training regulations. The trainingand experience needed to supervise or direct blasting operations in today'smines where the technology is continually changing would be expected toexceed the training provided to miners who simply handle explosives undera supervisor's direction. As new explosive materials are introduced atthe mine, the persons directing the blasting operations shall be trainedin the safe handling and use of the products. This training is normallyon-the-job, provided at the mine site by a representative of the explosivemanufacturer. These new products may create hazards in storage, transportation,loading, blast hook-up, blast area security, firing, and post-blast examinations.Training shall address these areas where appropriate.Section 56/57.6301 Blasthole obstruction checkThe proposal clarifies existing standard 56/57.6093 concerning obstructionsin blastholes. When explosive materials are loaded into an obstructed blasthole,several safety related problems can occur. A partially obstructed holecan result in wedging of the primed charge at an improper depth in thehole. Manual maneuvering to dislodge the wedged material could result ina premature detonation. A partial obstruction could also cause a separationbetween the blasting agent and the initiating charge and a misfire couldoccur. In addition, obstructions which interfere with proper loading ofthe blasthole can result in poor fragmentation which could require thatsecondary blasting be performed. Obstructions could also increase flyrockand blowouts which pose injury risks to miners. The proposal clarifiesthat checks for obstructions must be performed before holes are loaded.Some obstructions can occur near the bottom of a blasthole without effectivelyblocking the entire hole. In these instances, loading can be accomplishedto that depth without imposing safety hazards, and no restrictions apply.Where a rigid liner is inserted in the entire length of the blasthole andremains intact, the hole is considered checked and cleared of obstructions.Commenters to the draft proposal were concerned that all holes would haveto be drilled before any one hole was checked. This requirement was notintended and the word ``all'' has been deleted from the final rule.Section 56/57 .6302 Explosive material protectionThis proposed standard deals with the need to provide a protected environmentfor explosive materials prior to loading. Paragraph (a) modifies exisitingandSection; 56/57.6096 by substituting the word ``loading'' for the word``charging'' and adding the term ``blasting agents'' for clarity. Paragraph(b) is a new requirement that is a basic safety practice to prevent prematureinitiation of the explosive material due to impact or heat. The many newtypes of explosive material presently in use at the mine site are sensitiveto varying amounts of impact. In addition, large equipment capable of exertingheavy impact is often used in the loading environment. The IME cautionsthat temperatures in excess of 150anddegrees; F are considered hazardous(Safety Library Publication No. 4, p.5, December, 1985).Section 56/57.6303 Initiation preparationThis standard addresses the hazards of premature detonations and misfiresassociated with the preparation of primers. Paragraph (a) contains therequirements of existing standard 56/57.6098(a) with clarifying editorialchanges requested by commenters. The requirements of proposed paragraph(b) appeared in the draft proposal as 56/57.6302(b). It substituted ``blastsite'' for ``blasting area'' in existing standard 56/57.6097 and requiredthat ``primers shall be made up only at the time of use and as close tothe blast site as conditions allow.'' One commenter suggested adding thewords ``as close to the time of use as practical'' to paragraph (c). MSHAdisagrees because the word ``practical'' provides no specific guidancein this matter. Preparing primers as close to the blast site as ``conditionsallow'' more clearly conveys the needed safety concern. The preproposaldraft incorporated this thought by requiring primer preparation as closeto the blast site as conditions allow, and therefore, the proposal retainsthis language. Paragraph (c) retains the requirements of existing standard56/57.6098 (b) with editorial changes. It protects against misfires byrequiring that connections between detonating cord and other explosivesbe made in a manner which assures that the detonation will not be interrupted.Section 56/57.6304 Primer protectionThis proposed standard addresses the tamping or dropping of large cartridgesof explosives or blasting agents directly on primers, a practice whichcan cause accidents and misfires.Paragraph (a) adopts the tamping precautions of existing standard 56/57.6101without change. Paragraph (b) is a new requirement which prohibits droppingof large cartridges of explosive material directly on a primer unless theblasthole is full of water. If cartridges are dropped into blastholes onlypartially filled with water, the cartridges are likely to spread from theimpact and cause an interruption in the column of explosive material.The draft proposal prohibited dropping cartridges greater than 3 inchesin diameter. Commenters pointed out that 4 inches and greater sizes havebails which facilitate lowering, while smaller sizes do not. The proposalacknowledges this provision and prohibits the dropping of cartridges whichare 4 inches or larger in diameter directly on a primer unless the holeis full of water.Section 56/57.6305 Unused explosive materialThis proposed standard has been revised to clarify existing standard 56/57.6102dealing with unused explosives, and to provide uniformity with other standards.The ``protected location'' language of the proposal allows unused explosivematerial inside the blast area provided it would not be affected by concussionor flyrock.Section 56/57.6306 Loading and blastingThe proposed standard deals with precautions during loading and blasting,and combines existing standards 56/57.6094, 56/57.6160, 57.6175, and 57.6182,and adds several new provisions. The proposal would apply to surface andunderground operations. Paragraph (a) is a new requirement to assure propertreatment of explosive materials and initiating systems at the blast site.Explosive materials can be prematurely detonated if struck by moving vehiclesor contacted by electrically-powered equipment.Paragraph (b) is a new provision restricting activities near the blastsite during loading. It also specifies the minimum distance from the loadingand hook-up where work unrelated to the blasting operation is permitted.MSHA's draft proposal language required that ``once loading begins, onlyactivity directly related to the blasting operation shall be permittedwithin an area at least five times the face height in all directions fromthe blast site.'' Many comments were received objecting to this languageas being unnecessarily restrictive. MSHA has reevaluated the provisionand responded to these comments by excluding unrelated activity only fromthe blast site, a defined term. Activity at the blast site can interferewith the loading process and increase the likelihood of an accident.Paragraph (c) requires that loading be a continuous operation to avoidthe hazard of prolonged ``sleeping'' of explosive material. This proposalis a substitute for the requirement in existing standard 56/57.6094 thatblasting occur within 72 hours of loading the hole unless prior approvalis obtained. Several commenters felt an exception was needed from ``continuous''loading when unusual circumstances exist. MSHA agrees. The proposal allowsrelief for emergency situations, shift changes, and idle shifts not toexceed 16 hours.Paragraph (d) requires that when loading is suspended, the blast site shallbe attended. MSHA's proposed definition of ``attended'' would allow electronicor video monitoring devices as well as the actual presence of an individualto satisfy this standard.Paragraph (e) is derived from existing standards 56/57.6160, 57.6175, and57.6182. It addresses the time when persons must be removed from the blastarea to provide for their safety.Paragraph (f) deals with the need to fire blasts without delay. Once allcircuits have been connected, conditions at the blast site have reachedtheir maximum potential to cause injury or death if an accidental detonationoccurs. Blasts must be initiated as soon as possible once preparationshave been completed.Paragraph (g) provides for warning, clear escape routes from the blastarea, and all access to the blast area to be protected against entry. Likethe existing standard, the proposal provides that access to the blast areabe guarded by persons, or barricaded. It clarifies that ``barricade'' inthis provision means ``obstructed to prevent the passage of persons orvehicles.''Paragraph (h) is a new provision requiring post-blast examinations to minimizehazards to persons who will perform subsequent work at the site. One commenterstated that the language for post-blast examinations would not adequatelypromote safety because it does not explicitly state that smoke, dust, andfumes should be evaluated in any post-blast examination. This degree ofspecificity is not necessary. Trained and experienced persons conduct theseexaminations and would address all the potential hazards present at a blastsite including ground conditions, undetonated explosive materials and smoke,dust and fumes.Section 56/57.6307 Drill stem loadingThis proposed standard addresses the potential for premature detonationof explosive material while it is being loaded into the blastholes withdrill stem equipment or other devices that could be extracted. It editoriallyrevises existing standard 56/57.6142 for consistency with other standardsby substituting the terms ``explosive material'' and ``blastholes'' forthe existing language ``explosives or blasting agents'' and ``boreholes''.Accidental deaths and injuries have resulted from failure to recognizethe detonation hazard potential which exists when explosive material isaccidentally struck by extractable drill stem equipment. Commenters suggestedno substantive changes and none have been made.Section 56/57.6308 Initiation systemsRecent accidents and MSHA experience have indicated the need for this newstandard to address the safe use of electric initiating systems. In caseswhere initiating systems are used incorrectly, a variety of malfunctionsor unsafe practices can occur. Any malfunction in a multiple hole blastcan result in uninitiated explosive material remaining in the rock or ore.When the rock or ore is excavated with large mining equipment the explosivesmay not be observed until they are introduced into the crushing and screeningequipment where a hazard to persons is created. Recently a licensed blasterwas testing equipment in a blast sequence. He picked up the sequentialblasting cable plug lying alongside of the machine instead of the shuntplug. He plugged it in, proceeded through the test sequence of the chargingmachine and pressed the fire button. An unintended detonation occurredresulting in two injuries.Any malfunction or misuse of an initiating system in a multiple hole blastcan result in noninitiated explosive material remaining in the rock orore. When the rock or ore is dug with large mining equipment, the explosivesare not always observed until it is introduced to the crushing or screeningequipment where it creates a hazard to persons.Some commenters found the preproposal draft provision to be acceptable,however others felt that this provision was both unacceptable and unnecessary.MSHA believes that as a minimum, manufacturer's instructions relating tosafe use of these systems must be followed to assure safety of miners.The manufacturer, when introducing technology, can be expected to be familiarwith any new safety characteristics and can communicate the hazards ina timely manner.Section 56/57.6309 Fuel oil requirements for ANFOThis new standard addresses misfires associated with less than maximumdetonation of ammonium nitrate-fuel oil blasting agents. It prohibits theuse of waste fuels as an oxidizer and restricts the use of other hydrocarbons.It requires that liquid hydrocarbon fuels used in ammonium nitrate-fueloil have a minimum flash point of 125 anddegrees;F or less to minimize thehazards of fuel storage and blasting agent mixing and use and to preventthe excessive build-up of fumes following a blast. The two primary concernsaddressed by this standard are incomplete detonation and the creation ofunusually high quantities of toxic fumes.Section 56/57.6310 Misfire waiting periodThe proposed standard combines and updates existing standards 56/57.6104and 56/57.6105 dealing with the length of time a person must wait aftera suspected misfire before entering the blast area. The phrase ``when amisfire is suspected'' is introduced as the criteria for determining whento wait the prescribed period before returning to the blast area. Thislanguage is added so that a person would not feel compelled to physicallyinvestigate to determine if a misfire has occurred. After a suspected misfire,persons shall not enter the blast area for 30 minutes if blasting capsand safety fuse are used; or 15 minutes if any other type detonators areused.Section 56/57.6311 Handling of misfiresThis proposal would combine existing standards 56/57.6106, 56/57.6168 and57.6177 dealing with the examination for, and handling of misfires. Thecompetent person requirement in the draft proposal has been deleted asunnecessary since proposed standard 56/57.6300 requires a trained and experiencedperson to direct all blasting operations.The proposal recognizes that mine personnel often have the capability ofsafely disposing of misfires without the need to immediately notify minemanagement of the misfire. Other misfire conditions may require the expertiseof the manufacturer who can be contacted by mine management. For this reason,existing language has been modified to require reporting of all misfireseither immediately or at the end of the shift depending upon conditions.In paragraph (a) the term ``searched'' used in the preproposal draft hasbeen changed to the more appropriate term ``examined'' as recommended byseveral commenters. This would comply with the original intent of the standardand conform with the language of existing standard 56/57.6106.In paragraphs (b) and (c), several commenters suggested changing ``affectedareas'' to ``blast site''. The proposed rule retains the ``affected areas''terminology because an accidental detonation during the removal of a misfireis likely to affect an area larger than the blast site. Several commentersquestioned the scope of the phrase ``only work necessary to remove anymisfires'' appearing in paragraph (b). MSHA clarifies its intent by addingto the proposal language which would include any work related to securingthe safety of miners in the affected area. For example, necessary controlof ground in the misfire area would be permitted prior to removing themisfire.Section 56/57.6312 Secondary blasting Existing standard 57.6141 deals with multiple secondary blasts in a blastingarea. Its intent is to minimize risks associated with the unnecessary useof multiple initiation sources in a work area when one source will suffice.Because this principle is equally applicable for surface and undergroundoperations, the scope has been expanded to include secondary blasting atsurface operations as well as underground mines.The term ``blast area'' is used in the existing standard. However, theproposed rule definition of ``blast area'' has been broadened to includethose areas of the mine affected by shock waves, flying material or gases.The proposed rule uses the term ``work area'', more accurately reflectingthe original intent of the standard.Section 56/57.6313 Blast site securityThis standard addresses hazards present where loading is completed andthe hole is awaiting firing. It replaces existing standard 56/57.6103.The term ``loaded'' is substituted for ``charged'' and the term ``attended''is substituted for ``guarded'' for consistency with other standards. Theexisting standard allows alternatives to guarding. The area can be barricadedand posted, or flagged against unauthorized entry. Comments indicated thatit is appropriate to continue to allow these alternatives to ``attending''the site. The proposed rule incorporates the comments by allowing barricadingand posting, or flagging against unauthorized entry.<ITAG tagnum="81">Electric Blasting_Surface and Underground </ITAG>MSHA has received communication from industry concerning the quality ofthe insulation used for blasting wire and cable. The Agency solicits commentson the issue of substandard insulation and the desirability of establishingminimum insulation specifications. An alternative to a specification standardwould be to include in the final rule, language adopted from the followingwhich appears in the existing 56 and 57.2 definitions:``Insulated'' means separated from other conducting surfaces by a dielectricsubstance permanently offering a high resistance to the passage of currentand to disruptive discharge through the substance. When any substance issaid to be insulated, it is understood to be insulated in a manner suitablefor the conditions to which it is subjected. Otherwise, it is, within thepurpose of this definition, uninsulated. Insulating covering is one meansfor making the conductor insulated.``Insulation'' means a dielectric substance offering a high resistanceto the passage of current and to a disruptive discharge through the substance.Section 56/57.6400 Compatibility of electric detonatorsThis standard modifies existing standard 56/57.6119 and prohibits the useof incompatible electric detonators in the same round. Individual explosivematerial manufacturers and the IME caution that electric blasting capsof different manufacturers should not be mixed in the same series. Ignitionsystems may not be electrically compatible and misfires may occur. Theterm ``brand'' appearing in the existing standard is replaced with ``manufacturer''.Commenters agreed that ``manufacturer'' should be used. Section 56/57.6401 ShuntingThis proposal addresses shunting. It provides protection against prematuredetonation caused by extraneous current flowing through the individualportions of the circuit as they are prepared. Editorial changes have beenmade in existing standard 56/57.6120 for clarity. Commenters objected tothe removal of the reference to blasting galvanometers in the existingstandard. The requirement for these testing devices is retained in proposedstandard 56/57.6407, Circuit testing.Section 56.6402 Deenergized circuits near detonatorsThis proposal modifies existing standard 56/57.6126. It addresses the needto deenergize electrical circuits in a blast site where electric detonatorsare used, so that stray current will not be introduced. Stray current cancause a premature detonation during the loading process.The proposal also provides an alternative compliance method by allowingfor stray current tests in lieu of deenergization. The tests must indicatethat stray current levels in the area are sufficiently low so that theywould not cause detonation. Otherwise, all electrical circuits within 50feet of electric detonators at the blast site shall be deenergized whenelectrical detonators are used. At surface operations, voltages in excessof 650 volts are common. The use of any power cable that has copper-braidshielding, such as types SHD or SHC, is recommended to minimize stray currenthazards. MSHA specifically solicits comments on the desirability of requiringthat specific distances be established separating high voltage lines fromthe surface blast site where electric detonators are being used. As pointed out in the ``Handbook of Electric Blasting'', Atlas Powder Company(1976), electric current will always flow from a higher voltage to a lowervoltage through whatever conductive paths are available to it. If the insulationaround a conductor in a power system or a piece of electrically operatedequipment is defective, part of the current in the conductor can leak outand follow other conductive paths to the lower voltage. Thus, this typeof stray current could pass through such alternate conductive paths as:(1) The earth, (2) damp timbers, (3) metal pipelines, (4) machinery housings,(5) track rails, (6) metal fences, (7) a conductive rock strata that lieson top of or between two nonconductive strata or (8) other conductive materialin electrical contact with the defect in the insulation. A potential hazardexists if an electric detonator becomes part of one of these alternateconductive paths. In the proposed stray current test, the 1-ohm resistoris used to simulate the electric detonator. Any stray current flowing inthe circuit is detected by measuring the voltage drop across the resistor.The measured voltage drop cannot exceed the equivalent of 0.050 amps. Thismaximum stray current provides a safety factor and is 20% of the 0.250amp firing current for electric detonators.The frequency of stray current testing should be determined by consideringfactors such as: changes in the conductivity of the ground; relocationor change of a source or conductors of electrical current; and the continualdevelopment of new blast sites as mining progresses. The term, ``electricblasting caps'' is changed to read ``electric detonators'' as suggestedby commenters. Other editorial changes have been made. Section 56/57.6403 Branch circuitsThis proposal modifies existing standard 56/57.6125, addressing unintentionalcurrent in branch circuits. It protects miners by requiring that safetyswitches provide isolation of the circuits to reduce the hazard of prematuredetonation. The proposal allows equivalent methods of isolation to be used.Permanent blasting circuits are often used by more than one miner, particularlyin underground mines. The safety switch required in the standard is usedto protect individuals from unintentional voltage when another miner maybe energizing the circuit which would cause an unplanned ignition. Thiscircuit is similar to an electrical lock-out when working on an electricalcircuit.Section 56/57.6404 Positive separation of blasting circuits from powersourceExisting standard 56/57.6127 addresses blasting switches and lead wireconnections to the switch. The intent is to prevent accidental initiationof a blast by premature completion of the circuit. There were no changessuggested by commenters and the proposed rule appears with editorial changesonly.Section 56/57.6405 Firing devicesThis proposal combines existing standards 56/57.6128 and 56/57.6131 anddeals with power sources and control of firing devices. Paragraph (a) addressesthe need to provide sufficient power to prevent misfires. Electric detonatormanufacturers specify that a minimum of 1.5 amps direct current (DC) or2.0 amps alternating current (AC) be supplied to any single series or parallelseries circuit. Many metal and nonmetal blasts include several hundreddetonators and varying amounts of resistance dependent upon lengths andcomposition of leg wires and lead wires, series and parallel series circuits,and current leakage. It is incumbent upon the operator to evaluate thesepower needs and use the proper source. The use of storage or dry cell batteriesis not acceptable as a power source because dry cell batteries cannot berelied upon to have sufficient power to detonate a round and there is nobuilt-in mechanism to alert the user that a low electric charge exists.Paragraph (b) is a new provision which addresses the need for proper maintenanceof blasting machines. Advances in technology have led to increasing complexityin firing devices. All blasting devices, including sequential timers, shouldbe maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions to assureeffective operation. Defective or improperly repaired blasting machinescan contribute to misfires creating hazards to persons. For example, onSeptember 19, 1988 in Lafayette, New Jersey, the bucket of a front-endloader struck an undetonated charge buried on the floor of the quarry,the ensuing explosion injured the operator. The incident might have beenprevented if the contract blaster working for the mine operator had properlymaintained, tested, and repaired his blasting machine as prescribed inproposed andSection;andSection; 56/57.6405. The blasting machine being usedat this operation was a sequential timer that energizes multiple electricblasting cap circuits in a programmed sequence. The timing system providesblasting operators with a greater number of delays than is available witha conventional blasting machine. According to the preliminary accidentreport, the machine ``shut down'' meaning that some or all of the circuitswere not being energized appropriately. MSHA believes that compliance withthe standard on examination for misfires, andSection;andSection; 56/57.6311and this standard, addressing proper maintenance, testing, and repair ofblasting machines would have prevented this incident. MSHA solicits commentson other incidents which might have been prevented by this new provision.In developing an annual cost for this new provision, MSHA has estimatedthat fifty percent of the mines blast electrically and eighty percent ofthose would comply voluntarily as a safe work practice and company policy.Cost for those mines not complying would be $200 per mine. Mines averageone machine per mine. The total annual cost for small mines would be $69,700and for large mines would be $23,180. MSHA solicits additional informationon the various paramenters and costs associated with testing, repairing,and maintaining blasting machines. Paragraph (c) assigns control of the firing device key to the blaster.Several commenters suggested that the language relating to ``person designated''in the existing standard be used instead of the term ``blaster''. MSHAdisagrees. The blaster would be a knowledgeable person fully trained inall phases of blasting operations and is more likely to have been involvedin the loading process and the evaluation of the safety hazards associatedwith the blast. MSHA is considering including all firing devices, not onlyelectrical devices in this requirement. Comments are solicited on thisissue. Editorial changes have also been made to existing standard 56/57.6131.Section 56/57.6406 Duration of current flow This standard clarifies existing standard 56/57.6133 which addresses theprevention of misfires through limiting the duration of current flow. Theproposal modifies the existing standard by allowing the operator to choosethe manner in which the current flow would be limited. ``Arcing'' occurs when excessive current within the electric detonatorcauses a build-up of heat at the bridgewire. The build-up can result ina misfire. When electric blasting is performed from power sources suchas powerlines or lighting circuits which provide a continuous current,the duration of current flow must be limited to prevent arcing within thedetonator. Manufacturers have determined that arcing can be avoided ifthe current flow time is limited to 25 milliseconds. The phrase ``zero-delay''has been changed to ``25 millisecond delay'', the more precise term. Inresponse to comments, the phrase ``explosive charge'' in the existing standardis changed to ``explosive device'' for clarity. Section 56.6407 and 57.6407 Circuit testing The proposal editorially modifies existing standard 56/57.6121 dealingwith circuit testing. Testing of circuits helps prevent misfires by determiningwhether an individual series circuit is closed and by locating broken wiresand connections. When blasting electrically, the circuit must be testedfor continuity and for resistance at surface mines and for continuity atunderground mines prior to blasting. The required testing differs betweensurface and underground mines since surface holes are deeper, larger, anddifferent types of priming systems are used. This standard also addresses the need to use the appropriate type of testingequipment to avoid introducing excessive current which has resulted inpremature detonations and fatalities. Used properly, blasting galvanometersproduce the correct amount of current for testing the circuit. The term``borehole'' is proposed to be changed to ``blasthole'' for consistency.As suggested by commenters, the term ``electric blasting caps'' has beenchanged to the proper term, ``electric detonators.'' <ITAG tagnum="81">Nonelectric blasting_Surface and Underground </ITAG>Section 56/57.6500Damaged initiating material This proposal revises existing standard 56/57.6109 which addresses theprevention of misfires from defective initiating material. The phrase ``shockand gas tubing and similar material'' is added to include recent technologicaldevelopments in the coverage of the standard. A commenter stated that theterm ``shock tubing'' is no longer used by the manufacturers to describethis initiating material. While manufacturers may be identifying the productby its brand name, the term ``shock tubing'' is understood by the industryand has been included in manufacturers' publications. Except for gas tubing, there is no method of testing the continuity ofthese initiating materials prior to blasting. To avoid misfires it is extremelyimportant to protect the integrity of the material by using componentswhich are not kinked, bent sharply or damaged. It is also important tocheck visually to assure that components are properly aligned and connected.This requirement has been included in the proposed rule. Section 56/57.6501 Nonelectric systems This proposal combines existing standards 56/57.6115, 56/57.6163, and 56/57.6164which address misfire hazards encountered in detonating cord blasting.For other nonelectric blasting systems, it also addresses the misfire hazardfrom interruptions or cut-offs to the initiation line. A new provision in paragraph (a) requires the use of double trunklinesor loop systems to help prevent misfires when blasting with any nonelectricsystem. There are three exceptions. First, paragraph (a)(1) excepts safetyfuse blasting because of its uniqueness. The provisions dealing with safetyfuse are set out in 56/57.6502. Secondly, paragraph (a)(2) excludes secondaryblasting from the double-trunkline requirement. MSHA agrees with publiccomment that a misfire would be obvious in a secondary blast and easilydealt with. Third, paragraph (a)(3) allows the operator to forego use ofthe double trunkline or loop system when using in-the-hole delays of sufficientduration to retard ground movement. This method has been effective in preventingmisfires due to cut-offs. Paragrahs (b) and (d) are new provisions dealing with the shock tube andgas tube blasting systems which have recently been introduced into themining industry. These paragraphs set out basic safety practices as outlinedby the individual manufacturers. The proper handling of shock tube initiationsystems is essential because it cannot be checked for continuity. It isalso directional in nature and cannot be spliced to another length of shocktube by the traditional knotting or tying techniques. When connecting shocktube to other initiation devices such as the detonating cord trunkline,it is necessary that all joints be kept tight and at right angles to thetrunkline. Otherwise cut-off can occur and result in a misfire. Specialconnectors are available for connecting shock tube to detonating cord.When connecting shock tube to another length of shock tube, propagationcan only be assured if the correct type of connector is used. Paragraph (c) addresses detonating cord blasting. Paraqraph (c)(1) is anew requirement to assure that a premature detonation in the blastholewill not transmit detonation to the entire spool of cord on the surface.Paragraphs (c)(2), (c)(3), and (c)(4), have been revised in this proposalto allow the mine operator flexibility in the shot design while addressingthe hazards of misfires due to cut-offs. The requirements of these paragraphsretain the same degree of safety as the prior specific requirements ofcrossties at 200 feet intervals and tight connections at right angles tothe trunkline. Paragraph (c)(5) is a new provision designed to protectthe integrity of the cord and connections from damage by loading activitiesso that misfires will not occur. Section 56/57.6502 Safety fuse The proposed standard combines existing standards dealing with safety fuseinto one standard. They are: andSection;andSection; 56/57.6110, 56/57.6111,56/57.6112, 56/57.6113, 56/57.6114, 56/57.6116, 56/57.6117 and 56/56.6118.Paragraph (a) requires that the burning rate of each spool of safety fusebe checked and that users be made aware of the rate. Manufacturers acknowledgethat burning rates vary as much as plus or minus ten percent. Additionally,during storage and handling, factors such as dampness and mishandling maycreate an evern greater variation in the burning rate. Blasters must knowthe burning rate of the fuse in use in order to properly time the individualshots and allow an opportunity to evacuate safely. Paragraph (b) addresses the minimum burning time for safety fuse dependingon the number of holes to be fired. It recognizes that the length of lightingtime varies with the number of fuses to be lit, and provides time for theminer to evacuate before holes begin to detonate. Paragraph (c) assures that the timing of safety fuse is considered so thatall fuses are burning within the hole before the first blasthole detonates.Failure to take this precaution could result in undetonated holes, leavingunwanted explosive material in the muckpile to be handled later. Paragraph (d) includes a quality control measure to assure ease of lightingand consistency of the burning rate. When lighting multiples of safetyfuse which have a specified burning rate, it becomes important that a minimumamount of time is taken to light each individual fuse. Smoking cannot bepermitted in this area due to the spark sensitivity of the black powdertrain in the fuse. Paragraphs (e) and (f) contain only editorial changes. The existing standardsprovides for effective connection betweeen the fuse and cap and prohibitslighting prior to placement. Paragraph (g) specifies certain types of devices which shall not be usedto light safety fuse. These devices may induce erratic burning rates, andmay not provide reliable initiation of the fuse. Paragraph (h) provides a safety factor during the critical fuse lightingoperation. It addresses the need to provide sufficient evacuation timeand reduces the possibility of some fuses being missed as the area becomessmoke-filled. On March 13, 1982, two miners were fatally injured when theyattempted to light more fuses than time and the smoke-filled environmentpermitted. In addition, they were lighting their fuses with inappropriatedevices which would be prohibited by paragraph (g). MSHA specifically solicitscomments on the acceptability of further reducing the number of safetyfuses that can be lit by individuals to ten. Above that number, the useof igniter cord would be required. The Agency also solicits comments onthe frequency at which the buring rate of safety fuse should be posted.<ITAG tagnum="81">Extraneous Electricity_Surface and Underground </ITAG>Section 56/57.6600Loading practices Existing standard 56/57.6123 requires that loading be suspended if extraneouselectricity is detected when using electrical detonators. The proposalsubstitutes the word ``suspected'' for ``detected'' to increase the marginof safety. Adopting the suggestion of a commenter, the proposal sets outa threshold level to determine the presence of stray current. The thresholdis the level recommended by the IME and is accepted by the industry asa safe level of extraneous electricity for electric blasting. It is basedupon the current required to detonate electric detonators. The minimum firing current of detonators is approximately 0.25 amperes.The manufacturers have established that the maximum safe current flow througha detonator, without the potential for initiation, is one-fifth of theminimum firing current, or 0.05 amperes. The 1-ohm resistor specified inthe test represents the same resistance as the electric detonator. Onecommenter stated that MSHA's draft proposal language which allowed no extraneouscurrent is inappropriate and inconsistent with draft proposal languagein standard 56/57.6402. MSHA agrees. The proposed language that stray currentnot exceed ``0.05 amperes through a 1-ohm resistor,'' is consistent withproposed standard 56/57.6402. Editorial changes have also been made. The term ``extraneous electricity''includes both static electricity and stray current. The word ``loading''replaces ``charging'' and the word ``detonators'' replaces ``caps'' forconsistency. Section 56/57.6601 Grounding This proposal clarifies existing standard 56/57.6129, addressing the hazardof ground wires conducting extraneous electricity through the blastingcircuit and into the blast area. It is important that electrical blastingcircuits be isolated or insulated from any other electrical sources andnot grounded, so that fault currents are not introduced into the blastingcircuit. MSHA adopts a commenter's suggestion to broaden the existing language.The phrase ``including powerline sources when used'' clarifies that allmethods of electric initiation are covered. The standard also has beenedited for clarity. Section 56/57.6602 Static electricity dissipation during loading This proposal addresses the build-up of static electricity during pneumaticloading or dropping of explosive materials into a blasthole. It expandsthe scope of existing standards 56/57.6193; 56/57.6194; 56/57.6195; and56/57/6198, which explicity cover ``blasting agents'', to address all explosivematerial. The proposal requires that an evaluation of potential static electricityhazards be made and that the hazard be eliminated before loading begins.It also prohibits the use of wire-countered hoses and plastic tube holeliners where their use could create the hazard of unwanted current flow.The proposal also contains requirements for loading equipment used in pneumaticplacement of explosive material. Loading hoses must be semi-conductiveso that static electricity generated during the loading process is harmlesslydissipated. The hose must, however, provide sufficient resistence to preventstray current from reaching the detonators which could result in a prematuredetonation. The loading vessel and its component parts must be bonded andgrounded to complete the flow path for static electricity to ground andto prevent the vessel from serving as a storage capacitor for the generatedstatic electricity. The draft proposal contained specifications for loading hose which werederived from the NFPA Code No. 495. Manufacturers specify differing amountsand tolerances for resistance of the hose depending upon the mining environment.The proposal contains language which will assure that the characteristicsof the hose will be appropriate for the conditions present and will provideprotection against premature detonation. Some commenters acknowledged the hazard of using plastic hole liners, butsuggested that their restriction is appropriate only when electric detonatorsare used. The agency concurs and the proposal includes this revision. Commentersalso requested clarification that plastic bags containing stemming andexplosive materials would not be covered by this standard. These objectsare not considered to be plastic tube hole liners and would be exempt fromthe provisions of the standard. Section 56/57.6603 Air gap No change has been made to existing standard 56/57.6130. The standard providesfor an air gap to reduce the potential for extraneous electricity bridgingthe distance between blasting circuits and electric power sources. Several commenters objected to the 15-foot air gap separation and contendedthat there was no electrical criteria to support it. These commenters arguedthat a 5-foot air gap provided a suitable measure of protection. However,they supplied no electrical criteria in support of this distance. Commentersfurther contended that the size of underground mine openings are not largeenough to permit a 15-foot separation space and that the MSHA standardshould be made consistent with the OSHA 5-foot air gap standard for undergroundconstruction.The OSHA standard is based on ANSI document A-10-7-1970. The MSHA 15-footair gap is based upon more recent recommendations of the manufacturersof explosive material used in these metal and nonmetal mines, and the industryconsensus standards as contained in National Safety Council Data Sheet1-644-74. It also takes into account the high amperages generated by lightningstrikes and the fact that lightning can reach the blast site in metal andnonmetal mines through many paths, such as transmission lines, water lines,compressed air lines, conductive ore bodies and rails. The agency cannotperceive of an underground environment where the 15-foot gap could notbe achieved, either from the width of the opening or the length of thedrift.Section 56.6604 and 57.6604 Precautions during stormsThis proposal divides existing standard 56/57.6124 into two standards,andSection;andSection; 56.6604 and 57.6604. It broadens the scope of the existingsurface blasting standard to require the evacuation of personnel when anelectrical storm is approaching, regardless of the type of initiation systemsbeing used. MSHA is considering requiring evacuation when the storm iswithin five miles of the site and specifically solicits comments on theappropriateness of this provision. It also revises the language applicableto underground mines to address those situations where lightning strikeson the surface can travel underground and create a hazard. For surfaceblasting, the NFPA document 495 7-1.15(c), 1985 and manufacturers of explosivematerial agree that a direct lightning strike on any type of initiationsystem can result in detonation. Agency statistics indicate that prematuredetonations have been initiated by lightning in underground mines whenpaths such as air lines, water lines, rails, and conductive ore bodiesare present. Each mine operator would evaluate his underground entrancesand ore body to determine whether a path is provided for lightning to travelto a blasting area.The proposal would require that a determination be made that an electricalstorm is in progress and is indeed approaching the blast area before evacuationof the blast area must occur. Some commenters suggested that MSHA adoptthe Arizona Code language for determining when persons should evacuatea blast area during the approach of a storm. The Arizona Code uses thephrase ``during the ominous approach and progress'' of a storm. These commenterscontend that the approach of a storm may be hours away and evacuation maynot yet be necessary. However, the proposal does not incorporate the term``ominous'' since the term may be construed to mean ``arrival'' of thestorm. Recent fatalities resulting from premature detonations attributableto lightning strikes indicate that the danger can exist well before a stormmay be considered ominous to those affected. In addition to lightning,the atmosphere can also build up dangerous charges of static electricityat distances far removed from the storm center.The proposal also incorporates suggestions of commenters to include languagecalling for the withdrawal of persons ``to a safe location.'' As statedby one commenter, a safe location would provide protection against bothexplosive and lightning hazards.Section 56/57.6605 Isolation of blasting circuitsExisting standard 56/57.6162 deals with the need to isolate the blastingcircuits from sources of extraneous electricity. It also addresses theforce of the blast that can propel firing lines into contact with overheadpowerlines. Coverage is expanded to underground as well as surface applicationssince the same safety principles are applicable underground. Overhead powerlinesinclude trolley lines. For clarity, MSHA has adopted the suggestions oftwo commenters to include the language ``stray or static'' electricityinstead of ``extraneous'' electricity and ``contact between firing linesand overhead powerlines.''<ITAG tagnum="81">Equipment/Tools_Surface and Underground</ITAG>Section 56/57.6700 NonsparkingtoolsProposed standard 56/57.6700 combines and editorially revises existingstandards 56/57.6099 and 56/57.6134 dealing with the use of nonsparkingtools when preparing packaged explosive materials for use. Some explosivematerials contain spark-sensitive and potentially spark-generating ingredients.The proposal should reduce the likelihood that sparks would be generatedby requiring that nonsparking tools be used for punching holes in cartridges.Existing standard 56/57.6134 deals with the use of nonsparking implementsto open containers. The agency considered deleting the standard if explosivematerial could no longer be found packaged in metal containers and if nonmetalliccontainers in use had no metallic fasteners which could contribute to thegeneration of a spark. Upon review, however, it was recognized that blackpowder is presently shipped in metal containers and many metallic fastenersare used in the packaging of explosive material. In view of these packagingpractices and the possibility that a tool used to open a cartridge of explosivematerial could puncture the contents, the proposal also requires that nonsparkingtools be used for opening containers of explosive material and for punchingholes in explosives cartridges.Section 56/57.6701 Tamping and loading pole requirementsProposed standard 56/57.6701 clarifies existing standard 56/57.6100 andaffirmatively responds to commenters' requests to provide language allowingmaterial other than wood to be used for tamping poles. The draft proposalpermitted the use of products other than wood for tamping and loading poles.It specified, however, the electrical resistance criteria for these alternativeproducts. Although commenters were in general agreement with the standardand its intent, some commenters observed that the resistance requirementsmay not be achievable, even in wooden poles, where a wet environment isencountered. Manufacturing requirements for resistive tamping and loadingpoles specify an electrical resistance of more than 5000 ohms per footand less than 3 meg ohms per foot. The proposal contains no reference tothese specifications but rather requires that poles be nonconductive andnonsparking and that couplings be nonsparking. The agency specificallysolicits additional comments on the potential for generating static electricitywhile tamping explosive material with a non-wooden pole.<ITAG tagnum="81">Maintenance_Surface and Underground</ITAG>Section 56/57.6800 StoragefacilitiesThis proposed standard describes precautions to be taken when an explosivematerial storage facility is repaired. Existing standard 56/57.6012 requiresremoval of material and cleaning for all interior repairs. The proposalrequires removal and cleaning only if a spark or flame could be generated.The existing standard also requires material removal to a ``safe distance''and requires that the material be ``properly guarded.'' The proposal requiresremoval of all explosive material to a distance of 50 feet. Repairs whichgenerate sparks are generally of a welding or cutting nature. In theseinstances, the hot sparks are propelled outward from the work site. A minimumof 50 feet, as recommended by manufacturers, is needed for safety.``Monitored'' has been substituted for ``properly guarded'' to allow themine operator latitude for security measures. In most instances, the workersperforming the repairs would do the monitoring.Section 56/57.6801 VehiclesThis proposal editorially revises existing standard 56/57.6045 and incorporatescommenters' language substituting ``explosive materials'' for ``explosivesor detonators'' and ``into'' for ``to''. That standard prohibits vehiclescontaining explosive material from being taken into a repair garage orshop, where ignition sources are present.Section 56/57.6802 Bulk delivery vehiclesThis new standard addresses the detonation hazard created when heat isapplied to equipment on bulk delivery vehicles which have contained explosivematerial. The new venting requirement for hollow shafts is derived fromthe National Fire Protection Code 495, 1985 edition, to provide for theescape of gases which could be generated if even minimal amounts of residueremain inside the shaft when heat is applied.Section 56/57.6803 Blasting linesThis proposed standard adds a requirement to existing standard 56/57.6122which addresses the quality of permanent blasting lines. The proposal requiresthat not only permanent blasting lines but ``all'' blasting lines be insulated,physically separated from pipelines, power cables and other conductors,and kept in good repair. This minimizes the risk of pre-ignition and reducesthe possibility of misfires.<ITAG tagnum="81">General Requirements_Surface and Underground</ITAG>Section 56/57.6900Damaged or deteriorated explosive materialThis proposal revises existing standard 56/57.6092, dealing with disposalof defective explosives. Delay detonators that are at least five yearsold cannot be used or stored because the delay element becomes erraticand may cause misfires or out-of-sequence firing. MSHA's preproposal draftwould have required that damaged or deteriorated explosive material bedisposed of ``only on the surface''. Commenters objected to this changebecause it would introduce additional hazards entailed in the handlingand transporting of damaged or deteriorated explosives to the surface forremoval. MSHA agrees and retains the existing requirement for safe disposalof these explosives. The proposal makes editorial changes to the existingstandard.Section 56/57.6901 Black powderThe proposal combines and editorially revises existing standards 56/57.6136and 56/57.6137 and adds the requirement that containers of black powderbe constructed to be nonsparking. Black powder is presently used in themetal and nonmetal mining industry as the powder train in safety fuse andin bulk form in dimension stone mining. This standard addresses bulk use.Black powder when used in bulk form is extremely spark and heat sensitive.For this reason, black powder must be handled with extreme caution. Spills,which could occur any time the bulk material is handled, must be especiallyavoided in the vicinity of a magazine. Vehicular and foot traffic in thisarea while loading and unloading magazines could spread this substanceover a wider area and expose it to heat sources such as engine manifoldsand catalytic converters. For this reason, MSHA proposes to retain theexisting requirement that black powder containers shall not be opened within50 feet of any magazine. The proposed standard also retains existing provisionsthat prohibit the opening of containers of black powder within 50 feetof sources of open flame or sparks because the material is so spark sensitive.These provisions are consistent with other proposed standards that requireseparation of ignition sources from explosive material by 50 feet.The nonsparking container requirement is intended to prevent the practiceof transferring black powder into small metal cans before loading. Manufacturersoften supply black powder in metal containers. These containers, however,are coated with a nonsparking material and their continued use will beaccepted.The proposal would prohibit holes from being reloaded for at least 12 hourswhen the blastholes have failed to break as planned due to the potentialhazard of residual heat from the initial blast.Section 56/57.6902 Hot holesProposed standard 56/57.6902 deals with placement of explosive materialsin holes where heat could cause premature detonation. It revises existingstandard 56/57.6138 for clarity, and the term ``explosive material'' replacesthe phrase ``explosives or blasting agents'' for consistency. The temperatureof holes suspected of being hot should be measured before loading. Explosivematerial cannot be safely loaded into holes having a temperature above150anddegrees; F. These temperatures are often encountered where explosiveshave been used to enlarge or ``spring'' the holes, or when blasting nearfires or other hot areas such as kilns. Ammonium nitrate-fuel oil blastingagents, or blasting materials reacting with sulfide ores may also generatehigh temperatures.Section 56/57.6903 Burning explosive materialExisting standard 56/57.6161 addresses actions to be taken with burningexplosives at the blast site. The proposal broadens the scope of the existingstandard. It expands the ``surface only'' application of the standard toinclude underground areas because burning explosives can occur anywhereblasting is performed. Incomplete detonation in a blasthole can lead tothe slow burning of explosives in the hole. The IME recommended that theselocations not be approached for at least one hour after the apparent burninghas stopped. MSHA agrees and has incorporated this language into the standard.Editorial changes have been made to the standard.Section 56/57.6904 Smoking, open flame restrictionExisting standard 56/57.6250 which prohibits smoking and open flames nearexplosive materials is editorially changed for clarity.<ITAG tagnum="81">General Requirements_Underground Only</ITAG>Section 57.6960 Mixingof explosive materialExisting standard 57.6220 prohibits the mixing of ammonium nitrate-fueloil blasting agents underground. The draft proposal would have prohibitedthe underground mixing of all blasting agents. Commenters objected, statingthat underground mixing of blasting agents would actually promote safetywhen done properly. One commenter pointed out that hazards associated withmixing and handling of ammonium nitrate-fuel oil included the potentialbuild-up of static electricity and fine dust upon handling and processing.As ammonium nitrate is crushed finer and finer, it becomes more and moresensitive to many stimuli, such as sparks, friction, impact and shock.The commenter indicated that these hazards do not exist or are greatlyreduced when mixing slurries or emulsions. MSHA is proposing to allow bulkmixing underground to produce explosive material in the form of slurryor emulsions but only under conditions which minimize the possibility ofheat build-up, fire and sparks. The agency specifically seeks commentsrelating to the hazards associated with bulk mixing underground, the needto restrict the location of these mixing facilities and related storagefacilities, the need to indicate the location of all mixing and explosivematerial storage facilities on the mine escape and evacuation maps or theventilation plans, and the appropriateness of the proposed standard.H. Derivation TableThe following derivation table lists: (1) The number of the proposed standard,and (2) the number of the existing standard. Standards that uniformly appearin 30 CFR Parts 56 and 57 are referred to in this table as 56/57.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Derivation Table</T4><H1>Proposed Number </H1><H1>Existing Number</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6100 <D>56/57.6002 and 56/57.6008</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6101 <D>56/57.6005</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6102 <D>56/57.6007 and 56/57.6011</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6130 <D>56/57.6001</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6 and 57.6131 <D>56/57.6020</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6132 <D>56/57.6020</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6133 <D>56/57.6159</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6160 <D>New</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6161 <D>57.6027, 57.6029 and 57.6030</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6200 <D>56/57.6048</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6201 <D>56/57.6040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6202 <D>56/57.6042, 56/57.6043, 56/57.6044, 56/57.6047, 56/57.6050, 57.6053,56/57.6065, 57.6077 and 56/57.6200</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6203 <D>56/57.6041 and 56/57.6051</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56.6204 and 57.6204 <D>56/57.6054, 57.6075 and 57.6076</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6205 <D>56/57.6056 and 56/57.6057</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6300 <D>56/57.6090 and 56/57.6091</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6301 <D>56/57.6093</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6302 <D>56/57.6096</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6303 <D>56/57.6097 and 56/57.6098</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6304 <D>56/57.6101</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6305 <D>56/57.6102</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6306 <D>56/57.6094, 56/57.6160, 57.6175, and 57.6182</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6307 <D>56/57.6142</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6308 <D>New </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6309 <D>New </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6310 <D>56/57.6104 and 56/57.6105</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6311 <D>56/57.6106, 56/57.6168 and 57.6177</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6312 <D>57.6141</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6313 <D>56/57.6103</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6400 <D>56/57.6119</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6401 <D>56/57.6120</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6402 <D>56/57.6126</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6403 <D>56/57.6125</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6404 <D>56/57.6127</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6405 <D>56/57.6128 and 56/57.6131</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6406 <D>56/57.6133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56.6407 and 57.6407 <D>56/57.6121</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6500 <D>56/57.6109</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6501 <D>56/57.6115, 56/57.6163, and 56/57.6164</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6502 <D>56/57.6110, 56/57.6111, 56/57.6112, 56/57.6113, 56/57.6114, 56/57.6116,56/57.6117, and 56/57.6118</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6600 <D>56/57.6123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6601 <D>56/57.6129</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6602 <D>56/57.6193, 56/57.6194, 56/57.6195, and 56/57.6198</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6603 <D>56/57.6130</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56.6604 and 57.6604 <D>56/57.6124</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6605 <D>56/57.6162</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6700 <D>56/57.6099 and 56/57.6134</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6701 <D>56/57.6100</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6800 <D>56/57.6012</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6801 <D>56/57.6045</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6802 <D>New </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6803 <D>56/57.6122</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6900 <D>56/57.6092</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6901 <D>56/57.6136 and 56/57.6137</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6902 <D>56/57.6138</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6903 <D>56/57.6161</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6904 <D>56/57.6250</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6960 <D>57.6220</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.7055 <D>56/57.6107</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.7051 <D>56/57.6135</D></ITAG></ITAG>I. Distribution TableFor the convenience of the reader, the following distribution table hasbeen added as a cross-reference guide. Standards that uniformly appearin 30 CFR Parts 56 and 57 are referred to in this table as 56/57.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,s10,r10</C><T4>Distribution Table</T4><H1>Existing Number</H1><H1>Proposed Number</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6001 <D>57/57.6130</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6002 <D>56/57.6100</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6005 <D>56/57.6101</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6007 <D>56/57.6102</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6008 <D>56/57.6100</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6011 <D>56/57.6102</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6012 <D>56/57.6800</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6020 <D>56.6131, 57.6131 and 56/57.6132</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6027 <D>57.6161</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6029 <D>57.6161</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6030 <D>57.6161</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6040 <D>56/57.6201</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6041 <D>56/57.6203</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6042 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6043 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6044 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6045 <D>56/57.6801</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6046 <D>Removed</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6047 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6048 <D>56/57.6200</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6050 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6051 <D>56/57.6203</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6053 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6054 <D>56.6204 and 57.6204</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6056 <D>56/57.6205</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6057 <D>56/57.6205</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6065 <D>56.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6075 <D>56.6204 and 57.6204</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6076 <D>56.6204 and 57.6204</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6077 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6090 <D>56/57.6300</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6091 <D>56/57.6300</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6092 <D>56/57.6900</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6093 <D>56/57.6301</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6094 <D>56/57.6306</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6096 <D>56/57.6302</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6097 <D>56/57.6303</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6098 <D>56/57.6303</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6099 <D>56/57.6700</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6100 <D>56/57.6701</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6101 <D>56/57.6304</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6102 <D>56/57.6305</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6103 <D>56/57.6313</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6104 <D>56/57.6310</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6105 <D>56/57.6310</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6106 <D>56/57.6311</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6107 <D>Transferred to Subpart F, 56/57.7055</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6108 <D>Removed</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6109 <D>56/57.6500</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6110 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6111 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6112 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6113 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6114 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6115 <D>56/57.6501</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6116 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6117 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6118 <D>56/57.6502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6119 <D>56/57.6400</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6120 <D>56/57.6401</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6121 <D>56.6407 and 57.6407</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6122 <D>56/57.6803</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6123 <D>56/57.6600</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6124 <D>56.6604 and 57.6604</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6125 <D>56/57.6403</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6126 <D>56/57.6402</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6127 <D>56/57.6404</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6128 <D>56/57.6405</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6129 <D>56/57.6601</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6130 <D>56/57.6603</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6131 <D>56/57.6405</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6132 <D>Removed</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6133 <D>56/57.6406</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6134 <D>56/57.6700</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6135 <D>Transferred to Subpart F, 56/57.7056</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6136 <D>56/57.6901</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6137 <D>56/57.6901</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6138 <D>56/57.6902</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6139 <D>Removed</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6140 <D>Removed</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6141 <D>56/57.6312</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6142 <D>56/57.6307</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6159 <D>56/57.6133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6160 <D>56/57.6306</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6161 <D>56/57.6903</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6162 <D>56/57.6605</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6163 <D>56/57.6501</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6164 <D>56/57.6501</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6168 <D>56/57.6311</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6175 <D>56/57.6306</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6177 <D>56/57.6311</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6182 <D>57.6306</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6193 <D>56/57.6602</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6194 <D>56/57.6602</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6195 <D>56/57.6602</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6198 <D>56/57.6602</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6200 <D>56/57.6202</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.6220 <D>56/57.6960</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">56/57.6250 <D>66/57.6904</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">III. Executive Order 12291 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act </ITAG>In accordance with Executive Order 12291, MSHA has prepared an initialanalysis to identify potential costs and benefits associated with the proposedchanges to its explosives standards for metal and nonmetal mines. The Agencyhas incorporated this analysis into the Initial Regulatory FlexibilityAnalysis required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act. In this analysis,summarized below, MSHA has determined that the proposed rule would notresult in major cost increases nor have an effect of $100,000,000 or moreon the economy. Therefore, the rule is not within the criteria for a majorrule and a Regulatory Impact Analysis is not required. The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires that agencies evaluate and include,whereever possible, compliance alternatives that minimize an adverse impacton small business when developing regulatory proposals. This proposed rulewould introduce alternative compliance methods to the existing regulationsthat would directly benefit small mining operations. In addition, the proposalswould clarify compliance responsibilities and adopt performance-orientedstandards when possible. In the following summary of the Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis,MSHA has compared the costs associated with the proposed requirements tothe costs associated with the existing requirements. MSHA has also comparedthe benefits associated with the proposed requirements to the benefitsassociated with the existing requirements. A copy of the full analysisis available upon request. MSHA estimates that the total annual and annualized cost of complying withthe existing rule is $1.2 million and of the proposed rule is $1.3 million.The total annual and annualized incremental cost for complying with theproposed rule is $148,000. MSHA expects that the proposed rule will result in reduced risk to employeesafety. Full compliance with the proposed standards may potentially preventas many as 3 deaths and 24 injuries from occurring annually. For purposes of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, MSHA has defined smallbusiness entities as mines with fewer than 20 employees. The proposed ruleaffects about 4,600 metal and nonmetal mining operations under MSHA jurisdictionthat use explosive material, of which about 3,500 are small business entities.Almost 25,000 of 108,000 affected employees work at small mining operations.The existing rule will result in annual and annualized costs of approximately$280,000 for small mines. The proposed rule will cost approximately $364,000annually. Full compliance with the proposed rule may potentially preventas many as 1.1 fewer deaths and 8.0 fewer injuries annually at small operations.Little or no measurable economic effect is expected after this proposedrule is promulgated. The Agency specifically solicits comments and dataon how the proposed regulations would impact on the mining industry. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Paperwork Reduction Act </ITAG>The proposed rule contains an information collection paperwork requirementin andSection;56/57.6502. This paperwork requirement has been submitted tothe Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for review under section 3504(h)of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980. Comments on the proposed paperworkprovision should be sent directly to the Office of Information and RegulatoryAffairs, Office of Management and Budget, Attention: Desk Officer for MSHA.The respondents in the paperwork provision would be mine operators. Thefollowing public hour estimate includes the time for reviewing instructions,gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing the review ofcollection information. In each instance, the resultant information collectionwould be used by MSHA to assess compliance with the proposed requirement.Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of thiscollection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burdento Patricia W. Silvey; director, Office of Standards, Regulations, andVariances; MSHA; Room 631; Ballston Tower andplusmin;3; 4015 Wilson Boulevard,Arlington, FA 22203 and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 30 CFR Parts 56 and 57</ITAG>Mine safety and health, Metal and nonmetal mining, Explosives. <ITAG tagnum="6">David C. O'Neal, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Assistant Secretary for Mine Safety and Health. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: November 2, 1988.</ITAG>It is proposed to amend Subparts E and F of Part 56, Subchapter N, ChapterI, Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulations to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 56_SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS_SURFACE METAL AND NONMETAL MINES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6107 and 56.6135</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection;andSection; 56.7055 and 56.7056 and Revised]</ITAG>1. Redesignate and revise andSection;andSection;56.6107 as 56.7055 and andSection;56.6135as andSection;56.7056 in Subpart F_Drilling and Rotary Jet Piercing. 2. Revise Subpart E to consist of andSection;andSection;56.6000 through 56.6904,as set forth below. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart E_Explosives </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6000 Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Storage </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6100 Separation of explosive material. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6101 Areas around storage facilities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6102 Storage practices. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6130 Storage facilities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6131 Location of storage facilities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6132 Magazine requirements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6133 Powder chests. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Transportation </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6200 Delivery to storage or blast site areas. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6201 Separation of explosive material. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6202 Vehicles. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6203 Locomotives. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6204 Hoists. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6205 Conveying explosives by hand. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Use </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6300 Control of blasting operations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6301 Blasthole obstruction check. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6302 Explosive material protection. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6303 Initiation preparation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6304 Primer protection. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6305 Unused explosive material. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6306 Loading and blasting. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6307 Drill stem loading. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6308 Initiation systems. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6309 Fuel oil requirements for ANFO. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6310 Misfire waiting period. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6311 Handling of misfires. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6312 Secondary blasting. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6313 Blast site security. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Electric Blasting </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6400 Compatibility of electric detonators. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6401 Shunting. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6402 Deenergized circuits near detonators. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6403 Branch circuits. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6404 Positive separation of blasting circuits from power source.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6405 Firing devices. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6406 Duration of current flow. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6407 Circuit testing. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Nonelectric Blasting </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6500 Damaged initiating material. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6501 Nonelectric systems. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6502 Safety fuse. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Extraneous Electricity </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6600 Loading practices. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6601 Grounding. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6602 Static electricity dissipation during loading. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6603 Air gap. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6604 Precautions during storms. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6605 Isolation of blasting circuits. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Equipment tools </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6700 Nonsparking tools. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6701 Tamping and loading pole requirements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Maintenance </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6800 Storage facilities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6801 Vehicles. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6802 Bulk delivery vehicles. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6803 Blasting lines. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">General Requirements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6900 Damaged or deteriorated explosive material. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6901 Black powder. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6902 Hot holes. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6903 Burning explosive material. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">56.6904 Smoking, open flame restriction. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Appendix I for Subpart E_MSHA Tables of Distances </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>30 U.S.C. 811. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart E_Explosives </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6000 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions. </ITAG>The following definitions apply in this subpart. <T3>Attended. </T3>Presence of an individual or continuous monitoring toprevent unauthorized entry or access. <T3>Blast area. </T3>The area in which concussion (shock wave), flyingmaterial, or gases from an explosion may cause injury to persons. In determiningthe blast area, the following factors shall be considered: (a) Geology or material to be blasted. (b) Blast pattern. (c) Burden, depth, diameter and angle of the holes. (d) Blasting experience of the mine. (e) Delay system, powder factor, and pounds per delay. (f) Type and amount of explosive material. (g) Type and amount of stemming. <T3>Blast site. </T3>The area where explosive material is handled duringloading, including the perimeter formed by the blast holes and 50 feetin all directions from loaded holes or holes to be loaded. The 50 footrequirement also applies in all directions along the full depth of thehole. <T3>Blasting agent. </T3>Any substance classified as a blasting agent bythe Department of Transportation in 49 CFR 173.114(a) (1986 compilation).This document is available at any MSHA Metal and Nonmetal Safety and Healthdistrict office. <T3>Blasting switch.</T3> A switch used to connect a power source to ablasting circuit. <T3>Detonating cord. </T3>A flexible cord containing a center core of highexplosives and used to initiate other explosives. <T3>Detonator. </T3>Any device containing a detonating charged used toinitiate an explosive. These devices include blasting caps, electric ornon-electric instantaneous or delay blasting caps, and delay connectors.The term ``detonator'' does not include detonating cord. Detonators maybe either ``Class A'' detonators of ``Class C'' detonators, as classifiedby the Department of Transportation in 49 CFR Sections 173.53 and 173.100(1986 compilation). This document is available at any MSHA Metal and NonmetalSafety and Health district office. <T3>Explosive. </T3>Any substance classified as an explosive by the Departmentof Transportation in 49 CFR Sections 173.53, 173.88 and 173.100 (1986 compilation).This document is available at any MSHA Metal and Nonmetal Safety and Healthdistrict office. <T3>Explosive material. </T3>Explosives, blasting agents, and detonators.<T3>Flash point. </T3>The minimum temperature at which sufficient vaporis released by a liquid to form a flammable vapor-air mixture near thesurface of the liquid. <T3>Igniter cord. </T3>A fuse that burns progressively along its lengthwith an external flame at the zone of burning, used for lighting a seriesof safety fuses in a desired sequence. <T3>Laminated partition. </T3>A partition composed of the following materialand minimum nominal dimensions: \1/2\ inch thick plywood,. \1/2\ inch thickgypsum wallboard, \1/8\ inch thick low carbon steel and \1/4\ inch thickplywood, bonded together in that order. <T3>Loading. </T3>Placing explosive material either in a blast hole oragainst the material to be blased. <T3>Misfire. </T3>The complete or partial failure of explosive materialto detonate as planned. The term is also used to describe the explosivematerial itself that has failed to detonate. <T3>Multipurpose dry-chemical fire extinguisher. </T3>An extinguisher havinga rating of at least 2-A:10-B:C and containing a nominal 4.5 pounds ormore of dry-chemical agent. <T3>Safety switch. </T3>A switch that provides shunt protection in blastingcircuits between the blasting switch and the blast site. <T3>Slurry. </T3>An explosive material containing substantial portionsof water, such as a water gel or emulsion. <ITAG tagnum="84">Storage </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6100 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Separation of explosive material. </ITAG>(a) Detonators shall not be stored in the same magazine with other explosivematerial; and(b) Blasting agents shall be separated from explosives, safety fuse, anddetonating cord to prevent contamination.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6101</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Areas around storage facilities.</ITAG>(a) Areas surrounding storage facilities for explosive material shall beclear of rubbish, brush, dry grass, and trees for 25 feet in all directions.However, live trees 10 feet or taller need not be removed.(b) Combustibles shall not be stored or allowed to accumulate within 50feet of explosive material. Combustible liquids shall be stored in a mannerthat assures drainage will occur away from the explosive material storagefacility in case of tank rupture.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6102</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Storage practices.</ITAG>Explosive material shall be_(a) Stored in a manner to facilitate use of oldest stocks first;(b) Stored according to brand and grade in such a manner as to facilitateidentification; and(c) Stacked in a stable manner but not more than eight (8) feet high.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Explosives shall be stored in closed nonconductive containers exceptthat nonelectric detonating devices may be stored on nonconductive racks.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6130</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Storage facilities.</ITAG>(a) Detonators and explosives shall be stored in magazines;(b) Packaged blasting agents shall be stored in a magazine or other facilitywhich is ventilated, weather-resistant, and locked or attended. Facilitiesother than magazines used to store blasting agents shall contain only blastingagents;(c) Bulk blasting agents shall be stored in weather-resistant bins or tankswhich are locked, attended, or otherwise inaccessible to unauthorized entry;and(d) Facilities, bins or tanks shall be posted with warning signs shallindicate the contents and are visible from each approach.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6131</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Location of storage facilities.</ITAG>Storage facilities shall be_(a) Located in accordance with Appendix I for Subpart E_MSHA Tables ofDistances. However, where there is not sufficient area at the mine siteto allow compliance with Appendix I, storage facilities shall be locatedso that the forces generated by a storage facility explosion will not createa hazard to occupants in mine buildings and will not damage dams or electricsubstations; and(b) Detached structures located outside the blast area and a sufficientdistance from powerlines so that the powerlines, if damaged, would notcontact the magazines.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6132</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Magazine requirements.</ITAG>Magazines shall be_(a) Structurally sound;(b) Noncombustible, or covered with fire-resistant material;(c) Bullet resistant;(d) Equipped with electrical bonding connections between all conductiveportions of a metal magazine so the entire structure is at the same electricalpotential. Suitable electrical bonding methods include welding, rivetingor the use of securely tightened bolts where individual metal portionsare joined. Conductive portions of nonmetal magazines shall be grounded;(e) Made of nonsparking materials on the inside;(f) Ventilated to control dampness and excessive heating within the magazine;(g) Posted with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach, so located that a bullet passing through any of thesigns will not strike the magazine;(h) Kept clean and dry inside;(i) Unlighted or lighted by devices that are specifically designed foruse in magazines and which do not create a fire or explosion hazard. Allswitches and outlets shall be located on the outside;(j) Unheated, or heated only with devices that do not create a fire orexplosion hazard;(k) Locked when unattended; and(l) Used exclusively for the storage of explosive materials except foressential nonsparking equipment used for the operation of the magazine.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6133</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Powder chests.</ITAG>(a) Powder chests (day boxes) shall be_(1) Structurally sound, weather-resistant, equiped with a lid or cover,and with only nonsparking material on the inside;(2) Posted with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach;(3) Located out of the blast area once loading has been completed;(4) Locked or attended when containing explosive material;(5) Emptied at the end of each shift with the contents returned to a magazineor other storage facility, or attended.(b) All detonators shall be kept in separate chests from explosives orblasting agents, except that Class C detonators may be placed in the samepowder chest with explosives or blasting agents if separated by 4-inchesof hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent.<ITAG tagnum="84">Transportation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6200</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Delivery to storage or blast site areas.</ITAG>Explosive material shall be transported without avoidable delay to thestorage area or blast site.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6201</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Separation of explosive material.</ITAG>(a) Class A detonators, and Class C detonators in quantities of more than1000, shall not be transported in a vehicle or conveyance with explosivesfor blasting agents unless the detonators are maintained in the originalpackaging as shipped from the manufacturer and separated from the explosivesor blasting agents by 4-inches of hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent.(b) Class C detonators may be transported in quantities up to 1000 withexplosives or blasting agents. However, such detonators shall be kept inclosed containers and separated from the explosives or blasting agentsby 4-inches of hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent. The hardwoodor laminated partition shall be fastened to the vehicle or conveyance.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6202</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vehicles.</ITAG>(a) Vehicles containing explosive material shall be_(1) Structurally sound and well-maintained;(2) Equipped with sides and enclosures higher than the explosive materialbeing transported or have the explosive material secured to a nonconductivepallet;(3) Equipped with a cargo space which shall contain the explosive material.Passenger areas shall not be considered cargo space;(4) Equipped with at least two multipurpose dry-chemical fire extinguishersor one such extinguisher and an automatic fire suppression system;(5) Vented except when transporting in bulk;(6) Posted with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach;(7) Occupied only by persons necessary for handling the explosive material;(8) Attended, except when parked at the blast site and loading is in progress;and(9) Secured while parked by having_(i) The brakes set;(ii) The wheels chocked if movement could occur; and(iii) The engine shut off unless powering a device being used in the loadingoperation.(b) Vehicles containing explosives shall have_(1) No sparking material exposed in the cargo space; and(2) Only properly secured nonsparking equipment shall be in the cargo spacewith the explosives.(c) Vehicles used for dispensing bulk explosive material shall_(1) Have no zinc or copper exposed in the cargo space; and(2) Provide any enclosed screw-type conveyors with protection against internalpressure and frictional heat.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6203</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Locomotives.</ITAG>Explosive material shall not be transported on a locomotive. When explosivematerial is hauled by trolley locomotive, covered, electrically insulatedcars shall be used.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6204</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Hoists.</ITAG>(a) Before explosive material is transported in hoist conveyances, thehoist operator shall be notified.(b) Explosive material transported in hoist conveyances shall be placedwithin a structurally sound container. The manufacturer's container maybe used if secured to a nonconductive pallet. When explosives are transported,they shall be secured so as not to contact any sparking material.(c) No person shall be transported on a hoist conveyance or mantrip containingexplosive materials.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6205</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conveying explosives by hand.</ITAG>Closed, nonconductive containers shall be used to carry explosives to andfrom blast sites. Separate containers shall be used for explosives anddetonators.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6300 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Control of blasting operations. </ITAG>(a) Only persons trained and experienced in the handling and use of explosivematerial shall direct blasting operations and related activities. (b) Trainees and inexperienced persons shall work only in the immediatepresence of persons trained and experienced in the handling and use ofexplosive material. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6301 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Blasthole obstruction check. </ITAG>After blastholes are drilled, they shall be checked, and cleared of obstructionswherever possible, before loading. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6302 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Explosive material protection. </ITAG>(a) Explosives and blasting agents shall be kept separated from detonatorsuntil loading begins; and (b) Explosive material shall be protected from impact and temperaturesin excess of 150 anddegrees;F when taken to the blast site. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6303 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Initiation preparation. </ITAG>(a) Primers shall be prepared with the detonator contained securely andcompletely within the explosive or contained securely and appropriatelyfor its design in the tunnel or cap well; (b) Primers shall be made up only at the time of use and as close to theblast site as conditions allow; and (c) When using detonating cord to initiate another explosive, a connectionshall be prepared with the detonating cord threaded through, attached securelyto, or otherwise in contact with the explosive. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6304 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Primer protection. </ITAG>(a) Tamping shall not be done directly on a primer. (b) If cartridges of explosives or blasting agents exceed 4 inches in diameter,they shall not be dropped on the primer except where the blasthole is filledwith or under water. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6305 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Unused explosive material. </ITAG>Unused explosive material shall be moved to a protected location as soonas loading operations are completed. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6306 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Loading and blasting. </ITAG>(a) Once explosive material has reached the blast site, vehicles and equipmentshall not be driven over explosive materials or initiating systems or otherwisecontact them in a manner which could create a hazard; (b) Once loading begins, only activity directly related to the blastingoperation shall be permitted within the blast site; (c) Loading shall be continuous except for emergency situations, shiftchanges, and idle shifts not to exceed 16 hours; (d) When loading is suspended, the blast site shall be attended; (e) In electric blasting prior to hook-up of the power source and in nonelectricblasting prior to the attachment to an initiating device, all persons shallbe removed from the blast area except persons in a blasting shelter orother location that protects from concussion (shock wave), flying material,or gases. (f) Upon completion of loading and connecting or circuits, firing of blastsshall occur as soon as possible. (g) Before firing a blast_ (1) Ample warning shall be given to allow all persons to be evacuated;(2) Clear exit routes shall be provided for persons firing the round; and(3) All access routes to the blast area shall be guarded or barricadedto prevent the passage of persons or vehicles. (h) No work shall resume in the blast area until a postblast examinationhas been conducted. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6307 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Drill stem loading. </ITAG>Explosive material shall not be loaded into blastholes with drill stemequipment or other devices that could be extracted while containing explosivematerial. The use of loading hose, collar sleeves, or collar pipes is permitted.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6308 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Initiation systems. </ITAG>Initiation systems shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer'sinstructions. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6309 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Fuel oil requirements for ANFO. </ITAG>Liquid hydrocarbon fuels with flash points lower than that of No. 2 dieseloil (125 anddegrees; F) shall not be used to prepare ammonium nitrate-fueloil. Waste oil, including crankcase oil, shall not be used. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6310 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Misfire waiting period. </ITAG>When a misfire is suspected, persons shall not enter the blast area_ (a) For 30 minutes if safety fuse and blasting caps are used; or (b) For 15 minutes if any other type detonators are used. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6311 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Handling of misfires. </ITAG>(a) Faces and muck piles shall be examined for misfires after each blastingoperation. (b) Only work necessary to remove a misfire and protect the safety of minersengaged in the removal shall be permitted in the affected area until themisfire is disposed of in a safe manner. (c) When a misfire cannot be disposed of safely, each approach to the areaaffected by the misfire shall be posted with a warning sign at a conspicuouslocation to prohibit entry, and the condition shall be reported immediatelyto mine management. (d) All misfires occurring during the shift shall be reported to mine managementnot later than the end of the shift. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6312 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Secondary blasting. </ITAG>Secondary blasts fired at the same time in the same work area shall beinitiated from one source. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6313 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Blast site security. </ITAG>Areas in which loaded holes are awaiting firing shall be attended, or barricadedand posted, or flagged against unauthorized entry. <ITAG tagnum="84">Electric Blasting </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6400 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Compatability of electric detonators. </ITAG>All electric detonators to be fired in a round shall be from the same manufacturerand shall have similar electrical firing characteristics. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6401 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Shunting. </ITAG>Except during testing_ (a) Electric detonators shall be dept shunted until connected to the blastingline or wired into a blasting round; (b) Wired rounds shall be kept shunted until connected to the blastingline; and (c) Blasting lines shall be kept shunted until immediately before blasting.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6402 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Deenergized circuits near detonators. </ITAG>Electrical distribution circuits within 50 feet of electric detonatorsat the blast site shall be deenergized. However, such circuits need notbe denergized between 25 to 50 feet of the electric detonators if straycurrent tests indicate a maximum stray current of less than 0.05 amperesthrough a one-ohm resistor as measured at the location of the electricdetonators. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6403 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Branch circuits. </ITAG>If electric blasting includes the use of branch circuits, each branch shallbe equipped with a safety switch or equivalent method to isolate the circuitsto be used. At least one safety switch or equivalent method of protectionshall be located outside the blast area and shall be in the open positionuntil persons are withdrawn. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6404 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Positive separation of blasting circuits from power source. </ITAG>Except when closed to fire the blast, blasting switches shall be lockedin the open position. Lead wires shall not be connected to the blastingswitch until the shot is ready to be fired.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6405 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Firing devices. </ITAG>(a) Power sources shall be capable of delivering sufficient current toenergize all electric detonators to be fired with the type of circuitsused. The use of storage or dry cell batteries is not permitted as a powersource. (b) Blasting machines shall be tested, repaired, and maintained in accordancewith manufacturer's instructions. (c) Only the blaster shall have the key or other control to an electricalfiring device. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6406 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duration of current flow. </ITAG>If any part of a blast is connected in parallel and is to be initiatedfrom powerlines or lighting circuits, the time of current flow shall belimited to a maximum of 25 milliseconds. This can be accomplished by incorporatingan arcing control device in the blasting circuit or by interrupting thecircuit with an explosive device attached to one or both lead lines andinitiated by a 25 millisecond delay electric detonator. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6407 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Circuit testing. </ITAG>A blasting galvanometer or other instrument designed for testing blastingcircuits shall be used to test the following: (a) Continuity of each electric detonator in the blasthole prior to stemmingor connection to the blasting line; (b) Resistance of individual series or the resistance of multiple balancedseries to be connected in parallel prior to their connection to the blastingline; (c) Continuity of blasting lines prior to the connection of electric detonatorseries; and(d) Total blasting circuit resistance prior to connection to the powersource. <ITAG tagnum="84">Nonelectric Blasting </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6500 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Damaged initiating material. </ITAG>Safety fuse, igniter cord, detonating cord, shock or gas tubing and similarmaterial which is kinked, bent sharply, or damaged shall not be used. Avisual check of the completed circuit shall be made to assure that thecomponents are properly aligned and connected. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6501 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nonelectric systems. </ITAG>(a) When blasting with any nonelectric system, double trunklines or loopsystems shall be used, except: (1) When blasting with safety fuse and caps; (2) When performing secondary blasting; or (3) When in-the-hole delays are of sufficient duration to preclude cutoffsfrom the movement of ground. (b) When the nonelectric blasting system utilizes shock tube_ (1) All connections with other initiation devices shall be secured in amanner which provides for uninterrupted propagation; (2) Factory made units shall be used as assembled and shall not be cut;and (3) Connections between blastholes shall not be made until immediatelyprior to clearing the blast area and connecting to the source of energyfor firing the blast. (c) When the nonelectric blasting system utilizes detonating cord_ (1) The line of detonating cord extending out of a blasthole shall be cutfrom the supply spool immediately after the attached explosive is correctlypositioned in the hole; (2) In multiple row blasts, the trunkline layout shall be designed so thatthe detonation can reach each blasthole from at least two directions; (3) All connections shall be tight and kept at right angles to the trunkline;(4) Detonators shall be attached securely to the side of detonating cordand pointed in the direction in which detonation is to proceed; and (5) Connections between blastholes shall not be made until immediatelyprior to clearing the blast area. (d) When the nonelectric blasting system utilizes gas tube, continuityof the circuit shall be tested prior to blasting. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6502 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Safety fuse. </ITAG>(a) The burning rate of each spool of safety fuse to be used shall be measured,posted in locations which will be conspicuous to safety fuse users, andbrought to the attention of all persons involved with the blasting operation.(b) When firing with safety fuse ignited individually using handheld lighters,the safety fuse shall be of lengths which provide at least the minimumburning time for a particular size round as specified in the followingtable. <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,i1,s25,r25 </C><T4>Safety Fuse_Minimum Burning Time </T4><H1>Number of holes in a round </H1><H1>Minimum burning time</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">1 <D>2 minutes.\1\ </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2 to 5 <D>2 minutes 40 seconds. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6 to 10 <D>3 minutes 20 seconds. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">11 to 15 <D>5 minutes. </D><F>\1\ For example, persons shall use at least 36-inch length of 40-second-per-footsafety fuse or at least a 48-inch length of 30-second-per-foot safety fuseto allow sufficient time to evacuate the area.</F></ITAG></ITAG> (c) Where flyrock might damage exposed safety fuse, the blast shall betimed so that all safety fuse are burning within the blastholes beforeany blasthole detonates. (d) Fuse shall be cut and capped in dry locations posted with ``No Smoking''signs. (e) Blasting caps shall be crimped to fuse only with implements designedfor that purpose. (f) Safety fuse shall be ignited only after the primer and the explosivematerial are securely in place. (g) Safety fuse shall be ignited only with devices designed for that purpose.Carbide lights, liquefied petroleum gas torches and cigarette lightersshall not be used to light safety fuse. (h) At least two persons shall be present when lighting safety fuse, andno one shall light more than 15 individual fuses. If more than 15 holesper person are to be fired, electric blasting systems, igniter cord andconnectors, or other nonelectric blasting systems shall be used. <ITAG tagnum="84">Extraneous Electricity </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6600 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Loading practices. </ITAG>If extraneous electricity is suspected in an area where electric detonatorsare used, loading shall be suspended until tests determine that stray currentdoes not exceed 0.05 amperes through a 1-ohm resister when measured atthe location of the electric detonators. If greater levels of extraneouselectricity are found, the source shall be determined and no loading shalltake place until the condition is corrected. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6601 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Grounding. </ITAG>Electric blasting circuits, including powerline sources when used, shallnot be grounded. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6602 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Static electricity dissipation during loading. </ITAG>When explosive material is loaded pneumatically or dropped into a blastholein a manner that could generate static electricity_ (a) An evaluation of the potential static electricity hazard shall be madeand any hazard shall be eliminated before loading begins; (b) The loading hose shall be of a semiconductive type, have a total ofnot more than 2-megohms of resistance over its entire length and not lessthan 1,000-ohm of resistance per foot; (c) Wire-countered hoses shall not be used; (d) All conductive parts of the loading equipment shall be bonded and grounded.Grounds shall not be made to other potential sources of extraneous electricity;and (e) Plastic tubes shall not be used as hole liners if the hole containsan electric detonator. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;56.6603 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Air gap. </ITAG>At least a 15-foot air gap shall be provided between the blasting circuitand the electric power source.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6604 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Precautions during storms.</ITAG>During the approach and progress of an electrical storm, all blasting operationsshall be suspended and all persons withdrawn from the blast area or toa safe location.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6605 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Isolation of blasting circuits.</ITAG>Lead wires and blasting lines shall not be strung across power conductors,pipelines and railroad tracks, and shall be protected from sources of strayor static electricity. Blasting circuits shall also be protected from anycontact between firing lines and overhead powerlines which could resultfrom the force of a blast.<ITAG tagnum="84">Equipment/Tools</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6700 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nonsparking tools.</ITAG>Only nonsparking tools shall be used to open containers of explosive materialor to punch holes in explosive cartridges.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6701 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tamping and loading pole requirements.</ITAG>Tamping and loading poles shall be of wood or other nonconductive, nonsparkingmaterial. Couplings for poles shall be nonsparking.<ITAG tagnum="84">Maintenance</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6800 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Storage facilities.</ITAG>When repair work which could produce a spark or flame is to be performedon a storage facility for explosive materials:(a) The explosive material shall be moved to another facility, or movedat least 50 feet from the repair activity and monitored; and (b) The facility shall be cleaned to prevent accidental detonation.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6801 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vehicles.</ITAG>Vehicles containing explosive material shall not be taken into a repairgarage or shop.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6802 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Bulk delivery vehicles.</ITAG>No welding or cutting shall be performed on bulk delivery vehicles untilthe vehicles have been washed down and all explosive material has beenremoved. Before welding or cutting on a hollow shaft, the shaft shall bethoroughly cleaned inside and out and vented with a minimum \1/2\ inchdiameter opening to allow for sufficient ventilation.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6803 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Blasting lines.</ITAG>Permanent blasting lines shall be properly supported. All blasting linesshall be insulated and kept in good repair.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6900 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Damaged or deteriorated explosive material.</ITAG>Damaged or deteriorated explosive material shall be disposed of in a safemanner in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer. Delay detonatorsat least five years old are considered deteriorated explosive material.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6901 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Black powder.</ITAG>(a) Black powder shall be used for blasting only when a desired resultcannot be obtained with another type of explosive, such as in quarryingcertain types of dimension stone.(b) Containers of black powder shall be_(1) Nonsparking; (2) Kept in a totally enclosed cargo space while being transported by avehicle;(3) Securely closed at all times, when_(i) Within 50 feet of any magazine or open flame;(ii) Within any building in which a fuel-fired or exposed-element electricheater is operating; or(iii) In an area where electrical or incandescent-particle sparks couldresult in powder ignition; and(4) Opened only when the powder is being transferred to a blasthole oranother container and only in locations not listed in paragraph (b)(3)of this section.(c) Black powder shall be transferred from containers only by pouring;(d) Spills shall be cleaned up promptly with nonsparking equipment. Contaminatedpowder shall be put into a container of water to be disposed of promptlyafter the granules have disintegrated, or the spill area shall be promptlyflushed with water until the granules have disintegrated completely;(e) Misfires shall be disposed of by washing the stemming and powder chargefrom the blasthole, and removing and disposing of the initiator in accordancewith the requirement for damaged explosives; and(f) Holes shall not be reloaded for at least 12 hours when the blastholeshave failed to break as planned.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6902 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Hot holes.</ITAG>Where heat could cause premature detonation, explosive material shall notbe loaded into drilled or sprung holes. Special precautions are requiredwhen blasting sulfide ores that react with explosive material or stemmingin blastholes.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6903 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Burning explosive material.</ITAG>If explosive material is suspected of burning at the blast site, all personsshall be evacuated from the endangered area and shall not return for atleast one hour after the burning or suspected burning has stopped.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.6904 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Smoking, open flame restriction.</ITAG>(a) Smoking and use of open flames shall not be permitted within 50 feetof explosive material unless separated by permanent noncombustible barriers.(b) This standard does not apply to devices designed to ignite safety fuseor to heating devices which do not create a fire or explosion hazard.<ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix I for Subpart E_MSHA Tables of Distances  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>5,L2,i1,s175,12,12,12,12  </C><T4>MSHA Table of Distances for Surface Storage of Explosive Material</T4> <H1>Quantity of explosive material in pounds  </H1><H2>Over_Not over  </H2><H1>Mine buildings, dams, and electrical substations  </H1><H2>Barricaded  </H2><H2>Unbarricaded  </H2><H1>Distances in feet_Separation of magazines  </H1><H2>Barricaded  </H2><H2>Unbarricaded  </H2>   <ITAG tagnum="1">2_5  <D>70  </D><D>140  </D><D>6  </D><D>12   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5_10  <D>90  </D><D>180  </D><D>8  </D><D>16   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10_20  <D>110  </D><D>220  </D><D>10  </D><D>20   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">20_30  <D>125  </D><D>250  </D><D>11  </D><D>22   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">30_40  <D>140  </D><D>280  </D><D>12  </D><D>24   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">40_50  <D>150  </D><D>300  </D><D>14  </D><D>28   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">50_75  <D>170  </D><D>340  </D><D>15  </D><D>30   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">75_100  <D>190  </D><D>380  </D><D>16  </D><D>32   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100_125  <D>200  </D><D>400  </D><D>18  </D><D>36   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">125_150  <D>215  </D><D>430  </D><D>19  </D><D>38   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">150_200  <D>235  </D><D>470  </D><D>21  </D><D>42   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">200_250  <D>255  </D><D>510  </D><D>23  </D><D>46   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">250_300  <D>270  </D><D>540  </D><D>24  </D><D>48   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">300_400  <D>295  </D><D>590  </D><D>27  </D><D>54   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">400_500  <D>320  </D><D>640  </D><D>29  </D><D>58   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">500_600  <D>340  </D><D>680  </D><D>31  </D><D>62   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">600_700  <D>355  </D><D>710  </D><D>32  </D><D>64   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">700_800  <D>375  </D><D>750  </D><D>33  </D><D>66   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">800_900  <D>390  </D><D>780  </D><D>35  </D><D>70   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">900_1,000  <D>400  </D><D>800  </D><D>36  </D><D>72   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,000_1,200  <D>425  </D><D>850  </D><D>39  </D><D>78   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,200_1,400  <D>450  </D><D>900  </D><D>41  </D><D>82   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,400_1,600  <D>470  </D><D>940  </D><D>43  </D><D>86   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,600_1,800  <D>490  </D><D>980  </D><D>44  </D><D>88   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,800_2,000  <D>505  </D><D>1,010  </D><D>45  </D><D>90   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2,000_2,500  <D>545  </D><D>1,090  </D><D>49  </D><D>98   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2,500_3,000  <D>580  </D><D>1,160  </D><D>52  </D><D>104   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3,000_4,000  <D>635  </D><D>1,270  </D><D>58  </D><D>116   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4,000_5,000  <D>685  </D><D>1,370  </D><D>61  </D><D>122   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5,000_6,000  <D>730  </D><D>1,460  </D><D>65  </D><D>130   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6,000_7,000  <D>770  </D><D>1,540  </D><D>68  </D><D>136   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">7,000_8,000  <D>800  </D><D>1,600  </D><D>72  </D><D>144   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8,000_9,000  <D>835  </D><D>1,670  </D><D>75  </D><D>150   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">9,000_10,000  <D>865  </D><D>1,730  </D><D>78  </D><D>156   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10,000_12,000  <D>875  </D><D>1,750  </D><D>82  </D><D>164   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">12,000_14,000  <D>885  </D><D>1,770  </D><D>87  </D><D>174   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">14,000_16,000  <D>900  </D><D>1,800  </D><D>90  </D><D>180   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">16,000_18,000  <D>940  </D><D>1,880  </D><D>94  </D><D>188   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">18,000_20,000  <D>975  </D><D>1,950  </D><D>98  </D><D>196   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">20,000_25,000  <D>1,055  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>105  </D><D>210   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">25,000_30,000  <D>1,130  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>112  </D><D>224   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">30,000_35,000  <D>1,205  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>119  </D><D>238   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">35,000_40,000  <D>1,275  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>124  </D><D>248   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">40,000_45,000  <D>1,340  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>129  </D><D>258   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45,000_50,000  <D>1,400  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>135  </D><D>270   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">50,000_55,000  <D>1,460  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>140  </D><D>280   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">55,000_60,000  <D>1,515  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>145  </D><D>290   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">60,000_65,000  <D>1,565  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>150  </D><D>300   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">65,000_70,000  <D>1,610  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>155  </D><D>310   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">70,000_75,000  <D>1,655  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>160  </D><D>320   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">75,000_80,000  <D>1,695  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>165  </D><D>330   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">80,000_85,000  <D>1,730  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>170  </D><D>340   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">85,000_90,000  <D>1,760  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>175  </D><D>350   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">90,000_95,000  <D>1,790  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>180  </D><D>360   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">95,000_100,000  <D>1,815  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>185  </D><D>370   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100,000_110,000  <D>1,835  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>190  </D><D>390   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">110,000_120,000  <D>1,855  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>205  </D><D>410   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">120,000_130,000  <D>1,875  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>215  </D><D>430   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">130,000_140,000  <D>1,890  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>225  </D><D>450   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">140,000_150,000  <D>1,900  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>235  </D><D>470   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">150,000_160,000  <D>1,935  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>245  </D><D>490   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">160,000_170,000  <D>1,965  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>255  </D><D>510   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">170,000_180,000  <D>1,990  </D><D>2,000  </D><D>265  </D><D>530   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">180,000_190,000  <D>2,010  </D><D>2,010  </D><D>275  </D><D>550   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">190,000_200,000  <D>2,030  </D><D>2,030  </D><D>285  </D><D>570   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">200,000_210,000  <D>2,055  </D><D>2,055  </D><D>295  </D><D>590   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">210,000_230,000  <D>2,100  </D><D>2,100  </D><D>315  </D><D>630   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">230,000_250,000  <D>2,155  </D><D>2,155  </D><D>335  </D><D>670   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">250,000_275,000  <D>2,215  </D><D>2,215  </D><D>360  </D><D>720   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">275,000_300,000  <D>2,275  </D><D>2,275  </D><D>385  </D><D>770   </D><F>For purposes of this table, ``barricaded'' means that the storage facilitycontaining explosive material is effectually screened by a natural or anartificial barricade consisting of a mound or revetted wall of earth ofa minimum thickness of three feet.  </F><F>For conversion to the metric system of measurement: 1 lb=0.454 kg; 1ft=0.305 m; 1 in=2.54 cm.  </F><F>This table is derived from the IME ``American Table of Distances'',May 1983 edition.  </F></ITAG></ITAG>   <ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>MSHA Table of Separation Distances  </T4><H1>Pounds of explosives or blasting agents  </H1><H2>Over_Not over  </H2><H1>Storage facilities_Separation distances when barricaded  </H1><H2>Ammonium nitrate  </H2><H2>Blasting agents  </H2><H1>Minimum thickness of artificial barricades (in.)  </H1>   <ITAG tagnum="1">Not over 100  <D>3  </D><D>11  </D><D>12   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100_300  <D>4  </D><D>14  </D><D>12   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">300_600  <D>5  </D><D>18  </D><D>12   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">600_1,000  <D>6  </D><D>22  </D><D>12   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,000_1,600  <D>7  </D><D>25  </D><D>12   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,6000_2,000  <D>8  </D><D>29  </D><D>12   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2,000_3,000  <D>9  </D><D>32  </D><D>15   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3,000_4,000  <D>10  </D><D>36  </D><D>15   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4,000_6,000  <D>11  </D><D>40  </D><D>15   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6,000_8,000  <D>12  </D><D>43  </D><D>20   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8,000_10,000  <D>13  </D><D>47  </D><D>20   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10,000_12,000  <D>14  </D><D>50  </D><D>20   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">12,000_16,000  <D>15  </D><D>54  </D><D>25   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">16,000_20,000  <D>16  </D><D>58  </D><D>25   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">20,000_25,000  <D>18  </D><D>65  </D><D>25   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">25,000_30,000  <D>19  </D><D>68  </D><D>30   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">30,000_35,000  <D>20  </D><D>72  </D><D>30   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">35,000_40,000  <D>21  </D><D>76  </D><D>30   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">40,000_45,000  <D>22  </D><D>79  </D><D>35   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45,000_50,000  <D>23  </D><D>83  </D><D>35   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">50,000_55,000  <D>24  </D><D>86  </D><D>35   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">55,000_60,000  <D>25  </D><D>90  </D><D>35   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">60,000_70,000  <D>26  </D><D>94  </D><D>40   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">70,000_80,000  <D>28  </D><D>101  </D><D>40   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">80,000_90,000  <D>30  </D><D>108  </D><D>40   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">90,000_100,000  <D>32  </D><D>115  </D><D>40   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100,000_120,000  <D>34  </D><D>122  </D><D>50   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">120,000_140,000  <D>37  </D><D>133  </D><D>50   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">140,000_160,000  <D>40  </D><D>144  </D><D>50   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">160,000_180,000  <D>44  </D><D>158  </D><D>50   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">180,000_200,000  <D>48  </D><D>173  </D><D>50   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">200,000_220,000  <D>52  </D><D>187  </D><D>60   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">220,000_250,000  <D>56  </D><D>202  </D><D>60   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">250,000_275,000  <D>60  </D><D>216  </D><D>60   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">275,000_300,000  <D>64  </D><D>230  </D><D>60   </D><F>For purposes of this table, ``barricaded'' means that the storage facilityis effectually screened by a natural barricade or an artificial barricadeconsisting of a mound or revetted wall of earth.  </F><F>When the explosives or blasting agents are not barricaded, the distancesshown in this table shall be multiplied by six.  </F><F>For conversion to the metric system of measurement: 1 lb=0.454 kg; 1ft=.305 m; 1 in=2.54 cm.  </F><F>This table is derived from NFPA 492_1976, published in National FireProtection Association (NFPA) document 495, 1985 edition.   </F></ITAG></ITAG>   <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart F_Drilling and Rotary Jet Piercing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.7055</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Intersecting holes.</ITAG>Holes shall not be drilled where there is a danger of intersecting a misfiredhole or a hole containing explosives, blasting agents or detonators.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 56.7056</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Collaring in bootlegs.</ITAG>Holes shall not be collared in bootlegs.It is proposed to amend subparts E and F of Part 57, Subchapter N, ChapterI, Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulations as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 57_SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS UNDERGROUND METAL AND NONMETALMINES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;andSection; 57.6107 and 57.6135</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection;andSection; 57.7055 and 57.7056 and revised]</ITAG>1. Redesignate and revise andSection;andSection; 57.6107 as 57.7055 and 57.6135as 57.7056 in Subpart F_Drilling and Rotary Jet Piercing.2. Revise Subpart E to consist of andSection;andSection; 57.6000 through 57.6960,as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart E_Explosives</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6000 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Storage_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6100 Separation of explosive material.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6101 Areas around storage facilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6102 Storage practices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Storage_Surface Only</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6130 Storage facilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6131 Location of storage facilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6132 Magazine requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6133 Powder chests.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Storage_Underground Only</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6160 Main facilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6161 Auxiliary facilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Transportation_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6200 Delivery to storage or blast site areas.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6201 Separation of explosive material.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6202 Vehicles.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6203 Locomotives.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6204 Hoists.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6205 Conveying explosives by hand.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Use_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6300 Control of blasting operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6301 Blasthole obstruction check.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6302 Explosive material protection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6303 Initiation preparation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6304 Primer protection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6305 Unused explosive material.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6306 Loading and blasting.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6307 Drill stem loading.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6308 Initiation systems.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6309 Fuel oil requirements for ANFO.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6310 Misfire waiting period.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6311 Handling of misfires.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6312 Secondary blasting.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6313 Blast site security.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Electric Blasting_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6400 Compatibility of electric detonators.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6401 Shunting.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.66402 Deenergized circuits near detonators.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6403 Branch circuits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6404 Positive separation of blasting circuits from power source.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6405 Firing devices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6406 Duration of current flow.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6407 Circuit testing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Nonelectric Blasting_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6500 Damaged initiating material.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6501 Nonelectric systems.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6502 Safety fuse.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Extraneous Electricity_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6600 Loading practices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6601 Grounding.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6602 Static electricity dissipation during loading.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6603 Air gap.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6604 Precautions during storms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6605 Isolation of blasting circuits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Equipment Tools_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6700 Nonsparking tools.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6701 Tamping and loading pole requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Maintenance_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6800 Storage facilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6801 Vehicles.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6802 Bulk delivery vehicles.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6803 Blasting lines.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">General Requirements_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6900 Damaged or deteriorated explosive material.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6901 Black powder.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6902 Hot holes.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6903 Burning explosive material.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6904 Smoking, open flame restriction.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">General Requirements_Underground Only</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">57.6960 Mixing of explosive material.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix I for Subpart E_MSHA Tables of Distances</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>30 U.S.C. 811.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart E_Explosives</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6000</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>The following definitions apply in this subpart.<T3>Attended. </T3>Presence of an individual or continuous monitoring toprevent unauthorized entry or access.<T3>Blast area.</T3> The area in which concussion (shock wave), flyingmaterial, or gases from an explosion may cause injury to persons. In determiningthe blast area, the following factors shall be considered:(a) Geology or material to be blasted.(b) Blast pattern.(c) Burden, depth, diameter and angle of the holes.(d) Blasting experience of the mine.(e) Delay system, powder factor, and pounds per delay.(f) Type and amount of explosive material.(g) Type and amount of stemming.<T3>Blast site.</T3> The area where explosive material is handled duringloading, including the perimeter formed by the blast holes and 50 feetin all directions from loaded holes or holes to be loaded. The 50 footrequirement also applies in all directions along the full depth of thehole. In underground mines, 15 feet of solid rib or pillar can be substitutedfor the 50 foot distance.<T3>Blasting agent. </T3>Any substance classified as a blasting agent bythe Department of Transportation in 49 CFR 173.114(a), (1986 Compilation).This document is available at any MSHA Metal and Nonmetal Safety and Healthdistrict office.<T3>Blasting switch.</T3> A switch used to connect a power source to ablasting circuit.<T3>Detonating cord.</T3> A flexible cord containing a center core of highexplosives and used to initiate other explosives.<T3>Detonator.</T3> Any device containing a detonating charge used to initiatean explosive. These devices include blasting caps, electric or non-electricinstantaneous or delay blasting caps, and delay connectors. The term ``detonator''does not include detonating cord. Detonators may be either ``Class A''detonators or ``Class C'' detonators, as classified by the Department ofTransportation in 49 CFR 173.53 and 173.100 (1986 Compilation). This documentis available at any Metal and Nonmetal Safety and Health district office.<T3>Explosive.</T3> Any substance classified as an explosive by the Departmentof Transportation in 49 CFR 173.53, 173.88 and 173.100 (1986 Compilation).This document is available at any MSHA Metal and Nonmetal Safety and Healthdistrict office.<T3>Explosive material.</T3> Explosives, blasting agents, and detonators.<T3>Flash point.</T3> The minimum temperature at which sufficient vaporis released by a liquid to form a flammable vapor-air mixture near thesurface of the liquid.<T3>Igniter cord.</T3> A fuse that burns progressively along its lengthwith an external flame at the zone of burning, used for lighting a seriesof safety fuses in a desired sequence.<T3>Laminated partition.</T3> A partition composed of the following materialand minimum nominal dimensions: \1/2\ inch thick plywood, \1/2\ inch thickgypsum wallboard, \1/8\ inch thick low carbon steel and \1/4\ inch thickplywood, bonded together in that order.<T3>Loading.</T3> Placing explosive material either in a blast hole oragainst the material to be blasted.<T3>Misfire.</T3> The complete or partial failure of explosive materialto detonate as planned. The term is also used to describe the explosivematerial itself that has failed to detonate.<T3>Multipurpose dry-chemical fire extinguisher.</T3> An extinguisher havinga rating of at least 2-A:10-B:C and containing a nominal 4.5 pounds ormore of dry-chemical agent.<T3>Safety switch. </T3>A switch that provides shunt protection in blastingcircuits between the blasting switch and the blast site.<T3>Slurry.</T3> An explosive material containing substantial portionsof water, such as a water gel or emulsion.<ITAG tagnum="84">Storage_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6100</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Separation of explosive material.</ITAG>(a) Detonators shall not be stored in the same magazine with other explosivematerial; and(b) Blasting agents shall be separated from explosives, safety fuse, anddetonating cord to prevent contamination.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6101</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Areas around storage facilities.</ITAG>(a) Areas surrounding storage facilities for explosive material shall beclear of rubbish, brush, dry grass, and trees for 25 feet in all directions.However, live trees 10 feet or taller need not be removed.(b) Combustibles shall not be stored or allowed to accumulate within 50feet of explosive material. Combustible liquids shall be stored in a mannerthat assures drainage will occur away from the explosive material storagefacility in case of tank rupture.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6102</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Storage practices.</ITAG>Explosive material shall be_(a) Stored in a manner to facilitate use of oldest stocks first;(b) Stored according to brand and grade in such a manner as to facilitateidentification; and(c) Stacked in a stable manner but not more than eight (8) feet high.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Explosives shall be stored in closed nonconductive containers exceptthat nonelectric detonating devices may be stored on nonconductive racks.<ITAG tagnum="84">Storage_Surface Only</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6130</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Storage facilities.</ITAG>(a) Detonators and explosives shall be stored in magazines;(b) Packaged blasting agents shall be stored in a magazine or other facilitywhich is ventilated, weather-resistant, and locked or attended. Facilitiesother than magazines used to store blasting agents shall contain only blastingagents;(c) Bulk blasting agents shall be stored in weather-resistant bins or tankswhich are locked, attended, or otherwise inaccessible to unauthorized entry;and (d) Facilities, bins or tanks shall be posted with warning signs that indicatethe contents and are visible from each approach.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6131 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Location of storage facilities.</ITAG>Storage facilities shall be_(a) Located in accordance with Appendix I for Subpart E_MSHA Tables ofDistances. However, where there is not sufficient area at the mine siteto allow compliance with Appendix I, storage facilities shall be locatedso that the forces generated by a storage facility explosion will not createa hazard to occupants in mine buildings and will not damage mine openings,mine ventilation fans, dams or electric substations; and(b) Detached structures located outside the blast area and a sufficientdistance from powerlines so that the powerlines, if damaged, would notcontact the magazines.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6132 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Magazine requirements.</ITAG>Magazines shall be_(a) Structurally sound;(b) Noncombustible, or covered with fire-resistant material;(c) Bullet resistant;(d) Equipped with electrical bonding connections between all conductiveportions of a metal magazine so the entire structure is at the same electricalpotential. Suitable electrical bonding methods include welding, rivetingor the use of securely tightened bolts where individual metal portionsare joined. Conductive portions of nonmetal magazines shall be grounded;(e) Made of nonsparking materials on the inside;(f) Ventilated to control dampness and excessive heating within the magazine;(g) Posted with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach, so located that a bullet passing through any of thesigns will not strike the magazine;(h) Kept clean and dry inside;(i) Unlighted or lighted by devices that are specifically designed foruse in magazines and which do not create a fire or explosion hazard. Allswitches and outlets shall be located on the outside;(j) Unheated, or heated only with devices that do not create a fire orexplosion hazard;(k) Locked when unattended; and(l) Used exclusively for the storage of explosive materials except foressential nonsparking equipment used for the operation of the magazine.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6133 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Powder chests.</ITAG>(a) Powder chests (day boxes) shall be_(1) Structurally sound, weather-resistant, equipped with a lid or cover,and with only nonsparking material on the inside;(2) Posted with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach;(3) Located out of the blast area once loading has been completed;(4) Locked or attended when containing explosive material; and(5) Emptied at the end of each shift with the contents returned to a magazineor other storage facility, or attended.(b) All detonators shall be kept in separate chests from explosives orblasting agents, except that Class C detonators may be placed in the samepowder chest with explosives or blasting agents if separated by 4-inchesof hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent.<ITAG tagnum="84"> Storage_Underground Only</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6160 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Main facilities</ITAG>(a) Main facilities used to store explosive material underground shallbe located_(1) In stable or supported ground;(2) So that a fire or explosion in the storage facilities will not preventescape from the mine, or cause detonation of the contents of another storagefacility;(3) Out of the line of blasts, and protected from vehicular traffic, exceptthat accessing the facility;(4) At least 25 feet from track and haulageways, except those necessaryto provide access to the facility;(5) At least 200 feet from work places or shafts;(6) At least 50 feet from electric substations;(7) At least 25 feet from trolley wires:(8) At least 25 feet from detonator storage facilities; and(b) Main facilities used to store explosive material underground shallbe_(1) Posted with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach;(2) Used exclusively for the storage of explosive material and associatednonsparking equipment;(3) Clean and dry inside;(4) Provided with unobstructed ventilation openings;(5) Kept securely locked unless all access to the mine is either lockedor attended;(6) Unlighted, or lighted only with devices that do not create a fire orexplosion hazard and which are specifically designed for use in magazines.All electrical switches and outlets shall be located outside the facility;(7) Kept free of empty explosive material packaging; and(8) Made of nonsparking material on the inside and equipped with doorsor lids.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6161 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Auxiliary facilities.</ITAG>(a) Auxiliary facilities used to store explosive material near work placesshall be wooden box-type containers or facilities constructed to provideequivalent impact resistance and confinement.(b) The auxiliary facilities shall be_(1) Constructed of nonsparking material on the inside;(2) Equipped with covers or doors;(3) Clean and dry inside;(4) Kept in repair;(5) Located out of the line of blasts so they will not be subjected todamaging shock or flyrock;(6) Identified with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach; (7) Located at least 15 feet from all haulageways and electrical equipment,or placed entirely within a recess in the rib used exclusively for explosivematerial; (8) Filled with no more than a one-week supply of explosive material;(9) Separated by at least 25 feet from other facilities used to store detonators;and (10) Kept securely locked unless all access to the mine is either lockedor attended. <ITAG tagnum="84">Transportation_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6200 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Delivery to storage or blast site areas. </ITAG>Explosive material shall be transported without avoidable delay to thestorage area or blast site. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6201 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Separation of explosive material. </ITAG>(a) Class A detonators, and Class C detonators in quantities of more than1000, shall not be transported in a vehicle or conveyance with explosivesor blasting agents unless the detonators are maintained in the originalpackaging as shipped from the manufacturer and separated from the explosivesor blasting agents by 4-inches of hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent.(b) Class C detonators may be transported in quantities up to 1000 withexplosives or blasting agents. However, such detonators shall be kept inclosed containers and separated from the explosives or blasting agentsby 4-inches of hardwood, laminated partition or equivalent. The hardwoodor laminated partition shall be fastened to the vehicle or conveyance.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6202 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vehicles.</ITAG>(a) Vehicles containing explosive material shall be_ (1) Structurally sound and well-maintained;(2) Equipped with sides and enclosures higher than the explosive materialbeing transported or have the explosive material secured to a nonconductivepallet; (3) Equipped with a cargo space which shall contain the explosive material.Passenger areas shall not be considered cargo space;(4) Equipped with at least two multipurpose dry-chemical fire extinguishersor one such extinguisher and an automatic fire suppression system; (5) Vented except when transporting in bulk; (6) Posted with warning signs that indicate the contents and are visiblefrom each approach; (7) Occupied only by persons necessary for handling the explosive material;(8) Attended, except when parked at the blast site and loading is in progress;and(9) Secured while parked by having_(i) The brakes set;(ii) The wheels chocked if movement could occur; and (iii) The engine shut off unless powering a device being used in the loadingoperation. (b) Vehicles containing explosives shall have_(1) No sparking material exposed in the cargo space; and (2) Only properly secured nonsparking equipment in the cargo space withthe explosives. (c) Vehicles used for dispensing bulk explosive material shall_(1) Have no zinc or copper exposed in the cargo space; and (2) Provide any enclosed screw-type conveyors with protection against internalpressure and frictional heat. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6203 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Locomotives. </ITAG>Explosive material shall not be transported on a locomotive. When explosivematerial is hauled by trolley locomotive, covered, electrically insulatedcare shall be used. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6204 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Hoists.</ITAG>(a) Before explosive material is transported in hoist conveyances_(1) The hoist operator shall be notified; and (2) Hoisting in adjacent shaft compartments, except for empty conveyancesor counterweights, shall be stopped until transportation of the explosivematerial is completed. (b) Explosive material transported in hoist conveyances shall be placedwithin a structurally sound container. The manufacturer's container maybe used if secured to a nonconductive pallet. When explosives are transported,they shall be secured so as not to contact any sparking material. (c) No person shall be transported on a hoist conveyance or mantrip containingexplosive materials. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6205 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conveying explosives by hand. </ITAG>Closed, nonconductive containers shall be used to carry explosives to andfrom blast sites. Separate containers shall be used for explosives anddetonators. <ITAG tagnum="84">Use_Surface And Underground </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6300 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Control of blasting operations.</ITAG>(a) Only persons trained and experienced in the handling and use of explosivematerial shall direct blasting operations and related activities. (b) Trainees and inexperienced persons shall work only in the immediatepresence of persons trained and experienced in the handling and use ofexplosive material. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6301 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Blasthole obstruction check.</ITAG>After blastholes are drilled, they shall be checked, and cleared of obstructionswherever possible, before loading. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;57.6302 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Explosive material protection.</ITAG>(a) Explosives and blasting agents shall be kept separated from detonatorsuntil loading begins.(b) Explosive material shall be protected from impact and temperaturesin excess of 150anddegrees; F when taken to the blast site.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6303 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Initiation preparation. </ITAG>(a) Primers shall be prepared with the detonator contained securely andcompletely within the explosive or contained securely and appropriatelyfor its design in the tunnel or cup well; (b) Primers shall be made only at the time of use and as close to the blastsite as conditions allow; and (c) When using detonating cord to initiate another explosive, a connectionshall be prepared with the detonating cord threaded through, attached securelyto, or otherwise in contact with the explosive.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6304</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Primer protection.</ITAG>(a) Tamping shall not be done directly on a primer. (b) If cartridges of explosives or blasting agents exceed 4 inches in diameter,they shall not be dropped on the primer except where the blasthole is filledwith or under water. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6305</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Unused explosive material.</ITAG>Unused explosive material shall be moved to a protected location as soonas loading operations are completed.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6306</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Loading and blasting.</ITAG>(a) Once explosive material has reached the blast site, vehicles and equipmentshall not be driven over explosive material or initiating systems or otherwisecontact them in a manner which could create a hazard;(b) Once loading begins, only activity directly related to the blastingoperation shall be permitted within the blast site;(c) Loading shall be continuous except for emergency situations, shiftchanges, and idle shifts not to exceed 16 hours;(d) When loading is suspended, the blast site shall be attended; (e) In electric blasting prior to hook-up of the power source and in nonelectricblasting prior to the attachment to an initiating device, all persons shallbe removed from the blast area except persons in a blasting shelter orother location that protects from concussion (shock wave), flying material,or gases. (f) Upon completion of loading and connecting of circuits, firing of blastsshall occur as soon as possible. (g) Before firing a blast_(1) Ample warning shall be given to allow all persons to be evacuated;(2) Clear exit routes shall be provided for persons firing the round; and(3) All access routes to the blast area shall be guarded or barricadedto prevent the passage of persons or vehicles. (h) No work shall resume in the blast area until a post-blast examinationhas been conducted. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6307</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Drill stem loading.</ITAG>Explosive material shall not be loaded into blastholes with drill stemequipment or other devices that could be extracted while containing explosivematerial. The use of loading hose, collar sleeves, or collar pipes is permitted.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6308</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Initiation systems.</ITAG>Initiation systems shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer'sinstructions.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6309</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Fuel oil requirements for ANFO.</ITAG>Liquid hydrocarbon fuels with flash points lower than that of No. 2 dieseloil (125 anddegrees;F) shall not be used to prepare ammonium nitrate-fueloil. Waste oil, including crankcase oil, shall not be used. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6310 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Misfire waiting period.</ITAG>When a misfire is suspected, persons shall not enter the blast area_(a) For 30 minutes if safety fuse and blasting caps are used; or(b) For 15 minutes if any other type detonators are used.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6311</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Handling of misfires.</ITAG>(a) Faces and muck piles shall be examined for misfires after each blastingoperation. (b) Only work necessary to remove a misfire and protect the safety of minersengaged in the removal shall be premitted in the affected area until themisfire is disposed of in a safe manner.(c) When a misfire cannot be disposed of safely, each approach to the areaaffected by the misfire shall be posted with a warning sign at a conspicuouslocation to prohibit entry, and the condition shall be reported immediatelyto mine management. (d) All misfires occurring during the shift shall be reported to mine managementnot later than the end of the shift.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6312</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Secondary blasting.</ITAG>Secondary blasts fired at the same time in the same work area shall beinitiated from one source.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6313</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Blast site security.</ITAG>Areas in which loaded holes are awaiting firing shall be attended, or barricadedand posted, or flagged against unauthorized entry.<ITAG tagnum="84">Electric Blasting_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6400</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Compatibility of electric detonators.</ITAG>All electric detonators to be fired in a round shall be from the same manufacturerand shall have similar electrical firing characteristics.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6401</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Shunting.</ITAG>Except during testing_(a) Electric detonators shall be kept shunted until connected to the blastingline or wired into a blasting round; (b) Wired rounds shall be kept shunted until connected to the blastingline; and (c) Blasting lines shall be kept shunted until immediately before blasting.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6402</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Deenergized circuits near detonators.</ITAG>Electrical distribution circuits within 50 feet of electric detonatorsat the blast site shall be deenergized. However, such circuits need notbe deenergized between 25 to 50 feet of the electric detonators if straycurrent tests indicate a maximum stray current of less than 0.05 amperesthrough a one-ohm resistor as measured at the location of the electricdetonators.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6403</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Branch circuits.</ITAG>If electric blasting includes the use of branch circuits, each branch shallbe equipped with a safety switch or equivalent method to isolate the circuitsto be used. At least one safety switch or equivalent method of protectionshall be located outside the blast area and shall be in the open positionuntil persons are withdrawn.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6404 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Positive separation of blasting circuits from power source.</ITAG>Except when closed to fire the blast, blasting switches shall be lockedin the open position. Lead wires shall not be connected to the blastingswitch unitl the shot is ready to be fired.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6405 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Firing devices.</ITAG>(a) Power sources shall be capable of delivering sufficient current toenergize all electric detonators to be fired with the type of circuitsused. The use of storage or dry cell batteries is not permitted as a powersource.(b) Blasting machines shall be tested, repaired, and maintained in accordancewith manufacturer's instructions.(c) Only the blaster shall have the key or other control to an electricalfiring device.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6406 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duration of current flow.</ITAG>If any part of a blast is connected in parallel and is to be initiatedfrom powerlines or lighting circuits, the time of current flow shall belimited to a maximum of 25 milliseconds. This can be accomplished by incorporatingan arcing control device in the blasting circuit or by interrupting thecircuit with an explosive device attached to one or both lead lines andinitiated by a 25 millisecond delay electric detonator.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6407 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Circuit testing.</ITAG>A blasting galvanometer or other instrument designed for testing blastingcircuits shall be used to test the following:(a) In surface operations_(1) Continuity of each electric detonator in the blasthole prior to stemmingor connection to the blasting line;(2) Resistance of individual series or the resistance of multiple balancedseries to be connected in parallel prior to their connection to the blastingline;(3) Continuity of blasting lines prior to the connection of electric detonatorseries; and(4) Total blasting circuit resistance prior to connection to the powersource.(b) In underground operations_(1) Continuity of each electric detonator series; and(2) Continuity of blasting lines prior to the connection of electric detonators.<ITAG tagnum="84">Nonelectric Blasting_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6500 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Damaged initiating material.</ITAG>Safety fuse, igniter cord, detonating cord, shock or gas tubing and similarmaterial which is kinked, bent sharply, or damaged shall not be used. Avisual check of the completed circuit shall be made to assure that thecomponents are properly aligned and connected.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6501 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nonelectric systems.</ITAG>(a) When blasting with any nonelectric system, double trucklines or loopsystems shall be used, except:(1) When blasting with safety fuse and caps;(2) When performing secondary blasting; or(3) When in-the-hole delays are of sufficient duration to preclude cutoffsfrom the movement of ground.(b) When the nonelectric blasting system utilizes shock tube_(1) All connections with other initiation devices shall be secured in amanner which provides for uninterrupted progagation;(2) Factory made units shall be used as assembled and shall not be cut;and(3) Connections between blastholes shall not be made until immediatelyprior to clearing the blast area and connection to the source for energyfor firing the blast.(c) When the monelectric blasting system utilizes detonating cord_(1) The line of detonating cord extending out of a blasthole shall be cutfrom the supply spool immediately after the attached explosive is correctlypositioned in the hole;(2) In multiple row blasts, the trunkline layout shall be designed so thatthe detonation can reach each blasthole from at least two directions;(3) All connections shall be tight and kept at right angles to the trunkline;(4) Detonators shall be attached securely to the side of the detonatingcord and pointed in the direction in which detonation is to proceed; and(5) Connections between blastholes shall not be made until immediatelyprior to clearing the blast area.(d) When the nonelectric blasting system utilizes gas tube, continuityof the circuit shall be tested prior to blasting.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6502 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Safety fuse.</ITAG>(a) The burning rate of each spool of safety fuse to be used shall be measured,posted in locations which will be conspicuous to safety fuse users, andbrought to the attention of all persons involved with the blasting operation.(b) When firing with safety fuse ignited individually using handheld lighters,the safety fuse shall be of lengths which provide at least the minimumburning time for a particular size round as specified in the followingtable.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,xs25,r25 </C> <H1>Safety Fuse-Minimum Burning Time</H1><H2>Number of holes in a round</H2><H2>Minimum burning time</H2><ITAG tagnum="1">1 <D>2 minutes.\1\</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2-5 <D>2 minutes 40 seconds.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6-10 <D>3 minutes 20 seconds.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">11-15 <D>5 minutes. </D><F>\1\ For example, persons shall use at least 36-inch length of 40-second-per-footsafety fuse or at least a 48-inch length of 30-second-per-foot safety fuseto allow sufficient time to evacuate the area.</F></ITAG></ITAG>(c) Where flyrock might damage exposed safety fuse, the blast shall betimed so that all safety fuses are burning within the blastholes beforeany blasthole detonates.(d) Fuse shall be cut and capped in dry locations posted with ``No Smoking''signs.(e) Blasting caps shall be crimped to fuse only with implements designedfor that purpose.(f) Safety fuse shall be ignited only after the primer and the explosivematerial are securely in place.(g) Safety fuse shall be ignited only with devices designed for that purpose.Carbide lights, liquefied petroleum gas torches and cigarette lightersshall not be used to light safety fuse.(h) At least two persons shall be present when lighting safety fuse, andno one shall light more than 15 individual fuses. If more than 15 holesper person are to be fired, electric blasting systems, igniter cord andconnectors, or other nonelectric blasting systems shall be used.<ITAG tagnum="84">Extraneous Electricity_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6600</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Loading practices.</ITAG>If extraneous electricity is suspected in an area where electric detonatorsare used, loading shall be suspended until tests determine that stray currentdoes not exceed 0.05 amperes through a 1-ohm resister when measured atthe location of the electric detonators. If such levels of extraneous electricityare found, the source shall be determined and no loading shall take placeuntil the condition is corrected.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6601</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Grounding.</ITAG>Electric blasting circuits, including powerline sources when used, shallnot be grounded.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6602</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Static electricity dissipation during loading.</ITAG>When explosive material is loaded pneumatically or dropped into a blastholein a manner that could generate static electricity_(a) An evaluation of the potential static electricity hazard shall be madeand any hazard shall be eliminated before loading begins; (b) The loading hose shall be of a semiconductive type, have a total ofnot ore than 2-megohms of resistance over its entire length and not lessthan 1000-ohm of resistance per foot;(c) Wire-countered hoses shall not be used; (d) All conductive parts of the loading equipment shall be bonded and grounded.Grounds shall not be made to other potential sources of extraneous electricity;and (e) Plastic tubes shall not be used as hole liners if the hole containsan electric detonator.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6603</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Air gap.</ITAG>At least a 15-foot air gap shall be provided between the blasting circuitand the electric power source.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6604</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Precautions during storms.</ITAG>During the approach and progress of an electrical storm_(a) All surface blasting operations shall be suspended and all personswithdrawn from the blast area or to a safe location.(b) All underground electrical blasting operations that are capable ofbeing initiated by lightning shall be suspended and all persons withdrawnfrom the blast area or to a safe location.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6605</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Isolation of blasting circuits.</ITAG>Lead wires and blasting lines shall not be strung across power conductors,pipelines and railroad tracks, and shall be protected from sources of strayor static electricity. Blasting circuits shall also be protected from anycontact between firing lines and overhead powerlines which could resultfrom the force of a blast.<ITAG tagnum="84">Equipment Tools_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6700</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nonsparking tools.</ITAG>Only nonsparking tools shall be used to open containers of explosive materialor to punch holes in explosive cartridges.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6701</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tamping and loading pole requirements.</ITAG>Tamping and loading poles shall be of wood or other nonconductive, nonsparkingmaterial. Couplings for poles shall be nonsparking.<ITAG tagnum="84">Maintenance_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6800</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Storage facilities.</ITAG>When repair work which could produce a spark or flame is to be performedon a storage facility for explosive materials:(a) The explosive material shall be moved to another facility, or ovedat least 50 feet from the repair activity and monitored; and(b) The facility shall be cleaned to prevent accidental detonation.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6801</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vehicles.</ITAG>Vehicles containing explosive material shall not be taken into a repairgarage or shop.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6802</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Bulk delivery vehicles.</ITAG>No welding or cutting shall be performed on bulk delivery vehicles untilthe vehicles have been washed down and all explosive material has beenremoved. Before welding or cutting on a hollow shaft, the shaft shall bethoroughly cleaned inside and out and vented with a minimum 1/2 inch diameteropening to allow for sufficient ventilation.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6803</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Blasting lines.</ITAG>Permanent blasting lines shall be properly supported. All blasting linesshall be insulated and kept in good repair.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Requirements_Surface and Underground</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6900</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Damaged or deteriorated explosive material.</ITAG>Damaged or deteriorated explosive material shall be disposed of in a safemanner in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer. Delay detonatorsat least five years old are considered deteriorated explosive material.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6901</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Black powder.</ITAG>(a) Black powder shall be used for blasting only when a desired resultcannot be obtained with another type of explosive, such as in quarryingcertain types of dimension stone.(b) Containers of black powder shall be_(1) Nonsparking;(2) Kept in a totally enclosed cargo space while being transported by avehicle;(3) Securely closed at all times, when_(i) Within 50 feet of any magazine or open flame;(ii) Within any building in which a fuel-fired or exposed-element electricheater is operating; or(iii) In an area where electrical or incandescent-particle sparks couldresult in powder ignition; and (4) Opened only when the powder is being transferred to a blasthole oranother container and only in locations not listed in paragraph (b)(3).(c) Black powder shall be transferred from containers only by pouring;(d) Spills shall be cleaned up promptly with nonsparking equipment. Contaminatedpowder shall be put into a container of water to be disposed of promptlyafter the granules have disintegrated, or the spill area shall be promptlyflushed with water until the granules have disintegrated completely;(e) Misfires shall be disposed of by washing the stemming and powder chargefrom the blasthole, and removing and disposing of the initiator in accordancewith the requirement for damaged explosives; and(f) Holes shall not be reloaded for at least 12 hours when the blastholeshave failed to break as planned.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6902</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Hot holes.</ITAG>Where heat could cause premature detonation, explosive material shall notbe loaded into drilled or sprung holes. Special precautions are requiredwhen blasting sulfide ores that react with explosive material or stemmingin blastholes.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6903</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Burning explosive material.</ITAG>If explosive material is suspected of burning at the blast site, all personsshall be evacuated from the endangered area and shall not return for atleast one hour after the burning or suspected buring has stopped.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6904</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Smoking, open flame restriction.</ITAG>(a) Smoking and use of open flames shall not be permitted within 50 feetof explosive material except when separated by permanent noncombustiblebarriers.(b) This standard does not apply to devices designed to ignite safety fuseor to heating devices which do not create a fire or explosion hazard.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Requirements_Underground Only</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.6960</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Mixing of explosive material.</ITAG>The mixing of ingredients to produce explosive material shall not be conductedunderground unless the product of the mixing is an emulsion or slurry andthe storage facilities and mixing equipment are designed, maintained andoperated to minimize the possibility of heat build-up, fires and sparks.Storage facilities shall provide drainage away from the facilities forleaks and spills.<ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix I For Subpart E_MSHA Tables of Distances</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>5,L2,i1,s175,12,12,12,12</C><T4>MSHA Table of Distances for Surface Storage of Explosive Material</T4><H1>Quantity of explosive material in pounds_</H1><H2>Over_Not over</H2><H1>Mine buildings, underground mine openings, fans, dams, and electricsubstations</H1><H2>Barricaded</H2><H2>Unbarricaded</H2><H1>Distances in feet_Separation of magazines</H1><H2>Barricaded</H2><H2>Unbarricaded</H2><ITAG tagnum="1">2_5<D>70</D><D>140</D><D>6</D><D>12</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5_10<D>90</D><D>180</D><D>8</D><D>16</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10_20<D>110</D><D>220</D><D>10</D><D>20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">20_30<D>125</D><D>250</D><D>11</D><D>22</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">30_40<D>140</D><D>280</D><D>12</D><D>24</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">40_50<D>150</D><D>300</D><D>14</D><D>28</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">50_75<D>170</D><D>340</D><D>15</D><D>30</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">75_100<D>190</D><D>380</D><D>16</D><D>32</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100_125<D>200</D><D>400</D><D>18</D><D>36</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">125_150<D>215</D><D>430</D><D>19</D><D>38</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">150_200<D>235</D><D>470</D><D>21</D><D>42</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">200_250<D>255</D><D>510</D><D>23</D><D>46</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">250_300<D>270</D><D>540</D><D>24</D><D>48</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">300_400<D>295</D><D>590</D><D>27</D><D>54</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">400_500<D>320</D><D>640</D><D>29</D><D>58</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">500_600<D>340</D><D>680</D><D>31</D><D>62</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">600_700<D>355</D><D>710</D><D>32</D><D>64</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">700_800<D>375</D><D>750</D><D>33</D><D>66</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">800_900<D>390</D><D>780</D><D>35</D><D>70</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">900_1,000<D>400</D><D>800</D><D>36</D><D>72</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,000_1,200<D>425</D><D>850</D><D>39</D><D>78</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,200_1,400<D>450</D><D>900</D><D>41</D><D>82</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,400_1,600<D>470</D><D>940</D><D>43</D><D>86</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,600_1,800<D>490</D><D>980</D><D>44</D><D>88</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,800_2,000<D>505</D><D>1,010</D><D>45</D><D>90</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2,000_2,500<D>545</D><D>1,090</D><D>49</D><D>98</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2,500_3,000<D>580</D><D>1,160</D><D>52</D><D>104</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3,000_4,000<D>635</D><D>1,270</D><D>58</D><D>116</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4,000_5,000<D>685</D><D>1,370</D><D>61</D><D>122</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5,000_6,000<D>730</D><D>1,460</D><D>65</D><D>130</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6,000_7,000<D>770</D><D>1,540</D><D>68</D><D>136</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">7,000_8,000<D>800</D><D>1,600</D><D>72</D><D>144</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8,000_9,000<D>835</D><D>1,670</D><D>75</D><D>150</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">9,000_10,000<D>865</D><D>1,730</D><D>78</D><D>156</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10,000_12,000<D>875</D><D>1,750</D><D>82</D><D>164</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">12,000_14,000<D>885</D><D>1,770</D><D>87</D><D>174</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">14,000_16,000<D>900</D><D>1,800</D><D>90</D><D>180</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">16,000_18,000<D>940</D><D>1,880</D><D>94</D><D>188</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">18,000_20,000<D>975</D><D>1,950</D><D>98</D><D>196</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">20,000_25,000<D>1,055</D><D>2,000</D><D>105</D><D>210</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">25,000_30,000<D>1,130</D><D>2,000</D><D>112</D><D>224</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">30,000_35,000<D>1,205</D><D>2,000</D><D>119</D><D>238</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">35,000_40,000<D>1,275</D><D>2,000</D><D>124</D><D>248</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">40,000_45,000<D>1,340</D><D>2,000</D><D>129</D><D>258</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45,000_50,000<D>1,400</D><D>2,000</D><D>135</D><D>270</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">50,000_55,000<D>1,460</D><D>2,000</D><D>140</D><D>280</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">55,000_60,000<D>1,515</D><D>2,000</D><D>145</D><D>290</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">60,000_65,000<D>1,565</D><D>2,000</D><D>150</D><D>300</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">65,000_70,000<D>1,610</D><D>2,000</D><D>155</D><D>310</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">70,000_75,000<D>1,655</D><D>2,000</D><D>160</D><D>320</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">75,000_80,000<D>1,695</D><D>2,000</D><D>165</D><D>330</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">80,000_85,000<D>1,730</D><D>2,000</D><D>170</D><D>340</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">85,000_90,000<D>1,760</D><D>2,000</D><D>175</D><D>350</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">90,000_95,000<D>1,790</D><D>2,000</D><D>180</D><D>360</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">95,000_100,000<D>1,815</D><D>2,000</D><D>185</D><D>370</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100,000_110,000<D>1,835</D><D>2,000</D><D>190</D><D>390</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">110,000_120,000<D>1,855</D><D>2,000</D><D>205</D><D>410</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">120,000_130,000<D>1,875</D><D>2,000</D><D>215</D><D>430</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">130,000_140,000<D>1,890</D><D>2,000</D><D>225</D><D>450</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">140,000_150,000<D>1,900</D><D>2,000</D><D>235</D><D>470</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">150,000_160,000<D>1,935</D><D>2,000</D><D>245</D><D>490</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">160,000_170,000<D>1,965</D><D>2,000</D><D>255</D><D>510</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">170,000_180,000<D>1,990</D><D>2,000</D><D>265</D><D>530</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">180,000_190,000<D>2,010</D><D>2,010</D><D>275</D><D>550</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">190,000_200,000<D>2,030</D><D>2,030</D><D>285</D><D>570</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">200,000_210,000<D>2,055</D><D>2,055</D><D>295</D><D>590</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">210,000_230,000<D>2,100</D><D>2,100</D><D>315</D><D>630</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">230,000_250,000<D>2,155</D><D>2,155</D><D>335</D><D>670</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">250,000_275,000<D>2,215</D><D>2,215</D><D>360</D><D>720</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">275,000_300,000<D>2,275</D><D>2,275</D><D>385</D><D>770</D><F>For purposes of this table, ``barricaded'' means that the storage facilitycontaining explosive material is effectually screened by a natural barricadeor an artificial barricade consisting of a mound or revetted wall of earthof a minimum thickness of three feet.</F><F>For conversion to the metric system of measurement: 1 lb = 0.454 kg;1 ft = 0.305 m; 1 in = 2.54 cm</F><F>This table is derived from the IME ``American Table of Distances'',May 1983 edition</F></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>MSHA Table of Separation Distances</T4><H1>Pounds of explosives or blasting agents_</H1><H2>Over_Not over</H2><H1>Storage facilities_separation distances when barricaded_</H1><H2>Ammonium nitrate</H2><H2>Blasting agents</H2><H1>Minimum thickness of artificial barricades (in.)</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Not over 100<D>3</D><D>11</D><D>12</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100_300<D>4</D><D>14</D><D>12</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">300_600<D>5</D><D>18</D><D>12</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">600_1,000<D>6</D><D>22</D><D>12</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,000_1,600<D>7</D><D>25</D><D>12</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,600_2,000<D>8</D><D>29</D><D>12</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2,000_3,000<D>9</D><D>32</D><D>15</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3,000_4,000<D>10</D><D>36</D><D>15</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4,000_6,000<D>11</D><D>40</D><D>15</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6,000_8,000<D>12</D><D>43</D><D>20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8,000_10,000<D>13</D><D>47</D><D>20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10,000_12,000<D>14</D><D>50</D><D>20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">12,000_16,000<D>15</D><D>54</D><D>25</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">16,000_20,000<D>16</D><D>58</D><D>25</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">20,000_25,000<D>18</D><D>65</D><D>25</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">25,000_30,000<D>19</D><D>68</D><D>30</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">30,000_35,000<D>20</D><D>72</D><D>30</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">35,000_40,000<D>21</D><D>76</D><D>30</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">40,000_45,000<D>22</D><D>79</D><D>35</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45,000_50,000<D>23</D><D>83</D><D>35</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">50,000_55,000<D>24</D><D>86</D><D>35</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">55,000_60,000<D>25</D><D>90</D><D>35</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">60,000_70,000<D>26</D><D>94</D><D>40</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">70,000_80,000<D>28</D><D>101</D><D>40</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">80,000_90,000<D>30</D><D>108</D><D>40</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">90,000_100,000<D>32</D><D>115</D><D>40</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100,000_120,000<D>34</D><D>122</D><D>50</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">120,000_140,000<D>37</D><D>133</D><D>50</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">140,000_160,000<D>40</D><D>144</D><D>50</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">160,000_180,000<D>44</D><D>158</D><D>50</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">180,000_200,000<D>48</D><D>173</D><D>50</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">200,000_220,000<D>52</D><D>187</D><D>60</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">220,000_250,000<D>56</D><D>202</D><D>60</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">250,000_275,000<D>60</D><D>216</D><D>60</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">275,000_300,000<D>64</D><D>230</D><D>60</D><F>For purposes of this table, ``barricaded'' means that the storage facilityis effectually screened by a natural barricade or an artificial barricadeconsisting of a mound or revetted wall of earth.</F><F>When the explosives or blasting agents are not barricaded, the distancesshown in the table shall be multiplied by six.</F><F>For conversion to the metric system of measurement: 1 lb = 0.454 kg;1 ft = 0.305 m; 1 in = 2.54 cm</F><F>This table is derived from NFPA 492-1976, published in National FireProtection Association (NFPA) document 495, 1985 edition</F></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart F_Drilling and Rotary Jet Piercing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.7055</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Intersecting holes.</ITAG>Holes shall not be drilled where there is a danger of intersecting a misfiredhole or a hole containing explosives, blasting agents or detonators.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 57.7056</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Collaring in bootlegs.</ITAG>Holes shall not be collared in bootlegs.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-25694 Filed 11-9-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-43-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>