<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88815-0072 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-15-88.f2.A1071</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-482; License No. NPF-42; EA 87-213]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corp., Wolf Creek Generating Station;Order Imposing Civil Montetary Penalty</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I</ITAG>Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corporation (licensee) is the holder of OperatingLicense No. NPF-42 (license) issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission(NRC/Commission) on June 4, 1985. The license authorizes the licensee tooperate the Wolf Creek Generating Station in accordance with the conditionsspecified therein.<ITAG tagnum="84">II</ITAG>Three safety inspections of the licensee's activities were conducted duringthe period from October 1 through November 18, 1987. The results of theseinspections indicated that the licensee had not conducted its activitiesin full compliance with NRC requirements. A written Notice of Violationand Proposed Imposition of Civil Penalty was served upon the licensee byletter dated March 17, 1988. The Notice stated the nature of the violations,the provisions of the NRC's requirements that the licensee had violated,and the amount of the civil penalty proposed for the violations. The licenseeresponded to the Notice of Violation and Proposed Imposition of Civil Penaltyby letter dated April 14, 1988. In the licensee's response, the violationswere admitted, but the licensee considered escalation of the base civilpenalty to be inappropriate.<ITAG tagnum="84">III</ITAG>After consideration of the licensee's response and the statements of fact,explanation, and argument for mitigation contained therein, the DeputyExecutive Director for Regional Operations has determined, as set forthin the Appendix to this Order, that an inadequate basis was provided formitigation of the proposed penalty and that the penalty proposed for theviolations designated in the Notice of Violation and Proposed Impositionof Civil Penalty should be imposed.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV</ITAG>In view of the foregoing and pursuant to section 234 of the Atomic EnergyAct of 1954, as amended (Act), 42 U.S.C. 2282, and 10 CFR 2.205, it ishereby ordered that:The licensee pay a civil penalty in the amount of One Hundred ThousandDollars ($100,000) within 30 days of the date of this Order, by check,draft, or money order, payable to the Treasurer of the United States andmailed to the Director, Office of Enforcement, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, ATTN: Document Control Desk, Washington, DC 20555.<ITAG tagnum="84">V</ITAG>The licensee may request a hearing within 30 days of the date of this Order.A request for a hearing should be clearly marked as a ``Request for anEnforcement Hearing'' and shall be addressed to the Director, Office ofEnforcement, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ATTN: Document ControlDesk, Washington, DC 20555, with a copy to the Assistant General Counselfor Enforcement, Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, the Regional Administrator, U.S. NuclearRegulatory Commission, Region IV, and the NRC resident inspector at WolfCreek Generating Station.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will issue an Order designatingthe time and place of the hearing. If the licensee fails to request a hearingwithin 30 days of the date of this Order, the provisions of this Ordershall be effective without further proceedings. If payment has not beenmade by that time, the matter may be referred to the Attorney General forcollection.In the event the licensee requests a hearing as provided above, the issueto be considered at such hearing shall be whether, on the basis of theviolations set forth in the Notice of Violation and Proposed Impositionof Civil Penalty referrenced in Section II above, this Order should besustained.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 28th day of July 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">James M. Taylor,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Executive Director for Regional Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix_Evaluations and Conclusions</ITAG>On March 17, 1988, a Notice of Violation and Proposed Imposition of CivilPenalty (Notice) was issued to Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corporation(WCNOC), the licensee. On April 14, 1988, the licensee responded to theNotice. In its response, the licensee did not deny any of the violations,which were classified in the aggregate as a Severity Level III problem,but did request a reduction in the amount of the civil penalty. The NRC'sevaluation and conclusions regarding the licensee's response are as follows:I. Restatement of Violation <ITAG tagnum="81">A. Failure To Follow Procedures </ITAG>10 CFR Part 50, Appendix B, Criterion V, requires, in part, that activitiesaffecting quality be prescribed by documented instructions, procedures,or drawings. The activities shall be accomplished in accordance with theseinstructions, procedures, or drawings. 1. Procedure MPE E 009Q-01, Revision 0, ``13.8KV and 4.16KV SwitchgearInspection and Testing'' establishes the requirements for accomplishingmaintenance work in the NB02 switchgear when terminals in the NB02 switchgearare energized. Step 6.1 of Procedure MPE E 009Q-01, Revision 0 states, ``Check the electricaldrawings and identify any area(s) which will have high voltage potentialpresent even when the bus is grounded. List the areas on the Attachment``A'' sign-off sheet.'' Step 6.3.9.5 of Procedure MPE E-009Q-01, Revision 0 states, ``Clean theinsulator and high voltage connection in each tube. Check the insulatorsfor cracks and the rosettes for damaged fingers.'' Step 6.4.3. of Procedure MPE E-009Q-01, Revision 0 states ``Using the highvoltage gloves and tester, check the stationary disconnects for high voltagepotential. If no potential is found, check that the high voltage connectionsare dischared.'' Contrary to the above, on October 14, 1987, Procedure MPE E 009Q-01 wasnot followed in that: (1) Cubicle NB0209 feeder from Cubicle XNB02 wasnot identified as an area that had a high voltage potential present andtherefore was not listed in Attachment ``A'' sign-off sheet as requiredby Step 6.1 of Procedure MPE Q 009Q-01, Revision 0; (2) Step 6.3.9.5 ofthe Procedure MPE E 009Q-01, Revision 0, had been signed off for cleaningthe insulators and checking the insulators for cracks and the rosettesfor damaged fingers as completed; however, had the insulator been actuallycleaned, the person performing this step would have encountered it energizedand would have been unable to perform the required cleaning, and (3) theelectrician failed to check the stationary disconnects for high voltagepotential to ensure that the high voltage connections were discharged asrequired by Step 6.4.3. of Procedure MPE E 009Q-01, Revision 0. 2. Procedure 10-3, Revision 2, ``Sluicing Media from Duratek EVR System''describes the methods to sluice resin from the Durateck System to a disposalcontainer. Contrary to the above, on October 10, 1987, two contract workers failedto follow the methods described in Procedure 10-3, Revision 2, when theyphysically ``opened'' a clogged pipe resulting in the contamination ofthe individuals themselves and the surrounding area. 3. Procedure ADM 03-101, Revision 9, ``Radiation Work Permit Program,''requires that a radiation work permit (RWP) be issued for all entries intothe radiological controlled area (RCA). For work activities to be performedin the RCA, Radiation Work Permit (RWP) 870017 required that a continuousair sample be drawn during the work. Contrary to the above, on October 10, 1987, a continuous air sample wasnot drawn as required by Procedure ADM 03-101, Revision 9 while work activitieswere being performed in the RCA, so that any potential airborne contaminationthat may have existed in the area would not have been detected. 4. Procedure ADM 03-202, Revision 4, ``Radiological Control and UnconditionalRelease of Tools and Equipment,'' in Step 4.1.1 states, ``All items priorto leaving the RCA, will be surveyed for loose contamination and for fixedcontamination * * *'' and ``will be verified to have no * * * contamination.''Contrary to the above, the licensee failed to comply with Procedure ADM03-202, Revision 4, on November 9, 1987, in that it released radioactivematerial to the Coffey County Landfill that was neither surveyed for looseand fixed contamination, nor was the material verified to have no contamination.5. Procedure ADM 01-057, Revision 12, ``Work Request'' establishes theuse of the Work Request to document and control work activities involvingSafety Related items. a. Work Request (WR) 05013-86 required the documentation of the hydrostatictest manifold relief valve setting for the hydrostatic test of Spool PieceEF05-S050. Contrary to the above, as of November 13, 1987, the hydrostatic test manifoldrelief valve setting for the hydrostatic test of Spool Piece EF05-S050(pursuant to WR 05013-86) had not been documented.b. WR 02827-87, Step 5.0, required the quality control verification ofthe installation of an air dam bag downstream of Valve EF V-058 on pipe080-UBC-24.Contrary to the above, as of November 2, 1987, the quality control verificationof the installation of an air dam bag downstream of Valve EF V-058 on pipe080-UBC-24 (pursuant to WR 02827-87) had not been performed.6. 10 CFR Part 50, Appendix B, Criterion IX, requires, in part, that measuresbe established to assure that special processes, including welding, becontrolled and accomplished by qualified personnel using qualified proceduresin accordance with applicable codes, standards specifications, criteria,and other special requirements.a. Procedure ADM 08-302, Revision 4, ``Wolf Creek Generating Station Controlof Welding Filler Material,'' Step 6.2.4, requires that each welder havein his possession only that type and classification of weld filler materialauthorized on the Field Welding Material Requisition.Contrary to the above, twice on November 5 and once on November 6, 1987,welders were issued and used material different from what was authorizedon the Field Welding Material Requisition.b. Quality Control Procedure QCI 12.1-601, Revision 2, ``Inspection ofASME/ANSI Welds,'' requires that the quality control inspector verify thatthe weld filler material is as specified.Contrary to the above, on November 5, 1987, a quality control inspectormistakenly verified the wrong material as being the correct material, therebyresulting in the use of improper weld filler metal in three instances forField Welding Material Requisitions 9443, 9446, and 9448.c. Procedure ADM 08-302, Revision 4, Step 6.2.1, requires that shieldedmetal arc welds be performed by welders who are qualified to perform shieldedmetal arc welds.Contrary to the above, on November 12, 1987, during the performance ofPlant Modification Request PMR-2116, a welder performed a shielded metalarc weld thta he was not qualified to perform. <ITAG tagnum="81">B. Failure To Have Appropriate Procedures</ITAG>10 CFR Part 50, Appendix B, Criterion V, requires, in part, that activitiesaffecting quality be prescribed by documented instruction procedures, ordrawings of a type appropriate to the circumstances.1. Procedure GEN 00-007, Revision 8, ``RCS Draindown,'' used to purge hydrogenform the Reactor Coolant System (RCS) and pressurizer, in Step 4.3.4, states,in part, ``Commence raising pressurizer level towards 100 percent on BBLI-462, pressurizer level cold calibration, carefully observing reactorcoolant system pressure.''Contrary to the above, on October 14, 1987, the licensee experienced aninadvertent ignition of hydrogen in the pressurizer because Procedure GEN00-007, Revision 8 was not appropriate to ensure that all the hydrogenwas purged out of the pressurizer. The upper taps for the level instrumentationare approximately 3 feet below the top of the pressurizer. Therefore, eventhough the instruments (BB LI-462) indicated 100 percent as required bythe procedure, the pressurizer still had a vapor space with enough hydrogenpresent to support a burn.2. Procedure ADM 13-101, Revision 4, ``Control of Ignition Sources,'' requiresverification that the pressurizer be purged of flammable material.Contrary to the above, on October 14, 1987, the licensee experienced aninadvertent ignition of hydrogen in the pressurizer because Procedure ADM13-101, Revision 4 was not appropriate in that it failed to require thata sample be taken to confirm that the pressurizer had been purged of flammablematerial.3. Procedure SYS NG-331, Revision 5, ``Deenergization of 480 Volt (Class1E) Bus(es)'' provides instructions necessary to deenergize the 480 Volt(Class 1E) load centers and/or transformers.Contrary to the above, on October 15, 1987, when the 4.16KV Bus NB02 wastaken out of service for routine maintenance, the normal power suppliedto the 125 V DC Buses NK01 and NK04 was deenergized and the loads werethen transferred and placed upon Battery Banks NK12 and NK14, respectively.While Procedure SYS N6-331 provided instructions to deenergize the 480Volt (Class 1F) load centers, the procedure was inadequate in that no instructionsexisted to guide personnel in calculating the length of time the batteriescould carry the electrical loads and in determining the battery attributeswhich should have been periodically checked.4. Procedure STS IC-725B, Revision 1, ``7300 Process and N.I. ResponseTime Test (2/4 Logic) Protection Set II,'' establishes the requirementsfor testing of response times of the Analog Channels that generate certainReactor Trip and Engineered Safeguard Feature functions. Licensee TechnicalSpecification (TS) 3.9.2 requires, in part, ``As a minimum, two sourcerange neutron flux monitors shall be operable * * *'' and ``With one ofthe above required monitors inoperable or not operating, immediately suspendall operations involving core alterations* * *.''Contrary to the above, on November 7, 1987, while making core alterations,the licensee performed Procedure STC IC-725B. Procedure STS IC-725B specifiedthat both source ranges be deenergized; however, the TS required that bothsource range neutron flux monitors were to be operable. Thus, the procedurewas not adequate to ensure TS requirements were satisfied during all modesof plant operation.Collectively, these violations have been categorized in the aggregate asa Severity Level III problem (Supplement I).Cumulative Civil Penalty_$100,000 (assessed equally between the violations).II. Summary of Licensee ResponseThe licensee, in its response, does not deny any of the violations. However,the licensee does request a reduction in the civil penalty amount and statesthat escalation of the base civil penalty is considered inappropriate basedon the following reasons.A. WCNOC believes the NRC statement relative to the lack of correctiveactions prior to October 21, 1987, is not supported by the record in thata self-initiated work stoppage was imposed and several actions were immediatelyinitiated. Therefore, it is inappropriate to increase the base civil penaltyamount.B. WCNOC believes that it was inappropriate to use the number of violationsas a reason for both the escalation of the severity level classificationand as justification for increasing the amount of the base civil penalty.C. WCNOC believes that it is important to note that the incidents all occurredwhile the plant was in a cold shutdown status and none of the incidentsposed a threat to the health and safety of the public. In addition, essentiallyall of the problems were self-identified and the corrective actions takenby WCNOC were self-initiated and reported.WCNOC requests that the NRC reduce the proposed civil penalty to the baseamount of $50,000.III. NRC Evaluation of Licensee ResponseThe NRC staff has carefully reviewed the licensee's response and has concludedthat the licensee has not provided any information that was not previouslyconsidered in determining the amount of the proposed civil penalty. Withrespect to the corrective actions taken by WCNOC prior to October 21, 1987,the NRC does not consider the self-initiated work stoppage and associatedactions sufficient to satisfy all of the elements expected in a good correctiveaction program. The immediate actions taken by the licensee were viewedto be that expected of a licensee in response to significant outage problems.However, the NRC was concerned that management's oversight of the evaluationof the root cause of problems had not been investigated fully and thereforeon balance neither escalation nor mitigation was deemed appropriate forcorrective actions.The licensee, in its response, implies that these various procedural violationswere individually characterized at a lower severity level, aggregated intoa Severity Level III problem, and then the number of violations used toincrease the civil penalty amount. These violations were evaluated in theaggregate and found to represent a significant weakness in the licensee'smanagement controls and oversight of safety-related activities. In accordancewith the Enforcement Policy, they were characterized as one Severity LevelIII problem. Contrary to the licensee's assertion, multiple examples mayappropriately be considered in both aggregating violations for purposesof determining the severity level of a problem and in determining whethera civil penalty should be increased. This is especially true in this casewhere aggregation of the violations to a Severity Level III problem wouldhave been appropriate based on far fewer examples than set forth in theNotice. In addition, there were multiple examples of significant proceduraldeficiencies in areas including electrical equipment operations and maintenance,radiation safety/health physics, disposal of contaminated materials, andcontrol of welding processes, several of which might, in themselves, beargued to be Severity Level III violations. Increasing the base civil penaltywas warranted based on the added significance of the management issue withthe numerous examples of the failure to adhere to or have appropriate procedures.Although the NRC recognizes that these violations occurred during the refuelingoutage, the violations represented significant weaknesses in the licensee'sprocedures for administrative and management controls and were cause forsignificant regulatory concern. The nature and extent of the enforcementaction proposed was intended to reflect the seriousness of the violationsinvolved.The licensee also asserts in its response that essentially all of the problemswere self-identified. The NRC staff notes that these violations were theresults of events which occurred during the 1987 outage and that in manyof these events (i.e., maintenance of electrical switchgear, while beinginadvertently energized, contamination of contract technicians, hydrogenburn in the pressurizer, and lake water entry into the steam generators)there was minimal involvement of the licensee in identifying the violations.The NRC staff considers the ease of discovery among other factors whenevaluating this factor. These were not cases identified as a result ofthe licensee's initiatives. Therefore, the NRC staff considers it inappropriateto mitigate the base civil penalty on the basis of identification of suchclear and easily discovered violations.IV. NRC ConclusionAn adequate basis for mitigation of the proposed civil penalty has notbeen provided. Therefore, the NRC concludes that a $100,000 civil penaltyshould be imposed.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-18389 Filed 8-12-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>