<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88208-0014 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-08-88.f2.A1013</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 25 / Monday, February 8, 1988/ Rules and Regulations <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">30 CFR Parts 723, 724, 750, 845, 846, 910, 912, 921, 922, 933, 937,939, 941, 942, and 947 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Surface Coal Mining and Reclamation Operations; Initial RegulatoryProgram and Permanent Regulatory Program; Individual Civil Penalties </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement(OSMRE) of the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI) is amending its Initialand Permanent Regulatory Program procedures to provide for the assessmentof individual civil penalties against officers, directors and agents ofcorporate permittees in accordance with section 518(f) of the Surface MiningControl and Reclamation Act of 1977.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Effective March 9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Andrew F. DeVito, Office of SurfaceMining Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1951Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20240; Telephone: 202/343-5241(Commercial or FTS).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="26">I. Background </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">II. Discussion of the Rule and Public Comments </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">III. Procedural Matters </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background </ITAG>This rule establishes a regulatory scheme for imposing individual civilpenalties under section 518(f) of the Surface Mining Control and ReclamationAct of 1977 (the Act), 30 U.S.C. 1201 <T3>et seq. </T3>The proposed rule was published on December 24, 1986 (51FR 46838). On April 8, 1987 (52 FR 11287) the comment period was reopenedand extended until May 8, 1987. Those documents should be consulted foradditional background information. Section 518 of the Act authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to assesscivil and criminal penalties for violations of the Act. Under section 518(a)any person who violates any permit condition or any other provision ofTitle V of the Act may be assessed a civil penalty, not to exceed $5,000per violation for each day the violation continues. Section 518(a) requiresthe Secretary to consider the following criteria in determining the amountof the penalty: (1) The permittee's history of previous violations at theparticular surface coal mining operation; (2) the seriousness of the violation,including any irreparable harm to the environment and any hazard to thehealth or safety of the public; (3) whether the permittee was negligent;and (4) the demonstrated good faith of the permittee charged in attemptingto achieve rapid compliance after notification of the violation. Undersection 518(h) if a violation is not abated within the period set in anotice of violation (NOV) or cessation order, the assessment of a minimumpenalty of $750 for each day during which the violation remains unabatedis mandatory. Under section 518(f) if a violation is committed by a corporate permitteeor if a corporate permittee fails or refuses to comply with certain specifiedorders, then any director, officer or agent of the corporate permitteewho willfully and knowingly authorized, ordered or carried out such violation,failure or refusal is subject to the same civil penalties as may be imposedupon the corporate permittee under section 518(a). Section 518(f) of theAct reads in part as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21">Whenever a corporate permittee violates a condition of a permit ** * or fails or refuses to comply with any order issued under section 521of this Act, or any order incorporated in a final decision issued by theSecretary under this Act * * * any director, officer, or agent of suchcorporation who willfully and knowingly authorized, ordered, or carriedout such violation, failure, or refusal shall be subject to the same civilpenalties, fines, and imprisonment that may be imposed upon a person undersubsections (a) and (e) of this section.</ITAG>In order to distinguish between a penalty assessed against a corporatepermittee under section 518(a) and one assessed against a corporate officer,director or agent under section 518(f), OSMRE refers to the former penaltyas a ``civil penalty'' and to the latter as an ``individual civil penalty.''The current regulations in 30 CFR Parts 723 and 845 prescribe a point systemby which OSMRE calculates the amount of the penalty to be assessed undersection 518(a). The assessment system is based on the four criteria setforth in section 518(a), and provides for a waiver of the formula upona determination by the Director that there are exceptional factors whichrender the penalty demonstrably unjust. The regulations permit OSMRE toassess separately a civil penalty for each day of a continuing violation,from the date of issuance of an NOV or cessation order to the date setfor abatement. Whenever a violation resulting in an NOV or cessation orderhas not been abated within the prescribed abatement period, OSMRE assessesan additional penalty of not less than $750 for each day the violationremains unabated. The minimum $750 penalty is assessed pursuant to section518(h) and is in addition to the daily civil penalty that may be assessedunder the point system pursuant to section 518(a). Under 30 CFR 723.15(b)and 845.15(b), penalties under section 518(h) of the Act may not be assessedfor more than 30 days. Sections 723.15(b) and 845.15(b) further provide that if a violation isnot abated within 30 days after issuance of the failure to abate cessationorder, OSMRE must take appropriate action pursuant to sections 518(e) (criminalpenalties), 518(f) (individual civil penalties), 521(a)(4) (permit suspensionor revocation for a pattern of violations), or 521(c) (requests for temporaryor permanent injunctions). On January 31, 1985, Judge Barrington D. Parker of the United States DistrictCourt for the District of Columbia issued an order (Revised Parker Order)in the case of <T3>Save Our Cumberland Mountains, Inc., et al. </T3>v. <T3>Clark, et al., </T3>No. 81-2134 (D.D.C. 1985). The Revised Parker Orderresulted from a settlement agreement entered into by the Secretary. Amongother matters, the Revised Parker Order addresses the circumstances underwhich the Secretary would use his authority under section 518(f) of theAct to impose individual civil penalties on officers, directors and agentsof corporate permittees. The Revised Parker Order also requires OSMRE toconsider the use of authority under section 518(a) to assess individualcivil penalties for each day of a continuing violation, and to proposea regulation governing the use of such authority. The December 24, 1986rule was proposed in accordance with the Revised Parker Order.As a result of the Revised Parker Order, OSMRE has examined its existingrules and policies related to the assessment of civil penalties. Most civilpenalties are assessed based upon the point system set forth in 30 CFR723.13 to 723.14 and 30 CFR 845.13 to 845.14. The use of this point systemdoes not appear practical for, nor strictly applicable to, the assessmentof individual civil penalties. The point system does not give the Secretarysufficient flexibility to assess a penalty which fairly considers the particularactions or inactions of an individual. For example, andSection;andSection;723.13(b)(1) and 845.13(b)(1) consider the history of the permittee's previousviolations without respect to the individual's involvement with them. This rule establishes a regulatory scheme for imposing individual civilpenalties under section 518(f) of the Act. It is modeled in part on theregulations of the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), U.S. Departmentof Labor. The legislative history of the Act indicates that the enforcementprovisions in the Act, including those in section 518(f), were modeledafter similar provisions in the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Actof 1969 (Pub. L. 91-173). <T3>See </T3>S. Rep. No. 128, 95th Cong., 1st Sess. 58 (1977). Section109(c) of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969 is the predecessorof section 110(c) of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Pub.L. 95-164), which is administered by MSHA. Both sections 109(c) and 110(c) provide for the imposition of an individualcivil penalty in language nearly identical to that found in section 518(f)of the Act. Consequently, OSMRE has reviewed the regulations of MSHA at30 CFR Part 100 for guidance in developing Parts 724 and 846, which setforth the manner in which OSMRE will assess individual civil penaltiesunder section 518(f) of the Act. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Discussion of the Rule and Public Comments </ITAG>Sections 723.1 and 845.1 Scope. The rule makes certain conforming changes to andSection;andSection; 723.1 and845.1 to indicate that the assessment of an individual civil penalty undersection 518(f) of the Act is covered by Parts 724 and 846. No comments were received on the proposed revisions to these sections.OSMRE has adopted them as proposed. Sections 723.18 and 845.18 Extension of time to request a conference. The rule amends andSection;andSection; 723.18 and 845.18 to extend the timewithin which a person may request a conference to review a proposed assessmentor reassessment of a civil penalty under section 518(a). The time is extendedfrom the present 15 days from the date a notice or order of proposed assessmentor reassessment is mailed to 30 days following the receipt of a noticeor order of proposed assessment or reassessment. No comments were received on the proposed revisions. OSMRE has adoptedthem as proposed. Sections 724.1 and 846.1 Scope. Under the rule, Parts 724 and 846 will govern the assessment of individualcivil penalties against officers, directors and agents of corporate permitteesin accordance with section 518(f) of the Act. Under section 518(f), OSMREmay assess an individual civil penalty against any officer, director oragent of a corporate permittee who willfully and knowingly authorized,ordered, or carried out a violation of a condition of a permit issued pursuantto a Federal Program, a Federal lands program, Federal enforcement pursuantto section 502 of the Act, or Federal enforcement of a State program pursuantto section 521 of the Act, or who failed or refused to comply with anyorder issued under section 521 of the Act, or any order incorporated ina final decision issued by the Secretary under the Act, except an orderincorporated in a decision issued under sections 518(b) or 703 of the Act.No comments were received on these sections. OSMRE has adopted them asproposed. Sections 724.5 and 846.5 Definitions. An individual civil penalty under section 518(f) requires knowing and willfulconduct on the part of the individual. Neither the Act nor the legislativehistory define the terms ``knowingly'' and ``willfully.'' This rule definesthe terms in order to provide guidance to the individuals who may be subjectto penalty assessments as well as to those who assess individual civilpenalties. The rule also contains a definition for the phrase ``violation,failure or refusal.'' <T3>Knowingly: </T3>Under the definition, an individual acts ``knowingly''if he/she knew or had reason to know that he/she authorized, ordered orcarried out some act or omission of the corporate permittee which constituteda violation, failure or refusal specified in section 518(f). A person has``reason to know'' when he/she has such information as would lead a personexercising reasonable care in his or her position to acquire knowledgeof the facts in question or to infer their existence. For example, if acorporate official with responsibility for an operation received a copyof a failure to abate cessation order issued to the operator at the minesite, it would be reasonable to expect that he would investigate to ascertainif the violation had been abated. A corporate officer without responsibilityfor the operation would not necessarily be expected to find out such details.This definition is based in part upon the assumption that persons holdingthe position of officer, director or agent are responsible for the actionswhich they have authority to control by virtue of the position they hold.OSMRE has adopted the definition as proposed. Several comments were received on the proposed definition of the term ``knowingly.''Some commenters objected to the inclusion in the definition of the phrase``had reason to know'' and argued that this phrase would incorporate intothe definition the concept of imputed or constructive knowledge. The commentersargued that this was not intended by the Congress and stated that in earlierstatutes where the Congress intended that knowledge be imputed to parties,it has seen fit to provide specific statutory implementation. OSMRE disagrees with the commenters and believes its definition of ``knowingly''is consistent with its intended use in section 518(f). The definition of``knowingly'' contained in this rule is also consistent with the prevailinginterpretation of the same term in the individual civil penalty provisionsof the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, 30 U.S.C. 820(c), andits predecessor the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969 (MineSafety Act). In <T3>Secretary of Labor </T3>v. <T3>Kenny Richardson, </T3>2 MSHC 1114, 1120 (1981), <T3>aff'd, Richardson </T3>v. <T3>Secretary of Labor, </T3>689 F.2d 632 (6th Cir. 1982), the FederalMine Safety and Health Review Commission (the Commission) discussed thequestion of whether the term ``knowingly'' as used in the Mine Safety Actshould be construed as requiring a showing of actual knowledge. The Commissionin affirming the decision of an administrative law judge held that theterm ``knowingly'' is properly construed to mean ``knowing or having reasonto know,'' and that a person would have reason to know when he has suchinformation as would lead a person exercising reasonable care to acquireknowledge of the fact in question or infer its existence. The Commissionreasoned that the Mine Safety Act has certain humanitarian objectives andthat a broad construction of the term ``knowingly'' is consistent withthe remedial intent of the Mine Safety Act. If a person in a position toprotect health and safety fails to act on the basis of information thatgives him knowledge or reason to know of the existence of a violative condition,he has acted knowingly and in a manner contrary to the remedial natureof the statute.OSMRE believes that this same reasoning is also valid when construing themeaning of the term ``knowingly'' as used in section 518(f) of the Act.If a showing of actual knowledge were required, OSMRE would be applyingan extremely strict standard to a civil statute whose remedial purposeas stated in section 102(a) of the Act is to ``establish a nationwide programto protect society and the environment from the adverse effects of surfacecoal mining operations.'' Another commenter argued that the ``had reason to know'' standard conveysthe impression that OSMRE assumes that any officer, director, or agentof the corporate permittee should know all the facts arising in the day-to-dayoperations of a mine. The commenter argued that many corporate officialshave prescribed duties relating to specific functions of the corporationand therefore OSMRE cannot assume that all corporate officers or directorshave ``reason to know.'' OSMRE disagrees that the rule is based upon the assumption stated by thecommenter. Merely being an officer, director or agent of a corporationwill not result in a finding that the officer, director or agent knew orhad reason to know. Every officer, director or agent is not required toknow every detail of the mining operation. However, he or she is responsiblefor exercising due care with regard to his or her functions, and for findingout the relevant facts necessary to the performance of those functions.Thus under the definition, an officer, director or agent would have reasonto know when he or she has such information as would lead a person exercisingreasonable care in his or her position to acquire knowledge of the factin question or to infer its existence. <T3>Violation, failure, or refusal: </T3>This term is defined because itis used in the rule in a number of places. Under the definition, violationmeans a violation of a condition of a permit issued pursuant to a Federalprogram, a Federal lands program, Federal enforcement pursuant to section502 of the Act, or Federal enforcement of a State program pursuant to section521 of the Act. Failure or refusal means a failure or refusal to complywith any order issued under section 521 of the Act, or any order incorporatedin a final decision issued by the Secretary under the Act, except an orderincorporated in a decision issued under sections 518(b) or 703 of the Act.The exceptions for sections 518(b) and 703 are required by section 518(f)of the Act. Section 518(f) specifically prohibits the Secretary from assessing penaltiesfor failure to comply with an order incorporated in a civil penalty decisionrendered under section 518(b), presumably because it would be counter-productiveto assess an individual civil penalty for the nonpayment of the originalcivil penalty assessed against the corporate permittee. In addition, pursuantto section 518(f), the Secretary may not assess an individual civil penaltyfor failure to obey a decision of the Secretary issued pursuant to section703 of the Act. Section 703 of the Act prohibits retaliation against anyemployee who has filed or caused to be filed any proceeding under the Actor against anyone who has or will testify in any such proceeding. No comments were received on this proposed definition. OSMRE has adoptedit as proposed. <T3>Willfully: </T3>Under the definition an individual acts willfully ifhe/she does so either ``intentionally, voluntarily, or consciously, andwith intentional disregard or plain indifference to legal requirements.''OSMRE believes that this definition will provide OSMRE maximum flexibilityin enforcing the individual civil penalty provision of the Act while keepingwell within the bounds of sound statutory construction. In civil statutesthe term ``willfully'' generally refers to an act or omission which isintentional, knowing, voluntary and conscious, as distinguished from anact which is merely accidental or negligent. <T3>See, e.g., Messina Construction Corp. v. OSHA, </T3>505 F.2d 701 (lstCir. 1974). Also, the courts have consistently construed ``willfully''in civil statutes to encompass conduct which is plainly indifferent tostatutory or regulatory requirements. <T3>See, e.g., Alabama Power Co. v. FERC, </T3>584 F.2d 750, 752 (5th Cir.1978). Taken together, the terms ``willfully'' and ``knowingly'' do not includeconduct or omissions which are honest mistakes or which are merely inadvertent.They include, but are not limited to, conduct or omissions which resultfrom a criminal or evil intent or from a specific intent to violate thelaw. The knowing and willful nature of conduct may be established by plainindifference to or reckless disregard of the requirements of law, regulations,orders, or the terms and conditions of a permit. A consistent pattern ofperformance or failure to perform may also be sufficient to establish theknowing and willful nature of the conduct, where such consistent patternis neither the result of honest mistake nor mere inadvertency. Several comments were received on the proposed definition of the term ``willfully.''Two commenters argued that the phrase ``with intentional disregard or plainindifference to legal requirements'' should be deleted. They argued thatthe phrase ``intentional disregard'' adds an element of knowledge to thedefinition of ``willful'' and blurs the distinction between the terms ``willfully''and ``knowingly''. The same commenters also argued that by incorporatingthe phrase ``plain indifference to legal requirements,'' the meaning of``willful'' is expanded into areas of negligent, accidental, or involuntaryaction, and that when ``willful'' is used in statutes it is generally intendedthat such actions are to be distinguished from negligent, accidental orinvoluntary action. OSMRE disagrees with the comment that the phrase should be removed. However,to clarify that accidental or unintentional conduct is not willful, OSMREhas modified the proposed definition of ``willfully'' by changing an ``or''to an ``and''. The effect of the change is to require the conduct to beintentional, voluntary or conscious <T3>and</T3> that the person acted with intentional disregard or plainindifference to legal requirements. This definition is consistent with case law on the subject. The term ``willfully''as used in civil statutes ordinarily denotes an action or omission whichis intentional, knowing, voluntary and conscious, as distinguished fromone which is inadvertent, merely negligent, or accidental. The term ``willfully,''as used in civil penalty statutes, refers to something more than an unwittingfailure to comply with a statutory requirement. <T3>Alabama Power Co. v. FERC,</T3> 584 F.2d 750, 754 (5th Cir. 1978).``Willfully'' in this context denotes an action taken knowledgeably bysomeone subject to the statutory provision on civil penalties in disregardof the action's legality. <T3>Prino v. Simon, </T3>606 F.2d 449, 451 (4th Cir. 1979). Thus, in civilpenalty cases, willfulness requires a determination that the individual,knowing that he had a responsibility, acted with intentional disregardfor or plain indifference to the requirements established by the statute.<T3>See Alabama Power, supra, </T3>584 F.2d at 752-753; <T3>Prino, supra, </T3>606 F.2d at 451.In civil penalty actions, the existence of a ``willful'' statutory violationturns on the defendant's knowledge of his responsibilities at the timehe allegedly disobeyed or ignored the statute's provisions. <T3>See, e.g., Alabama Power, supra, </T3>at 754. Generally anyone whoacts with knowledge that his behavior is illegal is acting ``willfully''for purposes of civil penalty sanctions. <T3>See Mawod andamp; Co. v. SEC, </T3>591 F.2d 588, 595-96 (10th Cir. 1979).Another commenter pointed out that the discussion in the preamble to theproposed rule was inconsistent with the rule language that was proposedand converted the knowing and willful standard into one of simple negligence.In the preamble it was stated that an ``individual acts willfully if he/shedoes so either intentionally, voluntarily, consciously, or with <T3>careless </T3>disregard or plain indifference to legal requirements.''The definition of ``willfully'' at 30 CFR 724.5 and 846.5 uses the phrase``intentionally, voluntarily or consciously, and with <T3>intentional </T3>disregard or plain indifference to legal requirements.''The use of the term ``careless'' in the proposed preamble discussion wasincorrect. The discussion in the preamble did correctly indicate, however,that in civil statutes the term ``willfully'' generally refers to an actor omission which is <T3>intentional, </T3>knowing, voluntary and conscious, as distinguishedfrom an act which is merely accidental or negligent. Two commenters objected to the fact that in their view the definition isbroader than the definition of ``willful violation'' currently found in30 CFR 701.5 and 843.5. In andSection;andSection; 701.5 and 843.5, ``willfulviolation'' is defined as an act or omission by a person who intends theresult which actually occurs. OSMRE's definition of ``willfully'' was selectedafter reviewing the above cited decisions. Although the definition at andSection;andSection;723.5 and 846.5 is narrower than the definition of ``willful violation''at andSection;andSection; 701.5 and 843.5, it is well within the bounds ofsound statutory construction. One commenter argued that a permittee's inability to prevent or remedya violation should never be considered ``knowing and willful.'' OSMRE believesthat a mere inability to prevent or to remedy a violation for reasons beyondthe control of a corporate officer, director, or agent would lack the requisiteintent necessary for ``knowing and willful'' conduct. Another commenter argued that the definition of willfully should reflectthat a ``violation, failure, or refusal'' which arises from a good faithdispute over the appropriate interpretation of a legal requirement, oras to the adequacy of a permittee's efforts to comply with a legal requirement,or to remedy a violation, is not a ``knowing and willful'' violation. Thesame commenter also argued that good faith reliance on the advice of legalcounsel (as to legal requirements) or competent technical staff (as tothe adequacy of measures taken) should negate the ``knowing and willful''element. OSMRE believes that under the definition adopted today, good faith relianceon legal counsel or the advice of technical staff can be introduced asevidence to rebut a charge of a knowing and willful violation, failureor refusal. Any dispute concerning the propriety of the NOV or cessationorder should be resolved by petitioning the Department's Office of Hearingsand Appeals (OHA) for review pursuant to 43 CFR Part 4. The permittee mayalso petition OHA for temporary relief from the requirements of the noticeof violation or cessation order pursuant to 43 CFR 4.1260. However, ifa stay is denied, the permittee must comply with the terms of the noticeof violation or cessation order. One commenter argued that an individual civil penalty should be assessedonly if a violation, failure or refusal is <T3>both </T3>knowingly and willfully authorized, ordered or carried out.OSMRE agrees. Section 518(f) of the Act specifies that the conduct mustbe ``willfully and knowingly authorized, ordered, or carried out.'' One commenter argued that the rule should define the term ``agent.'' Thecommenter argued that while <T3>officer </T3>and <T3>director </T3>are well understood legal terms as applied to corporations,``agent'' has a wide range of meanings. In its narrowest sense ``agent''denotes someone having authority to act on behalf of the corporation ina particular situation, while in its broadest sense it would include everyonewho in fact acts on behalf of the corporation without respect to his orher authority. In the former sense ``agent'' might not include all officersof the corporation while in the latter it could include all employees.The commenter further argued that in the context of section 518(f), ``agent''appears to be used in its narrower sense to mean a person who is not anelected officer or director of the corporation, but exercises authorityand control over its business as though he or she were. OSMRE agrees with the commenter that the term ``agent'' as used in section518(f) should be interpreted to mean a person who exercises authority andcontrol over a surface coal mining operation, such as a foreman or supervisor,as opposed to an employee who merely acts on behalf of the corporationwithout respect to his or her actual authority. The term ``agent'' has already been decisionally defined in <T3>United States v. Dix Fork Coal Co., et al., </T3>692 F.2d 336 (6thCir. 1982) for the purposes of section 521(c) of SMCRA. In that case theU.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit addressed the issue of whoshould be considered an agent of a corporate permittee under the Act. TheCourt held that an ``agent includes that person charged with the responsibilityfor protecting society and the environment from the adverse effects ofthe surface coal mining operation and particularly charged with effectuatingcompliance with environmental performance standards during the course ofa permittee's mining operation.'' While the rule does not include a definitionof the term ``agent,'' OSMRE will apply the Court's analysis to determinationsunder section 518(f) as to whether an individual is an ``agent'' of a corporatepermittee. Sections 724.12 and 846.12 When a civil penalty may be assessed. Under andSection;andSection; 724.12(a) and 846.12(a) of this rule, the Secretarymay assess an individual civil penalty whenever a director, officer oragent of a corporate permittee knowingly and willfully authorized, orderedor carried out a violation, failure or refusal as defined in andSection;andSection;724.5 and 846.5. Under andSection;andSection; 724.12(b) and 846.12(b) thispenalty will not be assessed against the individual until a cessation orderis issued to the corporate permittee for the underlying violation and thecessation order has remained unabated for 30 days. Such a procedure isconsistent with the requirements of paragraphs 9 and 12 of the RevisedParker Order, and also with OSMRE's policy of using the assessment of anindividual civil penalty as an alternative enforcement mechanism. See 30CFR 723.15(b)(2) and 845.15(b)(2).As originally proposed, paragraph (a) stated that an individual civil penaltywould be assessed against a corporate official who knowingly and willfullyauthorized, ordered or carried out (1) the violation by the corporationof any condition of the permit or of any requirement of the Act or implementingregulation; or (2) the failure or refusal by the corporate permittee tocomply with any order issued under section 521 of the Act or other orderincorporated in a final decision issued by the Secretary under the Act.OSMRE has substituted for paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) the phrase ``violation,failure or refusal,'' which is defined in sections 724.5 and 846.5. Thedefinition of ``violation, failure, or refusal'' parallels the openinglanguage of section 518(f), which specifies what conduct would justifythe issuance of an individual civil penalty. This substitution was suggestedby a commenter and is responsive to the commenter's concerns discussedin the next paragraph. Several comments were received on this section objecting to the languageof proposed paragraph (a)(1). As proposed, paragraph (a)(1) provided thatan individual civil penalty would be assessed for the violation by thecorporation of any condition of the permit or of any requirement of theAct or implementing regulations. The commenters argued that the provisionsof proposed paragraph (a)(1) were broader than the requirements of section518(f) of the Act authorizing the imposition of an individual civil penalty.Section 518(f) of the Act authorizes the imposition of an individual civilpenalty only for specific violations which are (1) a violation of a permitcondition, (2) failure to comply with an order issued under section 521,and (3) failure to comply with an order in a final decision issued by theSecretary. OSMRE has modified the rule to account for the commenter's concerns. Aspreviously stated, OSMRE has deleted proposed paragraph (a)(1) from therule and has substituted the phrase ``violation, failure or refusal.''The definition of this phrase parallels the language of section 518(f).The result is that the rule as adopted authorizes the imposition of anindividual civil penalty only for the reasons specified in section 518(f)of the Act. As originally proposed, paragraph (a) referenced exceptions which werespecified in paragraph (b). Paragraph (b)(2) specified that OSMRE wouldnot assess an individual civil penalty for an order incorporated in a finaldecisison of the Secretary issued pursuant to sections 518(b) or 703 ofthe Act and the implementing regulations. The exception in paragraph (b)(2) has not been included in the final andSection;andSection;724.12 and 846.12 because it was redundant. Proposed paragraph (b)(2) mirroredthe language of section 518(f) and exempted from the issuance of an individualcivil penalty a failure to comply with an order incorporated in a finaldecision of the Secretary issued pursuant to sections 518(b) or 703 ofthe Act and the implementing regulations. Sections 724.12(a) and 846.12(a)state that an individual civil penalty may be assessed against any corporatedirector, officer or agent of a corporate permittee who knowingly and willfullyauthorized, ordered or carried out a violation, failure or refusal. Thephrase ``violation, failure or refusal'' is defined in the rule at andSection;andSection;724.5 and 846.5 and already contains an exception for ``an order incorporatedin a decision issued under section 518(b) or section 703 of the Act.''Thus inclusion of proposed paragraph (b)(2) would duplicate the limit inherentin paragraph (a). Two commenters stated that the regulations should provide guidelines forthe exercise of OSMRE's discretion to assess individual civil penaltiesin particular cases. One commenter suggested that an individual civil penaltybe assessed only where the Act's basic enforcement mechanisms_the NOV,cessation order and civil penalty assessment_are inadequate to ensure protectionof public health and safety and the environment. Another commenter specificallyasked if an individual civil penalty would be assessed in all situationswhere a cessation order had been issued to a corporate permittee and remainedunabated for 30 days. OSMRE considers the issuance of an individual civil penalty an alternativeenforcement mechanism to be used when the basic enforcement mechanismshave not resulted in the abatement of a violation. If a notice of violationor cessation order has not been abated within the abatement period specifiedin the notice or order, then under andSection;andSection; 723.15(b) and 845.15(b),OSMRE is required to assess a civil penalty of not less that $750 for eachday the failure to abate continues. Under OSMRE's rules, this penalty maybe assessed for up to 30 days. If the violation still remains unabated,then under andSection;andSection; 723.15(b)(2) and 845.15(b)(2) OSMRE is requiredto take appropriate alternative enforcement action within 30 days. OSMREhas discretion under andSection;andSection; 723.15(b)(2) and 845.15(b)(2) touse the alternative enforcement mechanism it considers most appropriateto ensure that abatement occurs or that there will not be a reoccurrenceof the failure to abate. OSMRE may file criminal charges (section 518(e)),suspend or revoke a permit (section 521(a)(4)), request an injunction (section521(c)), and/or assess an individual civil penalty (section 518(f)). OSMREmay use more than one alternative enforcement mechanism, but is not requiredto do so. In exercising its discretion OSMRE will review each situationon a case-by-case basis to determine the most effective alternative enforcementmechanism to use. Because of the innumerable factual situations that mayarise, OSMRE has concluded that the rules should establish the proceduresand basic principles for issuing individual civil penalties and that furtherguidance will be developed over time. One commenter requested clarification as to whether it is the intent ofOSMRE to assess individual civil penalties against a corporate directoror officer when the corporation is operating pursuant to a State programand there has been no Federal enforcement of that program pursuant to section521 of the Act. The commenter stated that as proposed, andSection;andSection;724.12(b) and 846.13(b) could be read to allow OSMRE to assess individualcivil penalties without first undertaking such Federal enforcement. Thecommenter suggested that OSMRE modify the language of andSection;andSection;724.12(b)(1) and 846.12(b)(1) to indicate clearly that in such instancesan individual civil penalty may be assessed only pursuant to Federal enforcementaction pursuant to section 521 of the Act. In situations involving violations of State-issued permits OSMRE will considerassessing an individual civil penalty under andSection;andSection; 724.12(b)and 846.12(b) only when OSMRE is exercising its enforcement authority undersection 521 of the Act and 30 CFR 722.11, 722.13, or 843.11. OSMRE hasadded the phrase ``by the office'' to andSection;andSection; 724.12(b) and846.12(b) to respond to the commenter's suggestion and to clarify OSMRE'spolicy that the cessation order which has been issued is one OSMRE issued.The same commenter also argued that the language in proposed andSection;andSection;724.12(a)(1) and 846.12(a)(1) would be unnecessary if the limitation inparagraph (b)(1) were applied to prevent the assessment of an individualcivil penalty until after the issuance of a cessation order. The commenterargued that if the intent under the regulations was to issue an individualcivil penalty only after a cessation order had been issued to the corporatepermittee and it remained unabated for 30 days, then the language of andSection;andSection;724.12(a)(2) and 846.12(a)(2) was sufficient. As originally proposed, paragraph(a)(1) would have authorized the assessment of an individual civil penaltyagainst any corporate director, officer, or agent of a corporate permitteewho knowingly and willfully authorized, ordered or carried out the violationby the corporation of any condition of the permit or of any requirementof the Act or implementing regulation. Paragraph (a)(2) covered violationsthat arose from the failure or refusal by the corporate permittee to complywith any order issued under section 521 of the Act or other order incorporatedin a final decision issued by the Secretary under the Act. As previously stated, OSMRE has deleted proposed paragraphs 724.12 (a)(1)and (a)(2) and 846.12 (a)(1) and (a)(2), and has substituted the phrase``violation, failure or refusal'' which is defined at andSection;andSection;724.5 and 846.5. Paragraphs 724.12(a) and 846.12(a), as modified in thefinal rule, read in conjunction with paragraphs 724.12(b) and 846.12(b),as modified in the final rule, clearly establish OSMRE's policy of assessingan individual civil penalty as an alternative enforcement mechanism whichOSMRE will consider using when a cessation order has been issued to thecorporate permittee for an underlying violation and the cessation orderhas remained unabated for 30 days. This limitation on the exercise of OSMRE'sdiscretion is intended to emphasize the nature of an individual civil penaltyas an alternative enforcement mechanism. One commenter requested clarification as to which corporate representativesmay be assessed an individual civil penalty. The commenter argued thatpenalties should be limited to those persons who were corporate officers,directors, or agents at the time the cessation order was issued to thecorporate permittee, or who have since been appointed. The commenter arguedthat an individual civil penalty should not be assessed against a personwho has ceased to be an officer, director or agent of the corporate permitteeprior to the issuance of a cessation order.It is OSMRE's intent to limit the issuance of an individual civil penaltyto those directors, officers or agents of a corporate permittee who knowinglyand willfully authorized, ordered or carried out (1) a violation by thecorporation; or (2) the failure or refusal by the corporate permittee tocomply with any order issued under section 521 of the Act or other orderincorporated in a final decision issued by the Secretary under the Act.A corporate officer, director or agent who knowingly and willfully authorized,ordered or carried out a violation, failure or refusal will not be allowedto insulate himself from liability for his knowing and willful conductby subsequently resigning his position. If an officer, director or agentknowingly and willfully authorized, ordered or carried out a violation,failure or refusal, OSMRE is authorized by section 518(f) of the Act andthese regulations to issue to the individual an individual civil penalty,even if the individual is no longer employed by the corporate permitteeat the time the cessation order is issued or at a later time. As long asOSMRE can establish the necessary elements, an individual civil penaltymay be issued regardless of the individual's subsequent status. Sections 724.14 and 846.14 Amount of Individual Civil Penalty. Section 518(f) of the Act subjects a corporate officer, director or agentto the same civil penalty that may be imposed upon a person or corporationunder section 518(a) of the Act. OSMRE interprets this to mean that therelevant criteria of section 518(a) are to be applied, and that the dailyceiling in section 518(a) on the amount of the penalty must be observedwhen assessing an individual civil penalty. OSMRE does not interpret section518(a) as requiring the amount of the penalty assessed against the individualto be the same as that assessed against the corporation. This interpretationis reasonable since all of the criteria used in assessing a section 518(a)penalty against a corporation might not apply to a corporate official chargedunder section 518(f). This interpretation of the phrase ``subject to the same civil penalties''is consistent with how the Department of the Interior interpreted the samephrase in section 109(c) of the Mine Safety Act when it administered thatlaw from 1969 to 1977. Section 109(c) of the Mine Safety Act is the lawafter which section 518(f) of the Act was modeled. This also is consistentwith the interpretation of the same phrase by MSHA. In <T3>MSHA v. Propst and Stemple, </T3>2 FMSHRC 304 (1981), the Federal MineSafety and Health Review Commission upheld individual civil penalties assessedagainst a supervisor and a foreman. Both penalties were larger than thepenalty assessed against the corporate employer. Thus, applying the samecriteria to individuals instead of a corporation may lead to a different,and even higher, individual civil penalty for the same underlying corporateviolation. Sections 724.14(a) and 846.14(a) of the rule list the criteria, discussedin detail below, which OSMRE will consider in assessing individual civilpenalties. Any one criterion can be used as the primary basis for determiningthe amount of an individual civil penalty. For example, if an individual repeatedly caused an administrative violationsuch as failure to allow an inspector access to the mine site, there mightbe no irreparable harm to the environment or appreciable costs of reclamationassociated with such violation. OSMRE, however, has the discretion to basethe amount of a penalty primarily upon the individual's history of violationsat the particular permit site. Consequently, OSMRE would be able to discourageflagrant disregard for the provisions of the Act in accordance with theplain intent of section 518(f). Under andSection;andSection; 724.14(a)(1) and 846.14(a)(1), it is the individual'sown history of authorizing, ordering or carrying out violations, failuresor refusals at the particular surface coal mining operation which willbe considered when assessing a penalty. OSMRE believes that a reasonablereading of sections 518(a) and 518(f) together supports this result. A central goal of the Act and its implementing regulations is the protectionof the environment from the adverse effects of surface coal mining operations(see section 102(a) of the Act). In many instances, a chief consequenceof a corporate permittee's violation of the Act and subsequent failureor refusal to abate such violation is environmental damage. Section 518(a)directs OSMRE to consider the seriousness of the underlying violation whenassessing an individual civil penalty. OSMRE believes that if a violation leads to environmental damage, the extentof the damage is to be considered. One accurate indicator of its extentis the amount of money it will cost to abate the violation and/or reclaimthe affected area. Accordingly, in measuring the harm to the environmentpursuant to the criteria in andSection;andSection; 724.14(a)(2) and 846.14(a)(2),OSMRE can base its assessment, as a whole or in part, upon the estimatedcost to repair the damage caused by a failure to abate the violation. OSMRE recognizes that in many cases the harm caused by the permittee'sviolation, failure or refusal cannot be repaired. Accordingly, andSection;andSection;724.14(a)(2) and 846.14(a)(2) will allow OSMRE, when assessing individualcivil penalties, to consider that an individual has taken an action whichhas caused ``irreparable damage to the environment,'' as defined at 30CFR 701.5. Section 518(a) also directs that the health and safety of the public beconsidered in the civil penalty assessment process. Accordingly, this criterionalso is incorporated into the rule in andSection;andSection; 724.14(a)(2) and846.14(a)(2). In the case of a civil penalty assessment against a permittee, section518(a) requires the Secretary to consider whether the permittee was negligent.OSMRE believes that this criterion is not directly applicable to the assessmentof individual civil penalties because section 518(f) of the Act requiresknowing and willful conduct, which goes beyond merely negligent behavior.Finally, section 518(a) requires the Secretary to consider the demonstratedgood faith of a permittee in attempting to achieve rapid compliance afternotification of a violation. Sections 724.14(a)(3) and 846.14(a)(3) establishthis criterion as a factor to be considered in assessing an individualcivil penalty, but reference ``violation, failure and refusal'' ratherthan just ``violation.'' Sections 724.14(b) and 846.14(b) give OSMRE broad discretion to assessa separate individual civil penalty for any or all days of a continuingviolation, failure or refusal, from the date of service of the NOV, cessationorder or other order until the abatement of the violation or compliancewith any final order or decision. The authority for this requirement derivesfrom the reference in section 518(f) to section 518(a), which allows OSMREto consider each day of a continuing violation a separate violation. Indetermining whether to assess separate penalties for continuing violations,failures or refusals, the rule requires OSMRE to consider the factors inandSection;andSection; 724.14(a) and 846.14(a). While the rule allows the assessment of a separate individual civil penaltyfor any or all days of a continuing violation, failure or refusal, fromthe date of service of the NOV, cessation order or other order, in someinstances a willful and knowing refusal to comply may not be provable untilthe period set for abatement has expired. For example, if the initial noticeof violation resulting from negligence on the part of the corporate permitteewas served on day 1, and a failure-to-abate cessation order was servedon the corporate permittee and corporate president on day 5, and the violationeventually was abated on day 45, OSMRE would be able to assess an individualcivil penalty on a daily basis for 40 days (from day 5 thru day 45). OSMREwould not assess an individual civil penalty from day 1 through day 4 becausethe violation was the result of negligence, and not knowing and willfulconduct. A knowing and willful failure or refusal can be established fromday 5, when the corporate president was served a copy of the cessationorder. Assessment of the individual civil penalty could not occur untilafter day 36, the thirtieth day the cessation order remained unabated.Several comments were received on andSection;andSection; 724.14 and 846.14.One commenter was concerned with the manner in which the individual's historyof authorizing, ordering or carrying out previous violations, failures,or refusals would be factored into the calculations. The commenter wasconcerned that the history factor would unfairly penalize large operatorswho continued mining operations at one location over a long period of time,and accrued a relatively large number of violations per permit. The commentersuggested that a more reliable indicator of the kind of abuse section 518(f)was intended to check would be the number of separate corporate entitiesbehind which the individual has committed knowing and willful violations.OSMRE does not agree. Sections 724.15(a)(1) and 846.15(a)(1) specificallystate that the individual's history of previous violations, failures orrefusals at the particular surface coal mining operation must be considered.Therefore, even if the permittee/operator has been mining at the particularsite for a number of years, it is only the knowing and willful violationsof the particular corporate official at the particular site that will beconsidered, and not the number of violation notices received by the permitteeat the particular site, or by the corporate official at other permittedcites. OSMRE considers the conduct of the individual at a particular siterather than at all mining operations over which the individual has controlbecause the language of section 518(a) specifically states that it is thehistory at the particular site which should be considered as a factor.One commenter stated that the seriousness of a violation in terms of theextent of damage that is caused is the same regardless of the individual'sculpability and therefore, the amount of the penalty attributable to theseriousness of the violation should not be more for the penalty assessedagainst the individual under Parts 724 and 846 than it would be for thepenalty assessed against the corporate permittee under the point systemof Parts 723 and 845. OSMRE does not agree with the commenter's approach of dissecting a penaltyinto components. OSMRE did not propose to apply the point system in Part845 to individual civil penalties because a precise correlation does notexist for all of the factors. As to the specific example raised by thecommenter, the damage occurring to the environment may increase substantiallybetween the time the corporation is issued an NOV or cessation order, andthe time an individual civil penalty is assessed against the corporateofficial for knowingly and willfully failing or refusing to order the corporationto comply. The initial damage to the environment may be the result of anegligent act on the part of the corporation, while the continuing damageto the environment may result from the corporate official's knowing andwillful failure to order abatement. OSMRE therefore would be justifiedin assessing a higher penalty against the corporate official because thecontinuing damage to the environment is the result of knowing and willfulconduct. Moreover, the penalty assessed against the corporate permitteeunder the point system for the seriousness of the violation in many instancesmay not cover the actual cost to repair the damage to the environment.Also, if the same penalty assessed against the corporate permittee wereassessed against the officer, director or agent, the amount might be insufficientto act as a deterrent to a knowing and willful failure or refusal to orderthe corporate permittee to comply with an NOV or cessation order. Two commenters were concerned that when assessing the seriousness of theviolation, failure or refusal OSMRE would use the cost of reclamation asthe amount of the individual civil penalty. Another was concerned thatusing the cost of reclamation when calculating the penalty would resultin the penalty being equal to or greater than the cost of reclamation.Another commenter suggested that the relative magnitude of the reclamationcosts should be considered a measure of the seriousness of the violationonly.When considering seriousness, OSMRE intends to use the cost the individualwould incur in abating the violation, failure or refusal as a key componentin determining the penalty. In some instances this will result in the individualcivil penalty equaling or exceeding the cost of abatement. Assessment ofa proposed individual civil penalty in such a high amount will act as anincentive for the individual to correct the violation, which would enableOSMRE or the regulatory authority to withdraw the proposed penalty underandSection;andSection; 724.18(c) and 846.18(c). One commenter was particularly concerned with the provisions in andSection;andSection;724.14(b) and 846.14(b) which allow a separate assessment for each dayof a continuing violation. The commenter suggested that andSection;andSection;724.12 and 846.12 be amended by the addition of criteria to determine whenseparate assessments will be made for each day of a continuing violation.As examples of appropriate criteria, the commenter suggested: (1) Whetherenvironmental damage continues to be caused by the violation, failure,or refusal from its inception until the abatement of the violation; and(2) whether the amount of the individual civil penalty assessed by theuse of the criteria set forth in proposed andSection;andSection; 724.14(a)and 846.14(a) would be so inadequate under the circumstances as to be manifestlyunjust or inadequate to deter future violations, failures or refusals byindividuals in control of corporate permittees. OSMRE has added language to andSection;andSection; 724.14(b) and 846.14(b)to clarify that an individual civil penalty under section 518(f) is limitedby section 518(a) to a maximum amount of $5,000 per violation per day.However, OSMRE believes that the regulations as written contain adequatecriteria for determining when and how an individual civil penalty willbe assessed and what factors are to be considered in determining the amountof the penalty. While criteria similar to those suggested by the commentermay be considered by OSMRE in determining whether to assess a penalty ona daily basis and thereby increase the amount of the penalty, OSMRE believesthat some discretion should be retained and that the regulations need notcontain detailed precedures or guidelines for such calculations. OSMREintends to develop guidelines for the assessment of individual civil penaltieswhich will assist those assessing an individual civil penalty in determiningwhen an assessment is appropriate and the amount to be assessed. The guidelineswill be made available to the state regulatory authorities and will helpto insure consistency in the assessment process. OSMRE notes that the MSHA regulations at 30 CFR 100.5 allow MSHA to waiveits penalty/point provisions when calculating a penalty against a corporateofficial because ``some types of violations may be of such a nature orseriousness that it is not possible to determine an appropriate penaltyunder these provisions.'' The MSHA regulations simply provide that whenMSHA determines that a civil penalty should be assessed against a corporateofficial, MSHA will take into account the statutory criteria and issueits findings and assessment in narrative form. OSMRE's approach is consistentwith that of MSHA. Sections 724.17 and 846.17 Procedures for Assessment of Individual CivilPenalty.  Under andSection;andSection; 724.17(a) and 846.17(a) of the rule, OSMRE willserve a notice of proposed individual civil penalty assessment on the individualwho is to be assessed a penalty. The notice of proposed assessment willinclude a narrative setting forth the reasons for the civil penalty andthe amount to be assessed. OSMRE intends that the narrative statement containdetailed information concerning the nature of the violation, failure orrefusal, why OSMRE believes it was the result of knowing and willful conducton the part of the officer, director or agent, and other information asappropriate establishing a justification for assessment of the penalty.Under andSection;andSection; 724.17(b) and 846.17(b), the proposed assessmentwill become a final order of the Secretary 30 days after it is served unlesswithin the 30-day period the individual files a petition for review oragrees to a schedule or plan for the abatement or correction of the violation.Unlike andSection;andSection; 723.19(a) and 845.19(a), which cover other civilpenalty assessments, this rule does not require an individual to prepaythe penalty before he or she appeals. The Act does not mandate prepaymentof an individual civil penalty. Because no prepayment is required, therule does not contain a provision for assessment conferences. A noticeof proposed individual civil penalty assessment can be appealed to an administrativelaw judge, and then, under the OHA rules, to the Interior Board of LandAppeals at its discretion. The address of OHA has been added to the finalrule to assist those desiring to file an appeal. The OHA procedures for the administrative review of a proposed individualcivil penalty assessment were published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on December 24, 1986 (51 FR 46848) as a proposedrule. It is expected that the final OHA procedural rule will be publishedin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>by March 9, 1988 and will be codified at 43 CFR4.1300 when published.For purposes of serving notices of proposed individual civil penalty assessmentand final orders under andSection;andSection; 724.17(c) and 846.17(c), serviceis considered sufficient if it satisfies Rule 4 of the Federal Rules ofCivil Procedure for service of a summons and complaint. This will ensurethat future issues concerning service will be minimized and resolved ina uniform manner. The final rule differs from proposed andSection;andSection; 724.17 and 846.17in that the word ``proposed'' has been added to the term ``notice of individualcivil penalty assessment'' to characterize the notice more accurately,since it does not become a final order until 30 days after service. Thesame change also has been made in other sections of the rule where appropriate.One commenter suggested that the rule contain provisions requiring thatcopies of the underlying NOV and cessation order which provide the basisfor the individual civil penalty be attached to the narrative statementthat is required by andSection;andSection; 724.17(a) and 846.17(a). OSMRE hasadopted the suggestion and added language to andSection;andSection; 724.17(a)and 846.17(a) requiring that copies of the underlying NOV and cessationorder be attached to the narrative statement. One commenter requested that the rule provide an opportunity for an assessmentconference in addition to the right to petition OHA under andSection;andSection;724.18 and 846.18. The commenter argued that this would avoid administrativewaste and inconvenience by allowing corporate officials to resolve disputesat a conference rather than requesting a hearing with OHA. The commenterargued that MSHA at 30 CFR 100.6 provides for an assessment conferenceand that OSMRE should also do so. OSMRE has not adopted the suggestion. The rules provide an adequate opportunityfor administrative review through OHA. No need exists to create an additionallevel of administrative review in OSMRE. As was previously stated, thecorporate official is not required to pre-pay the assessment as a priorcondition to requesting a hearing with OHA; thus no due process violationexists. Moreover, the notice of proposed assessment against the corporateofficial will contain a detailed narrative explanation of the reasons forthe assessment and the amount assessed, so that the corporate officialwill clearly understand why OSMRE believes that an individual civil penaltyis justified. It has been OSMRE's experience with corporate violationsthat almost everyone requests both an assessment conference and a hearingwith OHA, so that rather than eliminate administrative waste and inconveniencea conference simply would add another step in the process and increasethe government's administrative costs. Finally, an individual civil penaltywill be assessed only for knowing and willful conduct. Questions concerningsuch conduct may be better resolved by an administrative law judge, ratherthan an assessment conference officer. With regard to the commenter's assertionthat MSHA provides for an assessment conference, the conference providedfor by MSHA's regulations at 30 CFR 100.6 is for the purpose of reviewingthe violation, not the proposed penalty assessment. The penalty assessmentagainst the corporate official is reviewed under 30 CFR 100.7 directlyby the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission, which is the counterpartto OHA. Sections 724.18 and 846.18 Payment of Penalty. Under andSection;andSection; 724.18(a) and 846.18(a), if pursuant to andSection;andSection;724.17(b) and 846.17(b) no petition for review is filed and no agreementis entered into, payment of the penalty will become due to OSMRE upon issuanceof a final order. Sections 724.18(b) and 846.18(b) provide that the penalty shall be dueupon issuance of the order if the individual named in a notice of proposedcivil penalty assessment files a petition for administrative review asprovided in andSection;andSection; 724.17(b) and 846.17(b), and if the finaladministrative review results in a final order affirming, increasing, ordecreasing the proposed penalty. Under andSection;andSection; 724.18(c) and 846.18(c), if OSMRE and the corporatepermittee or individual have agreed in writing on a plan for the abatementof or compliance with the unabated order, the individual named in the noticeof proposed individual civil penalty assessment may postpone payment untilreceiving either a final order from OSMRE stating that the penalty is dueon the date of such final order, or written notice that abatement or complianceis satisfactory and the penalty has been withdrawn. New andSection;andSection; 724.18(d) and 846.18(d) have been added to the ruleto clarify that delinquent penalties are subject to the Debt CollectionAct of 1982 (Pub. L. 97-365). Under these sections, if the penalty is notpaid within 30 days after the issuance of a final order assessing an individualcivil penalty, the penalty will be considered delinquent will be subjectto interest at the rate established quarterly by the U.S. Department ofthe Treasury for use in applying late charges on late payments to the FederalGovernment, pursuant to Treasury Financial Manual 6-8020.20. The Treasurycurrent value of funds rate is published by the Fiscal Service in the noticessection of the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Interest on unpaid penalties will run from thedate payment first was due until the date of payment. Failure to pay overduepenalties may result in one or more of the actions specified in 30 CFR870.15 (e)(1) through (e)(5). Delinquent penalties are subject to latepayment penalties specified in 30 CFR 870.15(f) and processing and handlingcharges specified in 30 CFR 870.15(g). Because of the 30 day grace periodprovided by these delinquent payment procedures, the due dates for paymentof penalties under andSection;andSection; 724.18(b) and 846.18(b) and 724.18(c)and 846.18(c) have been changed from the proposed time of 30 days afterissuance to the date of issuance of the final order. Thus, under the proceduresof andSection;andSection; 724.18(d) and 846.18(d), even though payment is dueupon issuance of a final order, the individual will have the same 30 daygrace period for payment of the individual civil penalty before being chargedinterest as was provided in the proposed rules.One commenter requested more elaboration of the phrase ``that abatementis satisfactory and the penalty has been withdrawn,'' which appears inandSection;andSection; 724.18(c) and 846.18(c). The commenter also asked underwhat circumstances the penalty can be withdrawn, and if it can be withdrawn,why was it even assessed at the earlier stage. The purpose of the individualcivil penalty rule is not simply to assess and collect penalties, but toinsure that the requirements of the Act are met. In part, OSMRE intendsto propose the assessment of an individual civil penalty as an incentiveto an officer, director or agent to authorize, order or carry out the abatementof a violation. It should be understood that an individual civil penaltyis assessed against the officer, director, or agent of a corporate permitteeand not against the corporate permittee. Therefore it is the individualand not the corporation that is liable for payment. OSMRE intends in someinstances to propose an individual civil penalty which equals or exceedsthe cost of abating the violation under the theory that it would be moreeconomical for the corporate official to order the corporate permitteeto abate the violation than to pay the penalty or, if the corporate permitteeis now defunct, to abate the violation himself rather than pay an individualcivil penalty that would be assessed for a sum greater than the cost ofabatement. If the violation is abated prior to the issuance of a finalorder, it may be approporiate for OSMRE to withdraw the notice of proposedassessment. As originally proposed, andSection;andSection; 723.18(a) and 846.18(a) specifiedthat if a notice of individual civil penalty assessment becomes a finalorder, the penalty shall be due upon <T3>service </T3>of a final order on the individual. In the final rule,OSMRE has substituted the word <T3>issuance </T3>for the word <T3>service </T3>in order to eliminate the need to send the final orderto the individual by certified mail or to have it personally served. OSMREbelieves that issuance of the final order is sufficient to satisfy therequirements of the Act and to provide due process to the individual. Inevery instance the notice of proposed individual civil penalty has to beserved upon the individual. This action confers jurisdiction over the individualand is the act from which the individual's rights derive. An individualserved with a notice of proposed individual civil penalty has the opportunityto contest the individual civil penalty, to pay the individual civil penaltyor to enter into an abatement agreement. Issuance of the final order confersno additional rights and service of the final order serves no useful purpose.The regulations in andSection;andSection; 723.17(b) and 846.17(b) specify thatthe notice of individual civil penalty assessment shall become a finalorder of the Secretary 30 days after service upon the individual of thenotice of individual civil penalty assessment unless (1) the individualfiles within 30 days of service of the notice of individual civil penaltyassessment a petition for review with the Hearings Division, Office ofHearings and Appeals; or (2) the Office and the individual or responsiblecorporate permittee agree within 30 days of service of the notice of theindividual civil penalty assessment to a schedule or plan for the abatementor correction of the violation, failure or refusal. Except for the substitutionof the term ``issuance'' for the term ``service,'' OSMRE has adopted andSection;andSection;724.18 and 846.18 as proposed. Other Comments One commenter was concerned that the rule would make large companies ``easytargets'' for examination and enforcement actions, and burden them to demonstrateinnocence. OSMRE disagrees. These provisions merely provide proceduresfor a statutorily authorized enforcement action. The extent of the burdendoes not depend upon the size of the company but rather upon the conductof individuals. The rule is directed only at officers, directors and agentsof a corporate permittee who knowingly and willfully authorize, order orcarry out a violation, failure or refusal. As a further limiting factor,when the individual civil penalty would be based upon a situation wherea corporate permittee received a notice of violation, the rule requiresthat an individual civil penalty be assessed only after a cessation orderhas been issued to the corporate permittee and remains unabated for 30days. A corporate permittee's obligations are not changed by these individualcivil penalty rules. It must abate the violations within the period prescribed.If it does so, an individual civil penalty will not be assessed. If a companyhas been issued a cessation order and has failed to abate the violationwithin 30 days, then the conduct of the company and its officials mustbe scrutinized. If OSMRE believes that good reason exists for the assessmentof an individual civil penalty, a corporate official justifiably may becalled upon to account for his knowingly and willfully authorizing, orderingor carrying out a violation, failure or refusal. One commenter argued that because of the relationship between this proposaland the previously proposed ``ownership and control'' rule, this rule cannotbe adequately examined until the definitions of ownership and control arefinalized. The commenter requested that the comment period on this proposalbe reopened for a minimum of 30 days after publication of the final ruleon ownership and control. OSMRE disagrees. The ``ownership and control''rule does not define or determine who is an officer, director or agentof a corporate permittee for the purposes of the issuance of an individualcivil penalty under section 518(f). Each rule may be commented upon andpromulgated independently of the other. One commenter questioned the need for an individual civil penalty regulationin the Federal initial regulatory program since permanent programs arenow in effect in all States with coal mining operations. OSMRE is incorporatingPart 724 into the regulations to supplement andSection; 723.15(b)(2) of theinitial regulatory program. That section provides for the issuance of anindividual civil penalty but does not contain any procedures. Outstandingcessation orders issued under the initial regulatory program may continueto result in the issuance of individual civil penalties. If such penaltiesare issued, section 518 of the Act and Part 724 of the regulations willbe cited as authority.Effect in Federal Program States and on Indian Lands The rule will apply through cross-referencing to the following Federalprogram States: Georgia, Idaho, Massachusetts, Michigan, North Carolina,Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, and Washington. The Federalprograms for these States appear at 30 CFR Parts 910, 912, 921, 922, 933,937, 939, 941, 942, and 947, respectively. No comments were received concerningany unique conditions which exist in any of these States which would haverequired changes to the national rules or State-specific amendments toany or all of the Federal programs. The rules will also apply through cross-referencingin 30 CFR Part 750 to surface coal mining and reclamation operations onIndian lands. Effect of Rule in States With Primacy Pursuant to 30 CFR 732.17(d), OSMRE will notify States with approved programsof their program provisions which need amendment to remain no less stringentthan the Act and no less effective than these Federal regulations. Section518(i) of the Act specifies that ``[a]s a condition of approval of anyState program * * * the civil and criminal penalty provisions thereof shall,at a minimum, incorporate penalties no less stringent than those set forthin this section and shall contain the same or similar procedural requirementsrelating thereto.'' One commenter argued that a State regulatory authority need not modifyits regulations to incorporate the procedures contained in these rulesif the State statute confers adequate authority for the issuance of anindividual civil penalty without the need for implementing regulations.The commenter made reference to the fact that State programs are not requiredto incorporate the point system utilized by OSMRE in Parts 723 and 845of the regulations, and therefore should not be required to incorporatethe requirements of these rules. The question of whether a State is required to incorporate a point systemfor penalties was litigated in <T3>In re: Permanent Surface Mining Regulation Litigation, </T3>Civil ActionNo. 79-1144 (D.D.C. 1980). The court held that section 503(a)(7) of theAct requires a State program to meet the stringency standards of OSMRE'sregulations so long as OSMRE's regulations are not inconsistent with theAct or arbitrary or capricious. The court noted that neither section 518(i)nor the procedures enforcing those penalties refer to a point system; thereforethe court held that it was arbitrary to require the States to exactly parallelthe Secretary's penalty system. However, the court also held that a Statemust nonetheless incorporate the four criteria enumerated in section 518(a)within its own penalty system. OSMRE has reviewed its regulations in light of the comment and the court'sholding and has concluded that portions of these rules establish penalties,while other portions establish procedural requirements relating to suchpenalties. The requirements of section 518(i) thus will apply to Stateprogram individual civil penalty provisions. OSMRE will evaluate Stateprograms accordingly. One commenter suggested that OSMRE should use a point system for determiningthe amount of an individual civil penalty. OSMRE has not adopted the suggestion.As discussed above, the use of a point system does not appear practicalfor, nor strictly applicable to the assessment of individual civil penalties.The point system does not give the Secretary sufficient flexibility toassess a penalty which fairly considers the particular actions or inactionsof an individual. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Procedural Matters </ITAG>Federal Paperwork Reduction Act There are no information collection requirements in the rule which requireapproval by the Office of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3507. Executive Order 12291 The Department of the Interior has examined the rule according to the criteriaof Executive Order 12291 (February 17, 1981) and has determined that itis not major and does not require a regulatory impact analysis. The rulewill not add any new regulatory burden on the coal industry. It merelyestablishes procedures for the assessment of an individual civil penaltyalready authorized by section 518(f) of the Act and andSection;andSection;723.15(b)(2) and 845.15(b)(2) of the implementing regulations. The costor economic effect of the final rule will be minimal or nonexistent solong as operators comply with requirements or take corrective action ina timely manner. Regulatory Flexibility Act The Department of the Interior has also determined, pursuant to the RegulatoryFlexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq., </T3>that the rule will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The rule governs the assessmentof civil penalties personally upon individual corporate officers, directorsor agents for violations of certain provisions of the Act rather than uponthe corporate entities engaged in coal mining. No burden would be imposedupon entities operating in compliance with the Act. National Environmental Policy Act OSMRE has prepared an environmental assessment, and has made a findingthat the proposed rule would not significantly affect the quality of thehuman environment under section 102(2)(C) of the National EnvironmentalPolicy Act of 1969 (NEPA), 42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C). The environmental assessmentis on file in the OSMRE Administrative Record at the address previouslyspecified (see ``<T2>ADDRESSES</T2>''). Author The principal author of this rule is Andrew F. DeVito, Office of SurfaceMining Reclamation and Enforcement, 1951 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20240; Telephone 202-343-5241 (Commercial or FTS). <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects </ITAG>30 CFR Part 723 Administrative practice and procedure, Penalties, Surface mining, SurfaceMining Reclamation and Enforcement Office, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 724 Administrative practice and procedure, Law enforcement, Penalties, Surfacemining, Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement Office, Undergroundmining. 30 CFR Part 750 Indian lands, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Surface mining,Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement Office.30 CFR Part 845 Administrative practice and procedure, Law enforcement, Penalties, Reportingand recordkeeping requirements, Surface mining, Surface Mining Reclamationand Enforcement Office, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 846 Administrative practice and procedure, Law enforcement, Penalties, Surfacemining, Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement Office, Undergroundmining. 30 CFR Part 910 Administrative practice and procedure, Environmental protection, Intergovernmentalrelations, Penalties, Surety bonds, Surface mining, Underground mining.30 CFR Part 912 Intergovernmental relations, Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 921 Administrative practice and procedure, Intergovernmental relations, Penalties,Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 922 Administrative practice and procedure, Intergovernmental relations, Penalties,Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 933 Intergovernmental relations, Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 937 Administrative practice and procedure, Intergovernmental relations, Penalties,Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 939 Administrative practice and procedure, Intergovernmental relations, Penalties,Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 941 Intergovernmental relations, Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 942 Intergovernmental relations, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 947 Intergovernmental relations, Surface mining, Underground mining. For the reasons discussed in the preamble 30 CFR is amended by adding Parts724 and 846, and by revising Parts 723, 750, 845, 910, 912, 921, 922, 933,937, 939, 941, 942, and 947 as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: November 20, 1987. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J. Steven Griles, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary_Land and Minerals Management.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER B_INITIAL PROGRAM REGULATIONS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 723_CIVIL PENALTIES </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 723 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977,secs. 201, 501, 518 (30 U.S.C. 1211, 1251, 1268) and Pub. L. 100-34.</ITAG>2. Section 723.1 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 723.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope. </ITAG>This part covers the assessment of civil penalties under section 518 ofthe Act for violations of a permit condition, any provision of Title Vof the Act, or any implementing regulations, except for the assessmentof individual civil penalties under section 518(f), which is covered byPart 724. This part governs when a civil penalty is assessed and how theamount is determined, and sets forth applicable procedures. This part appliesto cessation orders and notices of violation issued under Part 722 of thischapter during a Federal inspection. 3. Section 723.18(a) is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 723.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Procedures for assessment conference. </ITAG>(a) The Office shall arrange for a conference to review the proposed assessmentor reassessment, upon written request of the person to whom the noticeor order was issued, if the request is received within 30 days from thedate the proposed assessment or reassessment is received. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>4. In Subchapter B, Part 724 is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 724_INDIVIDUAL CIVIL PENALTIES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">724.1 Scope. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">724.5 Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">724.12 When an individual civil penalty may be assessed. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">724.14 Amount of individual civil penalty. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">724.17 Procedure for assessment of individual civil penalty. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">724.18 Payment of penalty.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 95-87, 91 Stat. 445 (30 U.S.C. 1201 <T3>et seq.</T3>); and Pub. L. 100-34.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 724.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Scope. </ITAG>This part covers the assessment of individual civil penalties under section518(f) of the Act. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 724.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Definitions. </ITAG>For purposes of this part: <T3>Knowingly </T3>means that an individual knew or had reason to knowin authorizing, ordering or carrying out an act or omission on the partof a corporate permittee that such act or omission constituted a violation,failure or refusal. <T3>Violation, failure or refusal </T3>means_ (1) A violation of a condition of a permit issued pursuant to a Federalprogram, a Federal lands program, Federal enforcement pursuant to section502 of the Act, or Federal enforcement of a State program pursuant to section521 of the Act; or (2) A failure or refusal to comply with any order issued under section521 of the Act, or any order incorporated in a final decision issued bythe Secretary under the Act, except an order incorporated in a decisionissued under section 518(b) or section 703 of the Act. <T3>Willfully </T3>means that an individual acted (1) either intentionally,voluntarily or consciously, and (2) with intentional disregard or plainindifference to legal requirements in authorizing, ordering or carryingout a corporate permittee's action or omission that constituted a violation,failure or refusal. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 724.12</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> When an individual civil penalty may be assessed. </ITAG>(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the Office mayassess an individual civil penalty against any corporate director, officeror agent of a corporate permittee who knowingly and willfully authorized,ordered or carried out a violation, failure or refusal. (b) The Office shall not assess an individual civil penalty in situationsresulting from a permit violation by a corporate permittee until a cessationorder has been issued by the Office to the corporate permittee for theviolation, and the cessation order has remained unabated for 30 days. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 724.14</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Amount of individual civil penalty. </ITAG>(a) In determining the amount of an individual civil penalty assessed underandSection; 724.12, the Office shall consider the criteria specified in andSection;518(a) of the Act, including: (1) The individual's history of authorizing, ordering or carrying out previousviolations, failures or refusals at the particular surface coal miningoperation; (2) the seriousness of the violation, failure or refusal (as indicatedby the extent of damage and/or the cost of reclamation), including anyirreparable harm to the environment and any hazard to the health or safetyof the public; and (3) the demonstrated good faith of the individual charged in attemptingto achieve rapid compliance after notice of the violation, failure or refusal.(b) The penalty shall not exceed $5,000 for each violation. Each day ofa continuing violation may be deemed a separate violation and the Officemay assess a separate individual civil penalty for each day the violation,failure or refusal continues, from the date of service of the underlyingnotice of violation, cessation order or other order incorporated in a finaldecision issued by the Secretary, until abatement or compliance is achieved.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 724.17</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Procedure for assessment of individual civil penalty. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Notice. </T3>The Office shall serve on each individual to be assessedan individual civil penalty a notice of proposed individual civil penaltyassessment, including a narrative explanation of the reasons for the penalty,the amount to be assessed, and a copy of any underlying notice of violationand cessation order. (b) <T3>Final order and opportunity for review. </T3>The notice of proposedindividual civil penalty assessment shall become a final order of the Secretary30 days after service upon the individual unless: (1) The individual files within 30 days of service of the notice of proposedindividual civil penalty assessment a petition for review with the HearingsDivision, Office of Hearings and Appeals, U.S. Department of the Interior,4015 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, Virginia 22203 (Phone: 703-235-3800),in accordance with 43 CFR 4.1300 <T3>et seq.; </T3>or (2) The Office and the individual or responsible corporate permittee agreewithin 30 days of service of the notice of proposed individual civil penaltyassessment to a schedule or plan for the abatement or correction of theviolation, failure or refusal. (c) <T3>Service. </T3>For purposes of this section, service is sufficient ifit would satisfy Rule 4 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for serviceof a summons and complaint. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 724.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Payment of penalty. </ITAG>(a) <T3>No abatement or appeal. </T3>If a notice of proposed individual civilpenalty assessment becomes a final order in the absence of a petition forreview or abatement agreement, the penalty shall be due upon issuance ofthe final order. (b) <T3>Appeal. </T3>If an individual named in a notice of proposed individualcivil penalty assessment files a petition for review in accordance with43 CFR 4.1300 <T3>et seq., </T3>the penalty shall be due upon issuance of a final administrativeorder affirming, increasing or decreasing the proposed penalty. (c) <T3>Abatement agreement. </T3>Where the Office and the corporate permitteeor individual have agreed in writing on a plan for the abatement of orcompliance with the unabated order, an individual named in a notice ofproposed individual civil penalty assessment may postpone payment untilreceiving either a final order from the Office stating that the penaltyis due on the date of such final order, or written notice that abatementor compliance is satisfactory and the penalty has been withdrawn. (d) <T3>Delinquent payment. </T3>Following the expiration of 30 days afterthe issuance of a final order assessing an individual civil penalty, anydelinquent penalty shall be subject to interest at the rate establishedquarterly by the U.S. Department of the Treasury for use in applying latecharges on late payments to the Federal Government, pursuant to TreasuryFinancial Manual 6-8020.20. The Treasury current value of funds rate ispublished by the Fiscal Service in the notices section of the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Interest on unpaid penalties will run from thedate payment first was due until the date of payment. Failure to pay overduepenalties may result in one or more of the actions specified in andSection;andSection;870.15 (e)(1) through (e)(5) of this chapter. Delinquent penalties aresubject to late payment penalties specified in andSection; 870.15(f) of thischapter and processing and handling charges specified in andSection; 870.15(g)of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER E_INDIAN LANDS PROGRAM </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 750_REQUIREMENTS FOR SURFACE COAL MINING AND RECLAMATION OPERATIONSON INDIAN LANDS </ITAG>5. The authority citation for Part 750 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>30 U.S.C. 1201-1328; 5 U.S.C. 301; and Pub. L. 100-34.</ITAG>6. Section 750.18(a) is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 750.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Inspection and enforcement. </ITAG>(a) Parts 842, 843, 845 and 846 of this chapter and the hearings and appealsprocedures of 43 CFR Part 4 are applicable on Indian lands. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="76">SUBCHAPTER L_PERMANENT PROGRAM ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENTPROCEDURES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 845_CIVIL PENALTIES </ITAG>7. The authority citation for Part 845 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 95-87, 91 Stat. 445 (30 U.S.C. 1201 <T3>et seq.</T3>); and Pub. L. 100-34.</ITAG>8. Section 845.1 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 845.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope. </ITAG>This part covers the assessment of civil penalties under section 518 ofthe Act with respect to cessation orders and notices of violation issuedunder Part 843 (Federal Enforcement), except for the assessment of individualcivil penalties under section 518(f), which is covered in Part 846. 9. Section 845.18(a) is revised to read as follows. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 845.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Procedures for assessment conference. </ITAG>(a) The Office shall arrange for a conference to review the proposed assessmentor reassessment, upon written request of the person to whom the noticeor order was issued, if the request is received within 30 days from thedate the proposed assessment or reassessment is received. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>10. In Subchapter L, Part 846 is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 846_INDIVIDUAL CIVIL PENALTIES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">846.1 Scope. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">846.5 Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">846.12 When an individual civil penalty may be assessed. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">846.14 Amount of individual civil penalty. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">846.17 Procedure for assessment of individual civil penalty. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">846.18  Payment of penalty.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 95-87, 91 Stat. 445 (30 U.S.C. 1201 <T3>et seq.</T3>); Pub. L. 100-34. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 846.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope. </ITAG>This part covers the assessment of individual civil penalties under section518(f) of the Act. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 846.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions. </ITAG>For purposes of this part: <T3>Knowingly </T3>means that an individual knew or had reason to knowin authorizing, ordering or carrying out an act or omission on the partof a corporate permittee that such act or omission constituted a violation,failure or refusal. <T3>Violation, failure or refusal </T3>means_ (1) A violation of a condition of a permit issued pursuant to a Federalprogram, a Federal lands program, Federal enforcement pursuant to section502 of the Act, or Federal enforcement of a State program pursuant to section521 of the Act; or (2) A failure or refusal to comply with any order issued under section521 of the Act, or any order incorporated in a final decision issued bythe Secretary under the Act, except an order incorporated in a decisionissued under section 518(b) or section 703 of the Act. <T3>Willfully </T3>means that an individual acted (1) either intentionally,voluntarily or consciously, and (2) with intentional disregard or plainindifference to legal requirements in authorizing, ordering or carryingout a corporate permittee's action or omission that constituted a violation,failure or refusal. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 846.12</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">When an individual civil penalty may be assessed. </ITAG>(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the Office mayassess an individual civil penalty against any corporate director, officeror agent of a corporate permittee who knowingly and willfully authorized,ordered or carried out a violation, failure or refusal.(b) The Office shall not assess an individual civil penalty in situationsresulting from a permit violation by a corporate permittee until a cessationorder has been issued by the Office to the corporate permittee for theviolation, and the cessation order has remained unabated for 30 days. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 846.14</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Amount of individual civil penalty. </ITAG>(a) In determining the amount of an individual civil penalty assessed underandSection; 846.12, the Office shall consider the criteria specified in section518(a) of the Act, including: (1) The individual's history of authorizing, ordering or carrying out previousviolations, failures or refusals at the particular surface coal miningoperation; (2) The seriousness of the violation, failure or refusal (as indicatedby the extent of damage and/or the cost of reclamation), including anyirreparable harm to the environment and any hazard to the health or safetyof the public; and (3) The demonstrated good faith of the individual charged in attemptingto achieve rapid compliance after notice of the violation, failure or refusal.(b) The penalty shall not exceed $5,000 for each violation. Each day ofa continuing violation may be deemed a separate violation and the Officemay assess a separate individual civil penalty for each day the violation,failure or refusal continues, from the date of service of the underlyingnotice of violation, cessation order or other order incorporated in a finaldecision issued by the Secretary, until abatement or compliance is achieved.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 846.17</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Procedure for assessment of individual civil penalty. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Notice. </T3>The Office shall serve on each individual to be assessedan individual civil penalty a notice of proposed individual civil penaltyassessment, including a narrative explanation of the reasons for the penalty,the amount to be assessed, and a copy of any underlying notice of violationand cessation order. (b) <T3>Final order and opportunity for review. </T3>The notice of proposedindividual civil penalty assessment shall become a final order of the Secretary30 days after service upon the individual unless: (1) The individual files within 30 days of service of the notice of proposedindividual civil penalty assessment a petition for review with the HearingsDivision, Office of Hearings and Appeals, U.S. Department of the Interior,4015 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, Virginia 22203 (Phone: 703-235-3800),in accordance with 43 CFR 4.1300 <T3>et seq.; </T3>or (2) The Office and the individual or responsible corporate permittee agreewithin 30 days of service of the notice of proposed individual civil penaltyassessment to a schedule or plan for the abatement or correction of theviolation, failure or refusal. (c) <T3>Service. </T3>For purposes of this section, service is sufficient ifit would satisfy Rule 4 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for serviceof a summons and complaint. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 846.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Payment of penalty. </ITAG>(a) <T3>No abatement or appeal. </T3>If a notice of proposed individual civilpenalty assessment becomes a final order in the absence of a petition forreview or abatement agreement, the penalty shall be due upon issuance ofthe final order. (b) <T3>Appeal. </T3>If an individual named in a notice of proposed individualcivil penalty assessment files a petition for review in accordance with43 CFR 4.1300 <T3>et seq., </T3>the penalty shall be due upon issuance of a final administrativeorder affirming, increasing or decreasing the proposed penalty. (c) <T3>Abatement agreement. </T3>Where the Office and the corporate permitteeor individual have agreed in writing on a plan for the abatement of orcompliance with the unabated order, an individual named in a notice ofproposed individual civil penalty assessment may postpone payment untilreceiving either a final order from the Office stating that the penaltyis due on the date of such final order, or written notice that abatementor compliance is satisfactory and the penalty has been withdrawn. (d) <T3>Delinquent payment. </T3>Following the expiration of 30 days afterthe issuance of a final order assessing an individual civil penalty, anydelinquent penalty shall be subject to interest at the rate establishedquarterly by the U.S. Department of the Treasury for use in applying latecharges on late payments to the Federal Government, pursuant to TreasuryFinancial Manual 6-8020.20. The Treasury current value of funds rate ispublished by the Fiscal Service in the notices section of the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Interest on unpaid penalties will run from thedate payment first was due until the date of payment. Failure to pay overduepenalties may result in one or more of the actions specified in andSection;andSection;870.15 (e)(1) through (e)(5) of this chapter. Delinquent penalties aresubject to late payment penalties specified in andSection; 870.15(f) of thischapter and processing and handling charges specified in andSection; 870.15(g)of this chapter. <ITAG tagnum="76">SUBCHAPTER T_PROGRAMS FOR THE CONDUCT OF SURFACE MINING OPERATIONSWITHIN EACH STATE </ITAG>11. The authority citations for Parts 910, 912, 921, 922, 933, 937, 939,941, 942, and 947, are amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 95-87, 30 U.S.C. 1201 <T3>et seq.; </T3>and Pub. L. 100-34.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PARTS 910, 912, 921, 922, 933, 937, 939, 941, 942, and 947_[AMENDED]</ITAG>12. Parts 910, 912, 921, 922, 933, 937, 939, 941, 942 and 947 are amendedby adding to each part the following section <T2>XXX</T2>.846 (the wording is the same for each affected part): <ITAG tagnum="80"/><T2>XXX</T2>.846<ITAG tagnum="89"> Individual civil penalties. </ITAG>Part 846 of this chapter, <T3>Individual Civil Penalties, </T3>shall apply to the assessment of individualcivil penalties under section 518(f) of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-2481 Filed 2-7-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-05-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>