<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88719-0105 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-19-88.f2.A1104</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">VETERANS ADMINISTRATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Privacy Act of 1974; New System of Records  </ITAG>The Privacy Act of 1975 (5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4)) requires that all agenciespublish in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> a notice of the existence of character of theirsystems of records. Accordingly, the Veterans Administration (VA) publishedand adopted a notice of its inventory of personnel records on September27, 1977 (42 FR 49726).  Notice is hereby given that the VA is adding a new system of records entitled``General Personnel Records (Title 38)-VA (76VA05). This system is authorizedunder 38 U.S.C. 210(c)(1), Chapter 73 and 75.  The Office of Personnel Management system of records, ``General PersonnnelRecords'' (OPM/GOVT-1), covers the maintenance and release of informationin general personnel records of Federal employees as defined in 5 U.S.C.2105. To accommodate VA specific requirements under the Title 38 systemand to facilitate administration of Privacy Act matters, the VA is publishinga new system of records.  The purpose of the new system of records is to officially establish a repositoryfor the existing and future records, reports of personnel actions, andthe documents and papers required in connection with these actions thatwere or will be effected during a Title 38 employee's service with theVA. Records in this system have various uses, including screening qualificationsof employees; determining status, eligibility, and employee's rights andbenefits under pertinent laws and regulations governing Federal employment;computing length of service; and other information needed to provide personnelservices.  This system contains routine uses as defined by the Privacy Act of 1974.These routine uses are compatible with the purpose for which the informationis collected. The VA has determined that certain releases of data and informationare necessary and proper for this system of records and these releasesare described in the following system description.  Interested persons are invited to submit written comments, suggestions,or objections regarding this system of records to the Administrator ofVeterans Affairs (271A), Veterans Administration, 810 Vermont Avenue, NW.,Washington, DC 20420. All relevant material received before August 17,1988 will be considered. All written comments received will be availablefor public inspection only in Room 132 of the above address only betweenthe hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday (except holidays),until August 31, 1988.  If no public comment is received during the 30-day review period allowedfor public comment, or unless otherwise published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> by the Veterans Administration, the routine usesin this system are effective August 17, 1988.  A ``Report of New System'' and an advance copy of the new system have beensent to the Speaker of the House, the President of the Senate, and theDirector, Office of Management and Budget (OMB), as required by 5 U.S.C.552a(o) (Privacy Act) and guidelines issued by OMB (50 FR 52730), December24, 1985.  The Office of Management and Budget requires that a new system report bedistributed not later than 60 days prior to the implementation of a newsystem. OMB has been requested to waive this requirement.<ITAG tagnum="21">Approved: July 11, 1988.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Thomas K. Turnage,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="66">76VA05  </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME:  General Personnel Records (Title 38)-VA.  SYSTEM LOCATION:  Active records are maintained at the Veterans Administration (VA) CentralOffice, 810 Vermont Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20420, VA field facilities,and the VA Data Processing Center, 1615 East Woodward Street, Austin, Texas78772. The inactive records are retired to the National Personnel RecordsCenter, 111 Winnebago Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63118.  CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:  Current and former employees appointed under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 73 to theoccupations identified in 38 U.S.C. 4103, 4104(1), and 4104(3); individualsin those occupations who are appointed under 38 U.S.C. 4114; and residentsappointed under 38 U.S.C. 4114(b). This includes employees such as non-physicianfacility Directors, physicians, dentists, podiatrists, optometrists, nurses,nurse anesthetists, physician assistants, expanded-function dental auxiliaries,certified respiratory therapy technicians, registered respiratory therapists,licensed physical therapists, and licensed practical or vocational nurses.Current and former employees appointed under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 75 in theVeterans Canteen Service are also covered.categories of records in the systems: Records in this system are official personnel files reflecting work experience,licensure, credentials, educational level achieved, and specialized educationor training occurring outside of Federal service; records reflecting Federalservice and documenting work experience, education, training, and/or awardreceived while employed, and all other information relating to qualifications;records containing information about past and present positions held, grades,salaries, duty station locations, and notices of all personnel actionssuch as appointments, transfers, reassignments, details, promotions, demotions,reductions-in-force, resignations, separations, suspensions, approval ofdisability retirement applications, retirements, and removals; recordsregarding career development and counseling(s); recruitment and employmentfiles; promotion, upward mobility, and conversion files; suit-ability files;computer printouts from an automated personnel system; records reflectingenrollment or declination of enrollment in the Federal Employees' GroupLife Insurance Program and Federal Employees' Health Benefits programsas well as forms showing designation of beneficiary; records documentingfindings and recommendations of reviewing Boards; certifications of outsideprofessional activities; records relating to Government-sponsored trainingor participation in VA or other programs designed to broaden an employee'swork experience and/or for purposes of advancement; performance appraisalsor proficiency reports, supporting documentation, written recommendationsfor performance-based actions, statements made by the employee regardingan appraisal/proficiency report given, and any recommendations made basedon them; records are documents on the processing of adverse actions andactions based on inaptitude, inefficiency, misconduct or disqualificationduring probation, any notice of proposed action, materials relied on bythe VA to support the reasons in the notice, replies by the employee, statementsof witnesses, hearing notices, reports, and decisions made. authority for maintenance of the system: 38 U.S.C. Chapter 3, Section 210(c)(1), Chapters 73 and 75. routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categoriesof users and the purposes of such uses: 1. To disclose information to the Office of Personnel Management for theCentral Personnel Data File. 2. To disclose information to Government training facilities (Federal,State, and local) and to non-Government training facilities (private vendorsof training course or programs, private schools, etc.) for training purposes.3. To disclose information to educational institutions on appointment ofa recent graduate to a position in the Federal service, and to providecolleges and university officials with information about their studentsworking under programs necessary to a student's obtaining credit for theexperience gained. 4. To disclose information to: The Department of Labor, Social SecurityAdministration, Department of Defense, Federal agencies that have specialcivilian employee retirement programs; or a national, state, county, municipal,or other publicly recognized charitable or income security administrationagency (e.g., state unemployment compensation agencies), where necessaryto adjudicate a claim under the retirement, insurance or health benefitsprograms of the Office of Personnel Management or an agency cited above,or to an agency to conduct an analytical study or audit of benefits beingpaid under such programs. 5. To disclose to the Office of Federal Employees' Group Life Insurance,information necessary to verify election, declination, or waiver of regularand/or optional life insurance coverage or eligibility for payment of aclaim for life insurance. 6. To disclose to health insurance carriers contracting with the Officeof Personnel Management to provide a health benefits plan under the FederalEmployees Health Benefits Program, information necessary to identify enrollmentin a plan, to verify eligibility for payment of a claim for health benefits,or to carry out the coordination or audit of benefit provisions of suchcontracts. 7. To disclose information to a Federal, State, or local agency for determinationof an individual's entitlement to benefits in connection with Federal HousingAdministration programs. 8. To consider and select employees for incentive awards and other honorsand to publicize those granted. This may include disclosure to other publicand private organizations, including news media, which grant or publicizeemployee awards or honors. 9. To consider employees for recognition through administrative and qualitystep increases and to publicize those granted. This may include disclosureto other public and private organizations, including new media, which grantor publicize employee recognition. 10. To disclose information to officials of labor organizations recognizedunder 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 when relevant and necessary to their duties ofexclusive representation concerning personnel policies, practices, andmatter affecting working conditions. 11. To disclose pertinent information to the appropriate Federal (includingoffices of Inspector General), State, or local agency responsible for investigating,prosecuting, enforcing, or implementing a statute, rule, regulation, ororder, where the VA becomes aware of an indication of a violation or potentialviolation of civil or criminal law or regulation. 12. To disclose information to any source when necessary to obtain informationrelevant to a conflict-of-interest investigation or determination. 13. To disclose information to any source from which additional informationis requested (to the extent necessary to identify the individual, informthe source of the purposes(s) of the request, and to identify the typeof information requested), when necessary to obtain information relevantto an Agency decision concerning the hiring or retention of an employee,the issuance of a security clearance, the conducting of a security or suitabilityinvestigation of an individual, the letting of a contract, or the issuanceof a license, grant, or other benefits. 14. To disclose to an agency in the executive, legislative, or judicialbranch, or the District of Columbia's Government in response to its request,or at the initiation of the VA information in connection with the hiringof an employee, the issuance of a security clearance, the conducting ofa security or suitability investigation of an individual, the letting ofa contract, the issuance of a license, grant, or other benefits by therequesting agency, or the lawful statutory, administrative, or investigativepurpose of the agency to the extent that the information is relevant andnecessary to the requesting agency's decision. 15. To disclose information to private sector (i.e., non-Federal, State,or local governments) agencies, organizations, boards, bureaus, or commission(e.g., the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations).Such disclosures may be made only when: (1) The records are properly constitutedin accordance with VA requirements; (2) the records are accurate, relevant,timely, and complete; and, (3) the disclosure is in the best interestsof the Government (e.g., to obtain accreditation or other approval rating).When cooperation with the private sector entity, through the exchange ofindividual records, directly benefits the VA's completion of its mission,enhances personnel management functions, or increases the public confidencein the VA's or the Federal Government's role in the community, then theGovernment's best interests are served. Further, only such informationthat is clearly relevant and necessary for accomplishing the intended usesof the information as certified by the receiving private sector entityis to be furnished. 16. To disclose information to the Office of Management and Budget at anystage in the legislative coordination and clearance process in connectionwith private relief legislation as set forth in OMB Circular No. A-19.17. To provide information to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office madeat the request of the individual. 18. To disclose information to another Federal agency, to a court, or aparty in litigation before a court or in an administrative proceeding beingconducted by a Federal agency, either when the Government is a party toa judicial proceeding or in order to comply with the issuance of a subpoena.Information is also made available pursuant to a court order directingproduction of personnel records. 19. To disclose, in response to a request for discovery or for appearanceof a witness, information that is relevant to the subject matter involvedin a pending judicial or administrative proceeding. 20. To disclose information to the National Archives and Records Administration(NARA) for records management inspections conducted under authority of44 U.S.C. 2904 and 2906. 21. To disclose to persons engaged in research and survey projects informationnecessary to locate individulas for personnel research or survey response,and to produce summary descriptive statistics and analytical studies insupport of the function for which the records are collected and maintained,or for related work force studies. While published statistics and studiesdo not contain individual identifiers, in some instances, the selectionof elements of data included in the study may be structured in such a wayas to make the data individually identifiable by inference. 22. To provide an official of another Federal agency information neededin the performance of official duties related to reconciling or reconstructingdata files in support of the functions for which the records were collectedand maintained. 23. When an individual to whom a record pertains is mentally incompetentor under other legal disability, information in the individual's recordmay be disclosed to any person who is responsible for the care of the individualto the extend necessary to ensure payment of benefits to which the individualis entitled. 24. To disclose to the VA-appointed representative of an employee all notices,determinations, decisions, or other written communications issued to theemployee in connection with an examination ordered by the VA under medicalevaluation (formerly fitness-for-duty) examination procedures or Agency-fileddisability retirement procedures. 25. To disclose to a requesting agency, organization, or individual thehome address and other relevant information on those individuals who, itis reasonably believed, might have contacted an illness, been exposed to,or suffered from a health hazard while employed in the Federal work force.26. To disclose to the Department of Defense specific civil service employmentinformation required under law on individuals identified as members ofthe Ready Reserve, to ensure continuous mobilization readiness of ReadyReserve units and members. 27. To disclose information to the Department of Defense, National Oceanicand Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Public Health Service, and the U.S.Coast Guard needed to effect any adjustments in retired or retained payrequired by the dual compensation provisions of section 5532 of Title 5,United States Code. 28. To disclosue information to officials of the Merit Systems ProtectionBoard, including the Office of the Special Counsel, when requested in connectionwith appeals, special studies of the civil service and other merit systems,review of rules and regulations, investigation of alleged or possible prohibitedpersonnel practices, and such other functions, promulgated in 5 U.S.C.1205 and 1206, or as may be authorized by law. 29. To disclose information to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commissionwhen requested in connection with investigations of alleged or possiblediscrimination practices, examination of Federal affirmative employmentprograms, compliance with the Uniform Guidelines on Employee SelectionProcedures, or other functions vested in the Commission by the President'sReorganization Plan No. 1 of 1978.30. To disclose information to the Federal Labor Relations Authority (includingits General Counsel) when requested in connection with investigation andresolution of allegations of unfair labor practices, in connection withthe resolution of exceptions to arbitrator awards when a question of materialfact is raised and matters before the Federal Service Impasses Panel. 31. To disclose to prospective non-Federal employers, the following informationabout a specifically identified current or former employee: Tenure of employment;civil service status; length of service in the VA and the Government; andwhen separated, the date and nature of action as shown on the Notificationof Personnel Action_Standard Form 50 (or authorized exception). 32. Records from this system of records may be disclosed to a State orlocal government licensing board and/or to the Federation of State MedicalBoards or a similar non-government entity which maintains records concerningindividual's employment histories or concerning the issuance, retentionor revocation of licenses or registrations necessary to practice an occupation,profession or specialty, in order for the Agency to obtain informationdetermined relevant to an Agency decision concerning the hiring, retentionor termination of an employee or to inform licensing boards or the appropriatenon-government entities about the health care practices of a terminated,resigned or retired health care employee whose professional health careactivity so significantly failed to conform to generally accepted standardsof professional medical practice as to raise reasonable concern for thehealth and safety of private sector patients. 33. To disclose information to a State or local government entity whichhas the legal authority to make decisions concerning the issuance, retentionor revocation of licenses, certifications or registrations required topractice a health care profession, when requested in writing by an investigatoror supervisory official of the licensing entity for the purpose of makinga decision concerning the issuance, retention or revocation of the license,certification or registration of a named health care professional.34. To disclose relevant information to the Department of Justice and UnitedStates Attorneys in defense or prosecution of litigation involving theUnited States, and to Federal agencies upon their request in connectionwith review of administrative tort claims filed under the Federal TortClaims Act, 28 U.S.C. 2672.35. To disclose information including the name, social security number,date of birth, sex, annual salary, service computation date of basic activeservice date, separation or retirement date, veteran's preference, retirementstatus, occupational series, position occupied, work schedule (full-time,part-time, or intermittent), Agency identifier, geographic location (dutystation location), standard metropolitan statistical area, special programidentifier, and submitting office number of all Federal employees to agenciesparticipating in the ``Federal Employee Receiving Government Assistance''Matching Program conducted by the President's Council on Integrity andEfficiency to help eliminate fraud and abuse in the benefit program administeredby agencies within the Federal Government and to collect debts and overpaymentsowed to the Federal Government.36. To disclose to requesting States (and, upon specific VA approval, bythose States to local governments) information including the name, socialsecurity number, date of birth, sex, annual salary, separation or retirementdate, retirement status, occupational series, position occupied, work schedule(full-time, part-time, intermittent), Agency identifier, geographic location(duty station location), standard metropolitan statistical area, specialidentifier, and submitting office number of Federal employees for use incomputer matching to help eliminate fraud and abuse in the benefit programsadministered by the States and to collect debts and over-payments owedto those governments and their components.37. To disclose hiring, performance, or other personnel-related informationto any facility with which there is, or there is proposed to be, an affiliation,sharing agreement, contract, or similar arrangement, for purposes of establishing,maintaining, or expanding any such relationship.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORAGE:Paper documents, microfilm, magnetic tape, disk.RETRIEVABILITY:Both paper and automated records are retrieved by name, birth date, socialsecurity number, or identification number of the individual on whom theyare maintained.SAFEGUARDS:Access to VA working and storage areas is restricted to VA employees ona ``need to know'' basis; strict control measures are enforced to ensurethat disclosure to these individuals is also based on this same principle.VA file areas are locked after normal duty hours and are protected fromoutside access by the Federal Protective Service.Access to the VA Data Processing Center is restricted to authorized VAemployees and authorized representatives of vendors. Access to the computerrooms within the data processing center is further restricted to especiallyauthorized VA personnel and vendor personnel. Access to computerized recordsis limited through use of access codes and entry logs. Additional protectionis provided by electronic locking devices, alarm systems, and guard service.Exchange of data from the system between the data processing center andthe VA health care facilities is by use of the VADATS telecommunicationsnetwork. Access to the VADATS network equipment is restricted since itis in the communications center of each facility. Strict control measuresare enforced to ensure that disclosure is limited to a ``need to know''basis.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Records are maintained and disposed of in accordance with the records dispositionauthorities found in General Records Schedule 1 and VA Records ControlSchedule 10-1, except where otherwise required to be retained for a longerperiod of time.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Director, Office of Personnel and Labor Relations (05), Veterans Administration,810 Vermont Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20420.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:Individuals wishing to inquire whether this system of records containinginformation about them should contact the local VA facility at which theyare or were employed. It is necessary that the following information befurnished in order that the appropriation records may be located and identified:full name(s); date of birth; social security number; and signature. Tofacilitate records identifiation, former employees must also provide thename of their last duty station, if different than last employing facility,and approximate dates of employment.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:(See Notification Procedure.)CONTESTING RECORDS PROCEDURES:Current employees wishing to request amendment of their records shouldcontact the Personnel Officer of their current installation. Former employeesshould contact the Director, Office of Personnel and Labor Relations. (SeeSystem Manager(s) and Address.) Individuals must furnish the followinginformation for their records to be located and identified: Full name(s);date of birth; social security number; and signature. To facilitate recordsidentification, former employees must also provide the name of their lastemploying facility and approximate dates of employment.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:Information in this system of records is provided by the individual employee;examining physicians; educational institutions; VA officials and otherindividuals or entities, e.g., job references and supporting statements;testimony of witnesses; and correspondence from organizations or persons,e.g., licensing boards.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-16133 Filed 7-18-88; 8:45 a.m.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 8320-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>