<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881205-0043 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.12-05-88.f2.A1042</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">ARMS CONTROL AND DISARMAMENT AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Visiting Scholars Program</ITAG>The U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) will conduct a competitionfor selection of visiting scholars to participate in ACDA's activitiesduring the 1989-90 school year. Section 28 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (22 U.S.C. 2568) providesthat ``A program for visiting scholars in the field of arms control anddisarmament shall be established by the Director [of the U.S. Arms Controland Disarmament Agency] in order to obtain the services of scholars fromthe faculties of recognized institutions of higher learning.'' The law states that ``The purpose of the program will be to give specialistsin the physical sciences and other disciplines relevant to the Agency'sactivities an opportunity for active participation in the arms controland disarmament activities of the Agency and to gain for the Agency theperspective and expertise such persons can offer. * * * Fellows shall bechosen by a board consisting of the Director, who shall be the chairperson,and all former Directors of the Agency.'' In honor of the first Directorof ACDA, William C. Foster, who served from the inception of ACDA in 1961to 1969 and died on October 15, 1984, scholars are known as William C.Foster Fellows. ACDA initially implemented this program by competitively selecting sixvisiting scholars for the 1984-85 school year to perform specific activitiesat ACDA for which their services had been identified as being needed. Thisprocess was repeated for the 1985-86, 1986-87, 1987-88 and 1988-89 schoolyears and it is intended that the process will be used again this yearwith one-year assignments beginning at a mutually agreeable time duringthe period from July 1989 lasting until mid September 1990 for the positionsin ACDA's four bureaus described in the Appendix to this announcement.Note that the emphasis is on the expertise and service which the visitingscholars can provide rather than on general interest in arms control andthe pursuit of the scholars' own research. It is planned that the visiting scholars will be assigned by detail andcompensated in accordance with the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Inaddition to pay based on their regular salary rates, the visiting scholarswill receive travel to and from the Washington, DC area for their one-yearassignment and either per diem allowance during the one-year assignmentor relocation costs. Visiting scholars must be citizens or nationals of the United States andon the faculty of a recognized institution of higher learning. Prior toappointment they will be subject to full-field background security andloyalty investigation for a top secret security clearance including accessto Restricted Data, as required by Section 45 of the Arms Control and DisarmamentAct. Visiting scholars also will be subject to applicable Federal conflictof interest laws and standards of conduct. Selections will be made without regard to race, color, religion, sex, nationalorigin, age, or physical handicap which does not interfere with performanceof duties, and all qualified persons are encouraged to apply. Applicationsshould be in the form of a letter indicating the position(s) in which theapplicant is interested and the perspective and expertise which the applicantoffers. The letter should be accompanied by a curriculum vitae, and anyother materials such as letters of reference and samples of published articleswhich the applicant believes should be considered in the selection process.(If published materials are submitted, it is requested that they be providedin twelve copies, if possible.)Applications, and any requests for additional information, should be sentto: Visiting Scholars Program, Attention: Personnel Office, Room 5722,U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Washington, DC 20451. The applicationdeadline for assignments for the 1989-90 school year is January 31, 1989,subject to extension at ACDA's option. Announcement of selection, subjectto security clearance procedures, is expected early spring 1989.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: November 7, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William J. Montgomery, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrative Director. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">A. Visiting Scholar Assignments to the Bureau of Multilateral Affairsof ACDA </ITAG>1. Description of the Bureau of Multilateral AffairsThe Bureau of Multilateral Affairs (MA) has primary responsibility withinACDA for arms control issues dealt with in multilateral forums. MA providesboth technical backstopping and diplomatic support to the US Delegationsto the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, where negotiations on a chemicalweapons ban takes place, to the various negotiating forums dealing withconventional arms control in Europe, and to the United Nations. 2. Nature of AssignmentThe European Security Negotiations (ESN) Division of the Bureau of MultilateralAffairs has responsibility for supporting two negotiations concerning conventionalforces in Europe. The Conventional Stability Talks will take place in Vienna,Austria, among the 23 members of NATO and the Warsaw Treaty Organization,and will address conventional force reductions and associated stabilityand verification measures. The Conference on Disarmament in Europe willresume in Vienna, Austria, among the 35 states participating in the Conferenceon Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). These negotiations will considerfurther Confidence- and Security-Building Measures (CSBMs), building onthe Stockholm Document of 1986.Conventional arms control in Europe will be gaining increased attentionin coming years, as a result of the progress made in US-Soviet bilateralnegotiations on nuclear reductions, represented in particular by the INFTreaty. At the same time, NATO will be in the process of determining itspost-INF nuclear and conventional force requirements for the next decade.While these two conventional forces negotiations are independent forums,their substance is clearly related. The interactions of the two negotiationsand NATO force planning requirements will require careful analysis in theESN Division.3. Candidate QualificationsSpecific useful background for a candidate would include knowledge of Europeanpolitical and military issues and familiarity with NATO defense doctrine.Previous experience and research on arms control and national securityissues would be valuable.<ITAG tagnum="84">B. Visiting Scholar Assignments to the Bureau of Verification andIntelligence of ACDA</ITAG>1. Description of the Bureau of Verification and IntelligenceThe Bureau of Verification and Intelligence (VI) has responsibility forACDA's work in verification, compliance, intelligence, operations analysis,and computer support. VI provides the support in these subject areas forthe strategic and theater nuclear arms control negotiations; the StandingConsultative Commission; the Anti-Ballistic Missile, SALT I and SALT IITreaties, the Limited Test Ban Treaty and Threshold Test Ban Treaty, INF,START, CST, Defense In Space, Nuclear Testing and the agreements on chemicaland biological weapons.2. Nature of the AssignmentVI develops verification requirements for arms control agreements beingnegotiated; reviews compliance with existing arms control agreements; conductsoperations analysis of relevant arms control issues and Soviet views thereof;and evaluates the potential of various collection technologies for monitoringcompliance with provisions of arms control agreements. A Visiting Scholarwould be expected to participate in one or more of these activities byperforming studies, drafting policy papers, and/or performing analysesboth for use within ACDA and for coordination with other agencies. In somecases, the Visiting Scholar would represent ACDA on interagency workinggroups and would be called upon to exercise a relatively high degree ofindividual judgment.Subject areas where a Visiting Scholar might contribute include: verificationof a treaty on chemical weapons, vertification of limits on space-basedweapons and weapons which can attack space-based military assets, compliancewith existing_and verification of proposed_treaty limitations on ballisticmissiles and nuclear testing, or analysis of Soviet views on stabilityand their impact on verification.3. Candidate QualificationsBecause of the complex technical and analytical content in these areas,VI seeks a physical scientist, operations analyst, or expert in Sovietstrategy and doctrine with a broad background. Specific useful backgroundfor a candidate would include: knowledge of basic physics, chemistry, aerospacesystems, operations research, or Soviet strategic studies. The VisitingScholar should have facility in analytical writing and general communicationand a proven ability to innovate. Specific background in the areas of VIresponsibility would be a value, but is not a requirement.<ITAG tagnum="84">C. Visiting Scholar Assignments to the Bureau of Strategic Programsof ACDA</ITAG>1. Description of the Bureau of Strategic ProgramsThe Bureau of Strategic Programs (SP) has responsibility for support ofthe Director of ACDA on arms control matters concerning limitations onU.S. and Soviet strategic and theater nuclear offensive forces and defensiveand space forces. This includes providing technical and policy guidanceto the Director in these areas and participating in the policy deliberationof Interagency Groups responsible for these areas. SP also has responsibilityfor ACDA's participation in the Nuclear and Space Talks (NST) in Geneva,other bilateral U.S.-USSR nuclear arms control negotiations, and otherdefense related matters including ACDA participation in US decisions regardingresearch on ballistic missile defenses. NST includes strategic and theaternuclear arms control and defense and space issues. Other bilateral discussionsinclude meetings of the Standing Consultative Commission (SCC) and preparationfor the periodic Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty reviews as well asmeetings of the Special Verification Commission (SVC) on INF implementationand compliance. SP also has interagency responsibility for backstoppingof the NST negotiations, the SVC, the SCC, and ABM Treaty reviews. SP hasthree divisions: Strategic Affairs, Theater Affairs, and Defense and Space.2. Nature of the AssignmentA visiting scholar assigned to SP would assist in policy formation in oneor more of the areas cited above. Because of the high technical contentin these areas, SP seeks a physical scientist with a broad theoreticalor applied background.The visiting scholar's responsibilities would include drafting positionpapers, background studies, and policy analyses, both for use within ACDAand for coordination with other agencies such as the Central IntelligenceAgency, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff,the Department of State, and Interagency Groups. In some cases, the individualwould represent ACDA on interagency working groups. The visiting scholarwould be called upon to exercise a relatively high degree of individualjudgment in developing policy recommendations. There may be an opportunityto volunteer to serve on the staff of U.S. delegations to arms controlnegotiations. The most likely area of concentration for the visiting scholarwould be strategic arms reduction policy, but this could vary accordingto the scholar's background and the needs of ACDA/SP.3. Candidate QualificationsSpecific useful background for a candidate would include: knowledge ofbasic physics, facility in concise writing, general communication skills,and proven ability to innovate. Background in areas of SP responsibilitywould be of value but is not a requirement.<ITAG tagnum="84">D. Visiting Scholar Assignment to the Bureau of Nuclear and WeaponsControl of ACDA</ITAG>1. Description of the Bureau of Nuclear and Weapons ControlThe Bureau of Nuclear and Weapons Control (NWC) has responsibility forproliferation issues, including nuclear, missile, and conventional armaments.Functions include the review of nuclear exports, support of the internationalsafeguards system, and the promotion of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treatyand the Treaty of Tlatelolco. NWC also assesses the arms control implicationsof proposed arms transfers and technology transfers, prepares Arms ControlImpact Statements on U.S. programs and prepares arms control policy assessmentsand proposals. In addition, NWC is responsible for ACDA's economic analysiswork and coordinates publication of <T3>World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers.</T3>2. Nature of the AssignmentA visiting scholar assigned to NWC would work on selected topics withinthat Bureau's responsibility, with emphasis on issues raised by the interrelationshipsamong U.S. policies on nuclear non-proliferation, the transfer of conventionalarms, and the export of missile technology. The visiting scholar's responsibilitieswould include the preparation of analyses of these issues and recommendationson their implications for arms control.The position would involve close coordination with officials in the Departmentsof State and Defense and other concerned agencies. In carrying out assignedduties, the individual would need to exercise initiative and function effectivelywith minimum direct guidance and supervision.3. Candidate QualificationsDesirable attributes for a candidate would include an understanding ofthe role of arms control in national security planning, familiarity withweapons characteristics and capabilities, knowledge of political-militaryconditions in developing regions, a highly-developed analytical ability,and facility in written and oral communications. Because of the complexpolitical-military issues involved, the individual should have a strongbackground in national security studies or international relations.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-27920 Filed 12-2-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6820-32-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>