<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881129-0027 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-29-88.f2.A1026</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">National Highway Traffic Safety Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 571</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 87-08; Notice 2]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2127_AB91</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards; Occupant Crash Protection</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This notice proposes to establish a new requirement formanufacturers to install lap/shoulder belts in all forward-facing rearoutboard seating positions in passenger cars, light trucks, multipurposepassenger vehicles (e.g., passenger vans and utility vehicles), and smallbuses. Rear seat lap/shoulder belts are estimated to be more effectivethan rear seat lap belts in reducing fatalities and moderate-to-serve injuries.The benefits of this rulemaking would be augmented by the fact that theadoption of safety belt use laws in 32 States and the District of Columbiaand the growing public awareness of the benefits of safety belts have broughta general nationwide increase in safety belt usage. Further, six of theStates require safety belt use in the rear seats, as well as in the frontseats. As safety belt use in the rear seat increases, the greater effectivenessof rear seat lap/shoulder belts should yield progressively larger benefitsin terms of reduced fatalities and moderate-to-severe injuries. This proposedrequirement would encourage increased rear seat belt use, by providingrear seat occupants with maximum safety protection when they buckle up.This notice also proposes to establish a requirement for lap/shoulder beltsat the driver's seat and any front outboard passenger seat in small buses.Passenger cars and light trucks and light multipurpose passenger vehicleshave long been required to provide lap/shoulder belts at front outboardseating positions. Additionally, the front seat is generally a more hostilecrash environment than the rear seats. NHTSA has tentatively determinedthat front seat occupants of small buses should experience the same benefitsfrom lap/shoulder belts that are currently experienced by front seat occupantsof light trucks and light multipurpose passenger vehicles. The agency hasalso tentatively determined that the enhanced effectiveness of lap/shoulderbelts should maximize the likelihood that a driver of a small bus willbe able to assist the passengers in getting out of the bus in the eventof a crash.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES:</T2><T3>Comment Closing Date: </T3>Comments on this notice must be receivedby NHTSA not later than January 30, 1989.<T3>Proposed Effective Dates: </T3>If adopted as a final rule, these requirementswould apply to passenger cars other than convertibles manufactured on orafter September 1, 1989, and to convertible passenger cars, light trucks,multipurpose passenger vehicles and light buses manufactured on or afterSeptember 1, 1991.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments should refer to Docket No. 87-08; Notice 2 andbe submitted to: Docket Section, Room 5109, NHTSA, 400 Seventh Street SW.,Washington, DC 20590. (Docket hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday throughFriday.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Dr. Richard Strombotne, Chief,Crashworthiness Division, NRM-12, Room 5320, NHTSA, 400 Seventh StreetSW., Washington, DC 20590 (202-366-2264).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>On January 1, 1968, the initial Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standardstook effect. One of those standards was Standard No. 208, <T3>Occupant Crash Protection </T3>(49 CFR 571.208), which required theinstallation of safety belts in passenger cars. Standard No. 208 requiredthe installation of lap/shoulder belts at the driver's and right frontpassenger's seating positions, and either lap or lap/shoulder belts atevery other designated seating position. Another of the initial safetystandards that took effect on January 1, 1968 was Standard No. 210, <T3>Seat Belt Assembly Anchorages </T3>(49 CFR 571.210), which specifiedlocation and strength requirements for the anchorages used to hold thesafety belts to the passenger car during a crash. Standard No. 210 requiredpassenger car manufacturers to provide anchorages for lap/shoulder beltsfor each forward-facing front <T3>and</T3> rear outboard seating position. NHTSA subsequently amendedboth of these standards to extend their applicability to trucks, multipurposepassenger vehicles (MPV's), and buses. However, when Standard No. 210 wasextended to these additional vehicle types, NHTSA did not require manufacturersto provide upper torso (i.e., shoulder belt) anchorages for rear outboardseating positions in those other vehicle types.All comprehensive and reliable studies of occupant protection in the rearseat from 1968 forward showed that the lap belts installed in the rearseating positions were effective in reducing deaths and injuries. Notwithstandingthis evidence, Kathleen Weber and John Melvin, then both associated withthe University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, sought additionalprotection through submitting a petition for rulemaking with the agencyin December 1982. That petition (hereinafter called ``the Weber/Melvinpetition'') asked the agency to require the installation of lap/shoulderbelts in the rear outboard seating positions of passenger cars. The petitionersexplained that the primary reason for their request was enhancing childsafety, by facilitating the use of booster seats in the rear seat. (A boosterseat is a platform used to elevate and restrain a child in a vehicle. Itmay or may not have a frame or any other structural support behind thechild's back or head, and generally is designed to be used by childrenwho have outgrown their child seat, but are not old enough to use justthe vehicle's belt system. By elevating the child up to four additionalinches, some booster seats are designed to ensure that a vehicle's lapbelt is properly positioned over the child's pelvis and the vehicle's shoulderbelt, if one is available, is properly positioned over the child's chest,instead of the face or neck. Those booster seats that are designed withsome type of shield in front of the child are usually designed so thatthe shoulder belt can be routed in front of the shield on the booster seat,to provide additional upper torso restraint for the child.) As additionalsupport for the requested action, the Weber/Melvin petition asserted thatrear seat lap/shoulder belts would provide additional safety protectionfor adult occupants, as well.NHTSA denied this petition in 1984 (49 FR 15241). This denial focused primarilyon the child safety issues raised by the petitioners. At the time of thisdenial, the agency was considering a proposal to require the vehicles toinclude tether anchorage to secure a then-popular type of child restraint.The agency believed this approach would offer greater protection to childrenthan one requring rear seat lap/shoulder belts. In response to the petitioners'assertion that lap/shoulder belts in rear outboard seating positions couldprovide some additional safety protection to adults seated there, NHTSAstated that it agreed. However, the agency noted that existing crash datashowed that rear seat lap belts already provided effective protection torear seat occupants. In addition, NHTSA then estimated that lap/shoulderbelts with retractors would cost $20 more than the lap belts provided atthose seating positions in most passenger cars. NHTSA concluded at thattime that the additional cost could not be justified based on increasedbelt usage or belt effectiveness.In August 1986, another petition was filed with the agency asking thatNHTSA require the installation of lap/shoulder belts in rear seats. Thispetition, filed by the Los Angeles Area Child Passenger Safety Association,again focused on the protection afforded to children riding in motor vehicles.The agency decided to grant the petition and reexamine this issue, becauseof two new factors. First, many States had adopted safety belt use laws,which led to an increase in belt use in the rear seat. Second, child restraintproduction had shifted away from those that were designed to have a tetheranchored to the vehicle. Accordingly, on June 16, 1987, NHTSA publishedan advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPRM), requesting comments onthe need for rulemaking to require lap/shoulder belts in rear seating positionsof vehicles (52 FR 22818).In connection with the ANPRM, NHTSA prepared a preliminary regulatory impactanalysis (PRIA) to examine in detail the costs and safety benefits of rearseat lap/shoulder belts. The PRIA showed that rear seat lap belts havebeen effective in reducing deaths and serious injuries. The agency estimatedthat the benefits of requiring rear seat lap/shoulder belts would be areduction of approximately 10 fatalities and 400 serious injuries eachyear, at 1985 belt usage rates of approximately 10 percent for rear seatoccupants. The PRIA estimated that a requirement for lap/shoulder beltsat rear outboard seating positions would be $139 million for passengercars, $21 million for light trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles,and $100,000 for small buses. The ANPRM noted: ``The agency is concernedthat such costs are extremely disproportionate to the safety benefits.''52 FR 22819.The ANPRM asked for comments on these estimates. It also asked for commentson the vehicle manufacturer's plans for installing lap/shoulder belts inrear seating positions, whether any proposed rule should include dynamictesting requirements for rear seat lap/shoulder belts, and whether anyproposed rule should make the existing comfort and convenience requirementsfor front seat belts applicable to rear seat lap/shoulder belts. Thirty-fourcommenters responded to the ANPRM, and all of those comments were consideredin developing this proposal. The most significant comments are discussedbelow.<ITAG tagnum="84">The Need for Additional Requirements</ITAG>The agency has carefully considered both the comments received in responseto the ANPRM, information on the manufacturer's plans to voluntarily installlap/shoulder belts in the rear seats of their vehicles, and the continuingtrend of States to enact safety belt use laws. After considering all thisinformation, NHTSA has decided to propose a new requirement that most vehiclesbe equipped with lap/shoulder belts at each rear outboard seating position.The agency's estimate of the costs involved with such a requirement haschanged substantially since the ANPRM was issued, becaused of the significantincrease in the number of vehicles that will be voluntarily equipped withrear seat lap/shoulder belts. However, NHTSA also believes that the benefitsassociated with this requirement may be greater than it had previouslyestimated, for the following reasons. As of this date, 32 States and theDistrict of Columbia have safety belt use laws, an increase of seven inthe number of States with belt use laws since the ANPRM was published.As a result of these State laws, the number of people wearing safety beltshas increased substantially. For example, when the Secretary of Transportationissued the final decision on the automatic occupant crash protection requirementsin July 1984, the safety belt use rate for front seat occupants was 12.5percent. The ANPRM referred to the 1985 safety belt use rate of 22 percentfor front seat occupants. The most recent agency data on safety belt useby front seat occupants shows a 42 percent use rate, for the period ofJune through August 1987 (NHTSA Docket No. 74-14-GR-710). Hence, belt useby front seat occupants has increased by 30 percentage points, more thantripling the use rate in 1984, over this three year period.The most recent agency data also show the postive effects that State beltuse laws have on belt use. Front seat occupants in States with belt uselaws had a 20 percentage point higher belt use rate than did front seatoccupants in States without a belt use law (roughly 52 percent vs. 32 percent).As the number of States with belt use laws continues to grow, togetherwith the public awareness of the benefits of wearing safety belts, thereis every reason to believe that the rate of belt use by front seat occupantswill continue to increase. Historically, belt use in the rear seats has been lower than belt use inthe front seats. The ANPRM noted that belt use in the rear seats was approximatley2 percent in 1981-1982, and had risen to 10 percent in 1985. The most recentdata are from 1987 and show that belt use in the rear seats has risen to16 percent. Thus, the ANPRM's discussion of the benefits that would beassociated with a requirement for rear seat lap/shoulder belts focusedprimarily on the 10 percent use rate for rear seat belts. However, theagency now believes that belt use in rear seats will increase to levelssubstantially greater than 10 percent, bringing correspondingly higherbenefits for lap/shoulder belts in rear seats. Although most of the State safety belt use laws that have been enactedrequire the use of safety belts in front seats only, five of the Statelaws require both front and rear seat occupants to buckle up. The fiveStates that require rear seat occupants to use their belts are California,Montana, Nevada, Washington, and Wisconsin. Experience with belt use lawsapplicable to front seat occupants suggests that far more than 10 percentof the rear seat occupants in these States will buckle up. Even in thoseStates that have safety belt use laws, but do not require rear seat occupantsto buckle up, it seems likely that people who have gotten into the habitof wearing a safety belt in the front seat will be more likely to weara safety belt in the rear seat when they are riding there. This suggeststhat safety belt use in the rear seat should rise above the current 16percent level. Further, the greater visibility of belt use with lap/shoulderbelts, as opposed to lap belts alone, would make it easier for States toenforce safety belt use laws that require belt use in the rear seats.Further, the agency believes that the State safety belt use laws and thegreater public awareness of the benefits of safety belts have resultedin a larger share of the public being familiar with lap/shoulder beltsin front seats and getting into the habit of wearing lap/shoulder belts.Both the sense of familiarity and the habit of wearing have been developedwith respect to the lap/shoulder belts in the front seat, not the lap beltsin the rear seats. These factors may partially explain why belt use isso much lower in rear seats. If people who are familiar with and in thehabit of wearing lap/shoulder belts in the front seat find lap/shoulderbelts in the rear seat, it stands to reason that they would be more likelyto wear those belts when riding in the rear seat. Thus, the presence oflap/shoulder belts in the rear seat should result in an increase in rearseat belt use. The synergy between increased belt use and increased benefitsmeans that the benefits associated with this rule  will be substantiallygreater because of the anticipated increased use of lap/shoulder beltsin the rear seat.Finally, lap/shoulder belts in the rear seat would provide better protectionfor children restrained in booster seats. Standard No. 213, <T3>Child Restraint Systems </T3>(49 CFR 571.213) requires that all childrestraint systems be certified as complying with the injury protectioncriterial when held in place by a lap belt <T3>only</T3>. Accordingly, most booster seats have had to rely on a shieldto provide upper torso restraint for the child during Standard No. 213compliance testing and when used in the seating positions equipped withlap belts. The presence of lap/shoulder belts in rear seating positionswould help booster seats installed in rear seats to provide even more effectiveprotection for child occupants, by allowing booster seats to use the shoulderbelt to provide additional upper torso restraint. The agency re-emphasizes that a number of studies, evaluating thousandsof cases, show that lap belts in the rear seat <T3>are </T3>effective in preventing deaths and reducing injuries. NHTSAknows of no comprehensive studies by any person or organization that suggeststhat rear seat lap belts are anything less than effective. This proposalis <T3>not </T3>suggesting or implying that rear seat lap belts are not effective.Instead, this proposal is based on the agency's tentative conclusion thatsafety belt use in the rear seats of vehicles will increase and that, asa result of this increase, the benefits of rear seat lap/shoulder beltswill be reasonably related to the costs of rear seat lap/shoulder belts.Many of the vehicle manufacturers that responded to the ANPRM agreed withthe ANPRM's statement that the voluntary installation of rear seat lap/shoulderbelts by the manufacturers could mitigate the need for a Federal requirementin this area. As a policy matter, the agency has generally concluded thatthere is no compelling safety need for it to act when vehicle manufacturersare voluntarily taking the desired steps absent any Federal requirementto do so. In these circumstances, rulemaking imposes a burden on the agencyby requiring it to develop appropriate requirements, conduct a rulemakingproceeding, and use some of its enforcement budget to monitor compliance.The rule also imposes additional paperwork burdens on the manufacturers,even though they would take the desired action in any case. All of theseburdens are imposed without a commensurate safety benefit for the public,and are therefore unnecessary burdens. Although most manufacturers either already equip their passenger cars withrear seat lap/shoulder belts or are planning to do so in the very nearfuture, some manufacturers do not have similarly broad plans for theirfleets of minivans and light trucks. Further, some manufacturers do notplan to provide this equipment, even in passenger cars. Moreover, the agencyhas no reliable information that known new entrants to the U.S. motor vehiclemarket will follow the lead of their competitors in supplying rear seatlap/shoulder belts. Finally, a requirement for rear seat lap/shoulder beltswill ensure substantial uniformity of safety performance and comfort andconvenience for ease of use. For example, a regulatory requirement willensure that all such systems have an integrated lap/shoulder belt and retractors.For these reasons, NHTSA has tentatively concluded that it should requirerear seat lap/shoulder belts and establish some performance requirementsfor those belt systems. <ITAG tagnum="84">Specific Details of this Proposal</ITAG>1. Seating Positions Covered by ProposalThe ANPRM estimated the costs and benefits by requiring lap/shoulder beltsat all rear seating positions in the covered vehicles, at rear outboardseating positions only, and at rear outboard seating positions of the secondseat only, for vehicles with more than one rear seat. The agency askedfor comments on these estimates and each of these potential installationproposals. With respect to the request for comments on requiring lap/shoulder beltsat rear outboard seating positions, the commenters generally did not believethere would be any technical problems associated with such a requirement.Indeed, the fact that several manufacturers install lap/shoulder beltsat rear outboard seating positions in their passenger cars suggests thatthere are no serious technical problems with such installations. The PRIAfor the ANPRM estimated that, for passenger cars, about 90 percent of thebenefits estimated for lap/shoulder belts in all rear seating positionswould accrue to rear <T3>outboard </T3>seat occupants. For other vehicle types, about 70 percentof the benefits would accrue to rear <T3>outboard </T3>seat occupants. Some commenters did express concerns about a proposed requirement to installlap/shoulder belts in rear seating positions that were not outboard seatingpositions. Several manufacturers noted in their comments that the PRIAestimated that it would cost more to install lap/shoulder belts in therear center seating position of passenger cars than to install lap/shoulderbelts at both rear outboard seating positions in cars. Because the PRIAalso estimated that the benefits of lap/shoulder belts in rear center seatingpositions would be substantially lower than at outboard seating positions,these commenters stated that it would be inappropriate to require lap/shoulderbelts for rear seating positions that were not outboard seating positions.Toyota noted in its comments that rear seating positions that are not outboardseating positions are not presently required to even have anchorages forshoulder belts. Hence, according to this comment, structural changes tovehicles would be required. Both Toyota and Volkswagen noted that the rearcenter seating position is the least-used seating position in cars, accordingto the 19 city survey sponsored by NHTSA. The American Seat Belt Councilstated in its comments that lap/shoulder belts in rear center seating positionshad low cost-effectiveness and little field testing. The Automobile Importersof America and several manufacturers alleged that there would be difficultiesin locating the anchorage for a rear center seat shoulder belt in vehiclesother than passenger car sedans. According to these comments, hatchbackor station wagon models of passenger cars and the other vehicle types mentionedin the ANPRM would have to locate anchorages for rear center seat shoulderbelts either in the loadspace floor or on the vehicle roof. According tothese commenters, these locations would result in disruptions of the vehicle'scargo carrying area or impede the driver's rearward vision. The agency has tentatively concluded that it should limit the proposedrequirement for lap/shoulder belts in rear seats to outboard seating positions<T3>only</T3>. The agency agrees with those commenters that asserted thatthere would be more technical difficulties associated with a requirementto install lap/shoulder belts at all rear seating positions, than witha requirement to install lap/shoulder belts only at rear outboard seatingpositions. Whether or not those difficulties could be overcome, there wouldbe small safety benefits and substantially greater costs if rear seatingpositions that are not outboard seating positions were required to havelap/shoulder belts. Therefore, this proposal addresses only rear outboardseating positions. The term ``outboard designated seating positions'' is defined at 49 CFR571.3 as meaning ``a designated seating position where a longitudinal verticalplane tangent to the outboard side of the seat cushion is less than 12inches from the innermost point on the inside surface of the vehicle ata height between the seating reference point and the shoulder referencepoint (as shown in Figure 1 of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety StandardNo. 210) and longitudinally between the front and rear edges of the seatcushion.'' Thus, the seating positions next to the aisle on the right handside of many passenger vans and small buses may <T3>not </T3>be outboard seating positions, because they may be more than12 inches from the inside of the vehicle. Accordingly, some aisle seatingpositions in those vehicles may not be covered by this proposed requirementfor rear seat lap/shoulder belts. 2. Types of Rear Seats Covered by This ProposalThis proposal is limited to <T3>forward-facing </T3>rear outboard seats. The agency considered proposingrequirements for all rear outboard seats, but tentatively determined thatsuch a requirement might be overbroad. NHTSA is unaware of any data showingthat occupants of center-facing or rear-facing seats would be significantlybetter protected by lap/shoulder belts than by lap belts. Further, suchseats are usually designed to fold away for cargo carrying purposes, whichwould make shoulder belt anchorage and application especially cumbersomeand technically difficult. Since this proposal is limited to forward-facing rear outboard seats, theremight be some uncertainty as to whether the proposed requirements wouldapply to swivel seats in rear outboard positions. Swivel seats can rotate360anddegrees;, and so could be adjusted to face front, center, or rear.NHTSA answered this question for front outboard swivel seats in an April8, 1988 letter to Mr. Ohdaira of Isuzu Motors. In that letter, the agencyexplained that S7.1.1 of Standard No. 208 requires safety belts to adjustto fit occupants ``with the seat in any position.'' Because of this languagein the standard, the agency noted, ``Thus, we believe that a front outboardswivel seat must have lap and upper torso restraints that fit the occupantof the seat while the seat is in <T3>any </T3>position in which it can be occupied while the vehicle isin motion.'' (Emphasis in original). This notice proposes that rear outboardseating positions be subject to S7.1.1 of Standard No. 208. Since thisis the same regulatory requirement that was the basis of the agency's conclusionfor swivel seats at front outboard seating positions, the agency wouldreach the same conclusion for rear outboard swivel seats, if this proposalwere adopted as a final rule. This notice proposes to add express languageto S7.1.1 to clarify this point. 3. Vehicle Types Covered by This Proposal<ITAG tagnum="81">a. Passenger Cars</ITAG>This proposal, if adopted as a final rule, would apply to <T3>all </T3>passenger cars. More people travel in these vehicles thanin any other vehicle type. Accordingly, most of the safety benefits anticipatedfrom a requirement for rear lap/shoulder belts would accrue to rear seatoccupants in passenger cars. NHTSA anticipates no technical problems willbe associated with this proposed requirement, since passenger cars havelong been required to have anchorages installed for rear outboard shoulderbelts. Mazda suggested that NHTSA should consider treating convertibles differentlyfrom other passenger cars, for the purposes of this proposed requirement.In its comments to the ANPRM, Mazda alleged that, ``Interference betweenthe shoulder anchorage and the convertible roof will undoubtedly occurand will be very difficult to adequate reconcile. Accordingly, the onlyviable option available to convertible manufacturers must be the eliminationof rear seating positions.''NHTSA is not persuaded by this comment. In spite of the difficulties perceivedby Mazda, the rear outboard seating positions in convertibles are equippedwith lap/shoulder belts in 1988 convertible models made by BMW, Mercedes-Benz,and Saab. NHTSA concurs with Mazda's assertion that it will be more difficultto install rear seat lap/shoulder belts in convertibles than in other passengercars. The greater degree of difficulty for convertibles is a good reasonfor proposing to allow manufacturers a longer leadtime to install rearseat lap/shoulder belts in convertibles. Accordingly, this notice proposesto allow manufacturers two additional years after other passenger carsare required to be equipped with rear seat lap/shoulder belts before imposingthe same requirement for convertibles. However, the greater degree of difficulty for convertibles is not sufficientto justify proposing to exempt convertibles from any requirements. Thevoluntary actions by other convertible manufacturers show that the difficultiesin installing rear seat lap/shoulder belts in convertibles can be overcome.The agency does not believe that rear seat occupants of convertibles shouldbe denied the greater safety protection of lap/shoulder belts, simply becausegreater engineering efforts are required to install those belts in convertibles,compared with sedans or station wagons. Therefore, this proposal treatsconvertibles just like all other passenger cars, and requires <T3>all </T3>passenger cars to be equipped with lap/shoulder belts at rearoutboard seating positions. NHTSA acknowledges that convertibles are not required to have lap/shoulderbelts installed at front outboard seating positions prior to September1, 1989. However, as of September 1, 1989, all convertibles must complywith the automatic crash protection requirements of S4.1.2.1 of StandardNo. 208. NHTSA gave convertibles a longer leadtime to comply with the frontseat occupant protection requirements, by permitting manufacturers to excludeconvertibles from their production totals during the phase-in of the automaticcrash protection requirements. With the additional leadtime, however, NHTSAdetermined that there was no reason to treat convertibles any differentlythan other passenger cars for front seat occupant protection. The agencyis proposing to follow the same course in the case of rear seat occupantprotection. That is, convertibles will be given more leadtime to complywith the rear seat occupant protection requirements but after that timewill be subject to the same rear seat occupant protection standards asall other passenger cars. <ITAG tagnum="81">b. Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles With a Gross Vehicle Weight Ratingof 10,000 Pounds or Less</ITAG>This vehicle type consists primarily of passenger vans with a seating capacityof 10 persons or less, and utility vehicles and other off-road vehicles.These vehicles are designed to transport passengers and perform some otherspecialized function. This type of vehicle represents a growing share ofthe market, so that the estimated safety benefits to rear seat occupantsfrom lap/shoulder belts was greater than any other vehicle type, exceptpassenger cars. Further, these vehicles are frequently purchased <T3>because of</T3> their greater passenger-carrying capacity. Thus, itis reasonable for the agency to infer that these vehicles will have a greater-than-averageoccupancy rate in the rear seats, with accompanying greater-than-averagebenefits from this proposed requirement. Accordingly, this notice proposesto require lap/shoulder belts in these vehicles.Several of the commenters to the ANPRM expressed opinions about extendingany requirement for lap-shoulder belts at rear outboard seating positionsto multipurpose passenger vehicles (MPVs). Chrysler noted its plans toinstall such belts in MPVs, and supported a requirement for such. The InsuranceInstitute for Highway Safety (IIHS) recommended that the proposed regulationshould initially apply only to passenger cars and MPVs, since rear seatoccupants of these two vehicle types would experience almost all of thetotal benefits estimated from rear seat lap/shoulder belts. Land Rover,a British manufacturer of MPVs, stated that all of its vehicles sold inthe United States are already equipped with lap/shoulder belts at the rearoutboard seating positions.On the other hand, Mr. Robert Schlegel, a private citizen, recommendedthat NHTSA defer any actions on rear seat lap/shoulder belts in MPVs untilit can evaluate the effectiveness of those belts in passenger cars. TheAmerican Seat Belt Council similarly recommended that the question of rearseat lap/shoulder belts in MPVs not be addressed in this proposal, arguingthat the low belt use in the rear seats of these vehicles would resultin low cost-effectiveness for such a proposal. Several vehicle manufacturersnoted that structural modifications would be needed to allow MPVs to accommodaterear seat shoulder belts. As previously noted, Standard No. 210 does notcurrently require MPVs to have anchorages installed for rear seat shoulderbelts. Finally, Ford stated that it plans to install rear seat lap/shoulderbelts in its MPVs, but that it was uncertain whether it could develop apracticable rear seat should belt for its Bronco line of MPVs.The suggestions that the agency should concentrate initially on only passengercars, the vehicle type with the highest benefits, and later extend therequirement for rear seat lap/shoulder belts to MPVs if those belts wereeffective in passenger cars, were carefully considered by the agency. Forthe following reasons. NHTSA has decided to include MPVs in this proposal.As noted above, MPVs, especially passenger vans, frequently have rear seatoccupants. In fact, passenger vans, especially the newer ``mini-vans,''are frequently purchased to accommodate, and used for, the same familytransportation purposes for which station wagons were used exclusivelyin the past. Accordingly, only passenger cars have higher estimated benefitsfrom rear seat lap/shoulder belts.NHTSA concurs with the ANPRM commenters that noted that structural changeswill be necessary to permit MPVs to be equipped with rear seat shoulderbelts. However, these structural changes do not generally pose major technicaldifficulties, as evidenced by the rear lap/shoulder belts installed in1988 vans manufactured by General Motors, Toyota, and Volkswagen, and 1988off-road vehicles manufactured by Isuzu, Range Rover, and Toyota. The agencydoes not question that there may be some difficulties with installing rearlap/shoulder belts in some particular models, such as the Ford Bronco,but NHTSA has no reason to believe that these difficulties cannot be overcome.Since rear seat lap/shoulder belts in MPVs would offer greater safety benefitsthan any other vehicle type except passenger cars, and there are no extraordinarytechnical problems associated with the installation of such belts in MPVs,NHTSA has decided to propose to require the installation of those beltsin MPVs. As was the case for convertibles, this notice proposes to allowmanufacturers a longer period of time before requiring rear seat lap/shoulderbelts in MPVs than it would allow passenger cars other than convertibles.The leadtime issue is discussed more fully later in this preamble.c. Light Trucks and Small BusesThe light truck category consists primarily of extended cab pickup truckswith a rear seat in the cab and cargo vans with some limited rear seatpositions. Light trucks are designed primarily to transport property, asevidence, for example, by having more cargo room than passenger-carryingspace (cargo vans), or by having an open bed for hauling cargo (pickups),or transport special purpose equipment.The small bus category consists primarily of vehicles that are passengervans with more than 10 seating positions. In most other respects, smallbuses are very similar to passenger vans. The vehicles are designed totransport passengers in greater numbers than other passenger-carrying vehicles.NHTSA acknowledges that the estimated benefits that would accrue to rearseat passengers in both light trucks and small buses from lap/shoulderbelts at outboard seating positions are much less than for passenger carsand MPVs. However, NHTSA has tentatively determined that these lesser benefitsmay reflect the low production volume of these vehicles, rather than aninherently lower risk to rear seat occupants. Since only about 4,000 smallbuses are produced annually, and since most light trucks do not have rearseating positions, the injuries and fatalities to rear seat occupants ofsmall buses and light trucks predictably will be far less in absolute numbersthan the injuries and fatalities to rear seat occupants of passenger carsand MPVs. Thus, the agency acknowledges that its accident data for rearseat occupants reflect relatively small numbers of fatalities and injuriesto rear seat occupants of small buses and light trucks compared to passengercars and MPVs.On a per rear outboard seat occupant basis, however, the agency believesthat the benefits for rear seat occupants of small buses and light trucksare probably comparable to the benefits for rear seat occupants of standardpassenger vans. Indeed, common sense and knowledge in this area suggestthat a person riding in a rear seating position in a cargo van (classifiedas a light truck) or a passenger van with more than 10 seating positions(classified as a small bus) should be afforded the same level of protectionas would be afforded when riding in a rear seating position in a passengervan with 10 or fewer seating positions (classified as an MPV). With respectto pickup trucks that have rear seating positions, the agency has no reasonto believe that occupants of those seats experience any lesser benefitsfrom lap/shoulder belts than would be experienced by rear seat occupantsin comparably sized passenger vans. Since the benefits on a per vehiclebasis would be similar to those for MPVs, this notice proposes to establisha requirement that light trucks and small buses be equipped with lap/shoulderbelts at all rear outboard seating positions. Manufacturers would be allowedthe same leadtime for installations in these vehicles as is proposed forMPVs.Blue Bird Body Company (Blue bird), a school bus manufacturer, commentedthat a requirement for rear seat lap/shoulder belts on small school buseswould create a conflict between applicable standards for small school buses.This conflict would arise, according to the commenter, because the onlyanchorage location for shoulder belts for center and aisle seats wouldbe the seat back itself. Blue Bird asserted that the seat strength necessaryto comply with Standard No. 210's anchorage strength requirements wouldforce the seat back to no longer comply with Standard No. 222's limitson seat strength. This comment is now moot since this proposal requiresrear seat lap-shoulder belts only at outboard seating positions. Outboardanchorages can be located on the vehicle side structure, if desired, insteadof the seat back, thereby eliminating any alleged potential conflicts forschool bus manufacturers.NHTSA acknowledges that there is currently no requirement for small busesto be equipped with lap/shoulder belts at <T3>front</T3> outboard seating positions. The agency notes that the frontseats generally present a more hostile crash environment that the rearseats, because front seat occupants have the steering wheel, dash panel,windshield, and the like in front of them, instead of seat backs. Hence,these occupants would seem likely to experience even greater benefits fromthe increased effectiveness of lap/shoulder belts than rear seat occupants.A lap/shoulder belt for the driver would assist the driver in maintainingcontrol of the vehicle during crash avoidance maneuvers. The greater effectivenessof lap/shoulder belts should also maximize the chances of the driver beingable to assist the bus passengers out of the bus in the event of a crash.As noted above, the small bus category consists primarily of passengervans that have more than 10 seating positions and that small buses arein most other respects similar to passenger vans. There is no obvious reasonto require passenger vans with 10 or fewer seating positions to have lap/shoulderbelts at front outboard designated seating positions, and not require passengervans with 11 or more seating positions to comply with the same requirement.On a per front seat occupant basis, the benefits for front seat occupantsshould be comparable.For these reasons, this notice proposes that small buses also be requiredto have lap/shoulder belts at all front outboard seating positions. Theagency believes that most small buses are already so equipped, so minimalcosts should be associated with this proposal. Structural modificationswill be necessary for those small buses that are not already equipped withfront outboard lap/shoulder belts, however. To accommodate the legitimateleadtime needs of these small buses, this proposed requirement would applyto small buses manufactured on or after September 1, 1991. Comments areinvited on the agency's tentative determination that there is a safetyneed for this requirement, the number of small buses that are <T3>not</T3> currently equipped with lap/shoulder belts at front outboardseating positions, and whether the proposed leadtime is sufficient to makeany necessary structural changes to small buses.4. Vehicle Types NOT Covered by This Proposal<ITAG tagnum="81">a. Vehicles with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating of More Than 10,000Pounds</ITAG>NHTSA has traditionally used gross vehicle weight ratings as dividing linesfor the purposes of applying occupant crash protection standards. Thesegroupings reflect the differences in the vehicles' functions and crashresponses and exposure. This proposal would also use such a dividing line,by addressing only vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000pounds or less.<ITAG tagnum="81">b. Motor Homes</ITAG>Some of the commenters to the ANPRM suggested that motor homes should beexempted from the rear seat lap/shoulder belt requirements. The RecreationalVehicle Industry Association (RVIA) commented that recreational vehicleshave many diverse seating configurations, such as side-facing sofas, dinettes,and barrel chairs that lock in a side-facing position. RVIA argued thatit would be very complex and expensive to install lap/shoulder belts forthese rear seating positions. Additionally, RVIA argued that the resulting``clutter'' of lap/shoulder belts would impede movement throughout a recreationalvehicle and otherwise interfere with its ``residential functions.'' FleetwoodEnterprises, a manufacturer of motor homes, commented that lap/shoulderbelts in the rear of its products ``may create usability and human factorconcerns which are not now in the product.''This agency has long said that rear seating positions in motor homes, includingside facing sofas and barrel chairs and dinette chairs, are designatedseating positions. Accordingly, section S4.2.2 of Standard No. 208 requiresthose seating positions to be equipped with lap belts, if the vehicle hasa gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less. Thus with respectto the need for occupant protection, the agency has heretofore treatedsofas, dinette chairs, etc., just like standard bench seats in the rearof MPVs.However, the agency believes there is some merit to the comments that lap/shoulderbelts at these seating positions might interfere with the seating positions'ability to perform residential functions when the vehicle is not in motion.This effect could be mitigated by installing lap/shoulder belts that areintegrated into the seats. Nevertheless, the agency has tentatively concludedthat shoulder belts at rear seating positions in motor homes might interferewith the residential purposes of those seating positions, especially forlow back and/or sofa-type seats. Such possible interference might be necessary,if NHTSA had evidence indicating that significant benefits would resultfrom lap/shoulder belts at these positions. However, NHTSA has no accidentor other data that would allow it to project any significant benefits fromreal seat lap/shoulder belts in motor homes. Therefore, this notice excludesmotor homes from its proposed requirements.For the purposes of this rulemaking, the agency is proposing a definitionof ``motor home'' to permit it and the public to distinguish objectivelybetween motor homes and van conversions that do not qualify as motor homes.A ``motor home'' would be defined as ``a motor vehicle with motive powerthat is designed to provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidencedby the presence of at least four of the following facilities: Cooking;refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air conditioning;a potable water supply system including a faucet and sink; and a separate110-125 volt electrical power supply and/or an LP gas supply.'' This proposeddefinition has been derived from the definition of ``motor home'' specifiedin the 1987 version of the Uniform Traffic Code. Vehicles that do not includeat least four of the listed facilities woud <T3>not </T3>be considered motor homes. The public is specifically invitedto comment on whether this proposed definition is broad enough to includeall vehicles commonly called ``motor homes,'' yet narrow enough to excludevan conversions that would not ordinarily be termed ``motor homes.''5. Retractor Types Required for Rear Seat Lap/Shoulder BeltsNHTSA's decision to proceed with a proposal to require rear seat lap/shoulderbelts is based on the agency's tentative conclusion that these types ofbelts will increase belt use in the rear seats. NHTSA has already establishedperformance requirements for the comfort and convenience of lap/shoulderbelts installed at front outboard seating positions in vehicles with agross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less; 50 FR 46056, November6, 1985. The reasons for establishing these requirements were to enhancebelt use by vehicle occupants. In the notice establishing these requirements,NHTSA said:<ITAG tagnum="21">Automatic locking retractors are inconvenient to use since they mustbe extended in a single continuous movement to a length sufficient to allowbuckling or they will lock. They also tend to tighten excessively undernormal driving conditions, sometimes making it necessary to unbuckle andrefasten the lap belt to relieve pressure on the pelvis and abdomen. Neitherof these problems exists with the emergency locking retractor, which allowsoccupant movement without tightening and locks only upon rapid occupantmovement, vehicle deceleration, or impact. 50 FR 46057.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">For these reasons, section S7.1.1.3 of Standard No. 208 requires thatonly emergency locking retractors (ELR) be used on lap/shoulder safetybelts installed at front outboard seating positions of vehicles manufacturedon or after September 1, 1986.The agency has tentatively determined that these same considerations applywith equal force to the lap/shoulder belts proposed to be required by thisnotice. If these lap/shoulder belts do not increase rear seat belt use,the anticipated benefits from those belts would be significantly reduced.Hence, this notice proposes to apply the requirements for ELR's set forthin S7.1.1.3 to the lap/shoulder belts to be required by this proposal.The agency specifically invites comments on the costs of converting toELR's at rear outboard seating positions. Manufacturers are requested tosubmit an estimate of the number of vehicles by vehicle type (passengercar, MPV, light truck, and small bus) that will have to be changed fromALR's to ELR's. The public is also invited to submit their own estimatesof the net costs of making this change and the net weight increase (ifany) that would result from this change.Two of the commenters to the ANPRM raised questions about the compatibilityof ELR's and child restraint systems. Cosco, a child restraint manufacturer,asserted in its comments that ELR lap/shoulder belt systems are not compatiblewith child car seats. Cosco also expressed its opinion that a lap/shoulderbelt with an ELR for the shoulder belt and an automatic locking retractor(ALR) for the lap belt would be compatible with child car seats, as wouldELR lap belts that convert to ALR when fully extended, and suggested thata proposal require either of these for rear seat lap/shoulder belts. Coscocommented that this rule should consider the compatibility between childrestraints and vehicle safety belts thoroughly in this rulemaking. ThePhysicians for Automotive Safety also raised the same points in its comments,and recommended that any ELR lap belts convert to ALR when fully extended,as installed on some current models of General Motors' vehicles.NHTSA considered this question in detail in the 1985 rule requiring ELR'sfor front outboard seating positions. The alleged problem of incompatibilitybetween child car seats and ELR's is based on the fact that the ELR locksonly upon rapid occupant movement, vehicle deceleration, or impact. ALR'slock into position upon adjustment. The agency said:<ITAG tagnum="21">Child restraint manufacturers stated that some restraint devices,when positioned by safety belt systems which are adjusted by ELR's, becomeunstable when occupied by very active children. Agency testing of childrestraint devices under conditions of low-speed braking and vehicle manueversindicates that, although improvements in belt systems could improve thestability of these devices, there are no data to show that low-speed movementof child safety seats is affecting the safety performance of child restraintdevices in motor vehicle accidents. (Docket No. 80-18-GR-004).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Because the agency's research did not show that low-speed movementof the seats is actually reducing the effectiveness of child restraintsin accidents, and because after-market locking devices are available whichachieve the same goal, it has decided not to adopt a manual locking requirementfor ELR's at this time. The agency will continue to monitor the potentialproblems associated with the restraint of child restraint devices by ELRsafety belt systems and consider whether to address these problems in futurerulemaking actions. 50 FR 46056, at 46057; November 6, 1985.</ITAG>The aftermarket locking devices to which that notice referred are called``locking clips.'' Locking clips can prevent movement of belts equippedwith ELR's. Cosco stated in its comments that,<ITAG tagnum="21">While locking clips make this type of belt (i.e., one with an ELRfor the lap belt) compatible with child car seats, locking clips are frequentlynot used.</ITAG>NHTSA has thoroughly considered this issue again in connection with thisproposal. NHTSA believes that rear selt belts can and should provide comfortand convenience for adult users <T3>and </T3>provide effective protection for children. While the agencywelcomes public comments setting forth new information developed sincethe 1985 rule, the agency has tentatively determined that effective protectionfor both children and adults can be achieved without proposing any additionalrequirements for lap belt retractors.Additionally, the agency has heard reports that some current combinationsof child restraints and rear safety belt systems may be incompatible. Forexample, some have said that a rear set lap/shoulder belt may be too shortto fit around a child safety seat. NHTSA is also aware that a task forceof the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) has developed a draft testprocedure involving a test fixture, to assist both vehicle manufacturersand child seat manufacturers to prevent any future incompatibilities. Theagency specifically solicits comments on the current magnitude of the incompatibilityproblem, whether a requirement for integrated lap/shoulder belts mightexacerbate this problem, and whether NHTSA should include in any finalrule on this proposal a minimum length requirement for rear seat belts,or some other performance requirements that will ensure that child restraintscan be used in all passenger-carrying vehicles.After a child has outgrown a car seat, the child can be protected by placinghim or her in a type of child restraint called a ``booster seat.'' Boosterseats are often designed to use vehicle shoulder belts to provide additionalupper torso restraint. Thus, children protected by those types of boosterseats should experience some incremental safety benefits from this proposalto require lap/shoulder belts in rear outboard seating positions.However, NHTSA acknowledges that many parents do not use booster seatsto protect their children after the children have outgrown car seats, althoughbooster seats provide better protection, by using the shoulder belt tooffer upper torso support, than lap belts alone. Many of these childrenare not yet big enough to use the shoulder belt in the rear seat, evenwhen they slide as far inboard as possible, since it could pass over theirneck or face. When a shoulder belt passes over a child's face or neck,the agency recommends that a booster seat be used for the child. If a boosterseat is not used, the shoulder belt should be routed behind the child,and the child should be protected only by the lap belt. Once the childis large enough for the shoulder belt to fit properly, the child shouldwear the shoulder belt for maximum safety protection.Accordingly, the agency believes that this proposal for rear seat lap/shoulderbelts would offer benefits for children riding in some types of boosterseats, would have no positive or negative effects on children riding inmost designs of car seats and children that are too small to use shoulderbelts, and would offer older children the same incremental safety protectionthat would be afforded adult rear seat occupants. The agency specificallyrequests comments as to whether its tentative assessment of the impactsof this proposed rule on child rear seat occupants is correct.6. The Requirements With Which Rear Seat Lap/Shoulder Belts Must ComplyThe ANPRM asked commenters to provide data on testing in which test dummieswere restrained by lap/shoulder belts in the rear seat. This request forcomments reflected NHTSA's belief in the desirability of crash testingto determine compliance with occupant protection requirements. Crash testingis the most representative surrogate measure of the protection affordedvehicle occupants during an actual crash. Accordingly, Standard No. 208was recently amended to provide that manual lap/shoulder belts installedin the front outboard seating positions of most light trucks and MPVs mustmeet the occupant protection requirements applicable to automatic restraintsystems in cars, beginning September 1, 1991. The standard also providesthat, if the automatic restraint requirement is rescinded, all passengercars with manual lap/shoulder belts installed in the front outboard seatingposition must meet dynamic testing requirements, beginning September 1,1989. Additionally, passenger cars with air bags at the driver's positionare permitted to have manual lap/shoulder belts at the right front passenger'sposition until September 1, 1993, but those manual belts must meet theautomatic restraint occupant protection requirements, beginning September1, 1989.Several commenters to the ANPRM alleged that there were a number of technicalissues that must be resolved before any requirement for crash testing ofrear seat belts could be implemented. For example, Ford argued that the50th percentile adult male dummy (the specified size for the test dummy)would not be representative of the typical rear seat occupant, more thanhalf of whom are teenagers and younger children. Ford also argued thatthe 50th percentile adult male dummy may not readily fit in many rear seatswith the front seat in the mid-range adjustment position. Even if thatdummy would fit in the rear seats of the vehicle being tested, Ford notedthat there is currently no procedure for positioning a test dummy in anyrear seating positions. Ford asserted that past experience with positioningtest dummies in front seating positions suggests that considerable timeand effort will be needed to develop a rear seat positioning procedurethat accurately and repeatedly positions dummies in rear seats.General Motors (GM) stated its belief that the current occupant injurylimits specified in Standard No. 208 can be met in a 30 mile per hour barriercrash test by lap/shoulder belt restrained dummies in rear outboard seats.GM submitted some confidential testing results to support this belief.Notwithstanding this belief, GM argued that any crash testing requirementfor rear seat occupant protection would not be practicable, because thecost of certification would be approximately doubled, if rear seats weretested separately. If rear seats were required to be tested simultaneouslywith front seat automatic restraints, GM suggested that it might have toretest all vehicles it had previously certified as complying with the frontseat requirements, to ensure that the presence of instrumented dummiesin the rear seat did not affect the measured crash responses of the dummiesin the front seat.A number of other manufacturers commented that a requirement for crashtesting would move the United States farther away from harmonization withthe European requirements. These commenters urged the agency to adopt arequirement for rear seat belts that was harmonized with ECE 14, whichdoes not require vehicle dynamic testing.NHTSA agrees with Ford and GM that neither dummy positioning proceduresnor testing procedures for rear seat occupants have yet been developed.In addition, when NHTSA conducts its Standard No. 208 compliance testingfor front seat automatic restraints, it generally removes the rear seatsto allow it to achieve more easily the specified weight distribution andto more readily accommodate additional instrumentation. Additionally, theneed for crash test verification of a vehicle's occupant protection inrear seating positions may be less than in front seating positions. Therear seating positions offer a relatively more benign crash environment,bacause only seat backs are in front of the occupant, not a steering wheel,instrument panel, and so forth encountered by front seat occupants. Therefore,this notice does not propose that safety belts for rear seat occupantsbe subject to any additional testing requirements. Instead, those safetybelts would continue to be required to comply with the requirements ofStandard No. 209, in the case of the belt assemblies, and Standard No.210 in the case of the anchorages.The decision not to propose any crash testing requirements leads NHTSAto also propose that rear lap/shoulder belts must be integral, i.e., thelap belt must not be detachable from the shoulder belt. Standard No. 208permits manufacturers to install manual belt systems in front outboardseating positions of some percentage of their passenger cars until September1, 1989. Section S4.1.2.3.1 specifies that manual belts installed at frontoutboard seating positions must be either (a) integral lap/shoulder beltsor (b) crash-tested lap belts such that the car complies with the occupantprotection requirements when test dummies are restrained only by the lapbelts. In practice, all vehicles have complied with this option by installingintegral lap/shoulder belts. NHTSA believes it is appropriate to extendthe requirement for integral lap/shoulder belts to those that would berequired in rear outboard seats under this proposal.Only one commenter to the ANPRM addressed the issue of whether lap/shoulderbelts in the rear should be required to be integral. Ford stated that rearseat lap/shoulder belts should be nonintegral for several reasons. First,Ford commented that a large percentage of rear seat occupants are subteenchildren for whom shoulder belt use may not be appropriate because of theirsize. Second, Ford commented that most of its van-type MPV's are equippedwith readily removable seats. Ford stated that the lap belts for theseseats are mounted on the seat frame so that the belts are removed alongwith the seats. However, Ford believes that the seat frames cannot be designedto provide the anchorage for both lap and shoulder belts. Hence, Ford suggestedthat nonintegral lap/shoulder belts be permitted, so that it could continueto anchor lap belts on the readily removable seats in MPV's.The agency does not believe that either of these points is sufficientlypersuasive to permit nonintegral lap/shoulder belts to be installed underthis proposed rule. Nonintegral shoulder belts require the occupant toseparately buckle a lap belt and a shoulder belt. The agency long ago determinedthat nonintegral shoulder belts result in a lower use rate for shoulderbelts. This lower use rate means that nonintegral shoulder belts offersafety benefits significantly below the level estimated for integral shoulderbelts. Thus, Standard No. 208 has required lap/shoulder belts installedat front outboard seating positions to be integral for all cars manufacturedon or after September 1, 1973 (37 FR 3911; February 24, 1972).NHTSA does not disagree with Ford's contention that, for children thatare too small to wear a shoulder belt, it would probably be more convenientto just detach the shoulder belt from the lap belt instead of routing theintegral shoulder belt behind them. However, the convenience of detachabilitywould also result in lower use of the shoulder belt in general. Lower useof shoulder belts than estimated would yield correspondingly lesser benefitsthan estimated.Ford's example of the convenience of nonintegral shoulder belts for thereadily removable seats in MPV's is another particular situation in whicha nonintegral shoulder belt would be more convenient for an occupant. Again,however, the detachability would lead to lower shoulder belt use and lowersafety benefits. The agency also believes that manufacturers are capableof designing an integral lap/shoulder belt system that would be nearlyas convenient as a nonintegral shoulder belt in MPV's with readily removableseats. For instance, a shoulder belt that is readily detachable at theanchorage could be used for the outboard seating positions.7. Comfort and ConvenienceThe ANPRM noted that in November 1985, the agency had amended StandardNo. 208 to establish a new set of performance requirements aimed at makingsafety belts easier to put on and more comfortable to wear. Several ofthose performance requirements, such as the requirements in S7.4.6 thatare designed to prevent safety belts from slipping between the seat cushions,apply to both the front and rear seats. Thus, those requirements wouldapply to rear seat lap/shoulder belts without any additional amendmentsin this proposal.However, the ANPRM also noted that some of the performance requirementsapply only to automatic or manual lap/shoulder belts installed in the frontseat of vehicles. For example, S7.4.3 limits the pressure that can be exertedon an occupant by a shoulder belt, but applies only to front seats. TheANPRM asked for comments on whether the safety belt comfort and conveniencerequirements that apply to front seat manual lap/shoulder belts shouldbe extended to apply to rear seat lap/shoulder belts.The American Seat Belt Council commented that, ``Considerations for comfortand convenience of seat belts should apply equally in front or rear seatapplications. The actual requirements will not necessarily be identicalbut will rather be appropriate analogous requirements.'' On the other hand,many of the manufacturers commented that the comfort and convenience requirementsin S7.4 of Standard No. 208 depend on the use of a properly positionedtest dummy in the seating position, and that no dummy positioning procedureshad been proposed for rear seating positions. The manufacturers commentedthat several different factors would have to be considered in developingdummy positioning procedures for rear seating positions, because the dummiesare not as flexible as human occupants.The purpose of the comfort and convenience requirements in Standard No.208 is to promote increased safety belt use by eliminating objectionableor bothersome characteristics associated with some safety belt system designs.NHTSA believes that this purpose is equally applicable and appropriatefor rear seating positions. However, the commenters were correct in notingthat compliance with S7.4.2 through S7.4.5 is determined with referenceto a test dummy. The agency believes that a properly positioned dummy isthe best surrogate measurement of a belt system's comfort and conveniencefor actual occupants. Other surrogate measurements could be used, suchas requirements for performance at a specified percentage of a belt's fullextension or by reference to a zone around a seating position. However,NHTSA has not yet developed any alternative surrogate measurements forcomfort and convenience in rear seating positions. As is the case withcrash testing requirements discussed above, the agency does not believeit would be appropriate to delay this rulemaking to allow the agency todevelop a full set of comfort and convenience requirements.The performance requirements in S7.4.6, <T3>Seat belt guides and hardware</T3>, currently apply to all manual seatbelt assemblies, whether installed in front or rear seats. This noticedoes not propose to exempt rear seat lap/shoulder belts from these requirements.Hence, they will also apply to manual lap/shoulder belts installed in compliancewith this proposed rule.One remaining issue in this area relates to tension-relieving devices onrear seat lap/shoulder belts. The agency has repeatedly stated that theadded potential to improve belt fit and the added comfort of shoulder beltsequipped with tension-relieving devices is desirable in certain circumstances,because those features could serve to enhance proper belt use. <T3>See, e.g., </T3>50 FR 46056; November 6, 1985. However, the agencyhas also expressed its concern that <T3>excessive </T3>slack could compromise belt effectiveness. On balance,the agency concluded that tension-relieving devices should continue tobe permitted on belt assemblies, but that certain special conditions (i.e.,those specified in S7.4.2 of Standard No. 208) should apply to vehiclesthat had belt assemblies at front outboard seating positions that wereequipped with tension-relieving devices, so as to reduce the likelihoodof misuse.NHTSA believes that the same considerations should apply to rear outboardseating positions that have belt assemblies equipped with tension-relievingdevices. The requirements of S7.4.2 for front outboard seating positionsthat have belt assemblies equipped with tension relieving devices are:1. The vehicle owner's manual must include an explanation of how the tension-relievingdevice works and recommend a maximum amount of slack that should be introducedinto the belt under normal circumstances (S7.4.2(b));2. The vehicle must comply with the injury criteria specified in S5.1 ofStandard No. 208 during a barrier crash test with the shoulder belt webbingadjusted to introduce the maximum amount of slack recommended by the manufacturer(S7.4.2(a)); and3. The vehicle must have an automatic means to cancel any shoulder beltslack introduced into the belt system by a tension-relieving device (S7.4.2(c)).The second requirement listed above cannot be applied to rear seat lap-shoulderbelts equipped with tension-relieving devices at this time, because theagency is not yet in a position to propose rear seat dummy positioningprocedures. However, this notice proposes to apply the other two requirementslisted above to rear seat lap/shoulder belts equipped with tension-relievingdevices. As explained above, the agency believes that the need for crashtesting of rear seating positions may be less compelling than for frontseating positions, because the rear seat is generally a more benign crashenvironment. Even absent a crash testing provision, the agency has tentativelyconcluded that requirements that information on proper use of rear seattension-relieving devices be provided in the owner's manual and that anyslack be automatically cancelled under certain conditions will adequatelyserve to minimize the likelihood of misuse of tension-relieving deviceson rear seat belt assemblies. Given the importance of increasing rear satbelt use, this notice proposes to permit tension-relieving devices on rearseat lap/shoulder belts subject to these two requirements, and requestscomments on this issue. NHTSA is particularly interested in learning commenters'views as to whether the absence of a dynamic testing requirement for tension-relievingdevices in the rear seat might permit a net degradation of safety becauseof occupant misuse of the devices.8. Relationship of This Proposal to Standard No. 210Standard No. 210, <T3>Seat Belt Assembly Anchorages </T3>(49 CFR 571.210), establishes requirementsfor belt assembly anchorages, to ensure that belt assemblies will provideeffective occupant protection. Section S4.1.1 of Standard No. 210 providesthat seat belt anchorages for a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be installedfor each forward-facing outboard designated seating position in passengercars other than convertibles, and for each designated seating positionfor which a Type 2 seat belt assembly is required by andSection; 571.208in vehicles other than passenger cars. The Type 2 seat belt assembly to which the Standard refers is a lap/shoulderbelt. Hence, all passenger cars other than convertibles are already requiredto provide anchorages for a lap/shoulder belt at forward-facing rear outboardseating positions. Hence, passenger cars other than convertibles wouldonly be required to have seat belt assemblies installed on existing anchoragesto comply with this proposed rule. Convertibles are currently exempted from this requirement in Standard No.210. As explained above, NHTSA is proposing to require that convertiblescomply with this proposed requirement for rear seat lap/shoulder belts.This requirement would not achieve the anticipated benefits if those lap/shoulderbelts are not effectively anchored to the convertible. Hence, this noticeproposes to amend Standard No. 210 to delete the existing exemption forconvertibles from rear seat lap/shoulder belt anchorages. S4.1.1 of Standard No. 210 would automatically require anchorages for rearseat lap/shoulder belts in all other vehicle types covered by this proposal,since it requires such anchorages when Standard No. 208 requires lap/shoulderbelts. This notice proposes to amend Standard No. 208, so there is no needto propose to amend Standard No. 210 as it applies to these vehicle types.<T3>9. Proposed Timing for Applying These Requirements to Vehicle Types</T3>As explained above, it would be a relatively simply matter for manufacturersof passenger cars other than convertibles to comply with this proposedrequirement for rear seat lap/shoulder belts, since those vehicles arealready required to be equipped with anchorages for such belts. The onlyadditional steps that would be needed for these cars would be the installationof the lap/shoulder belt assemblies. While some time may be needed to changethe production process to accomplish such installations, that time shouldnot be very long. This is particularly true because so many manufacturersare already planning to have rear lap/shoulder belts in their 1990 modelyear cars. Accordingly, this notice proposes that the requirements forrear seat lap/shoulder belts in passenger cars other than convertiblesapply to cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1989. In the case of convertibles and the other vehicle types covered by thisproposal, it would not be so relatively simply to comply with these proposedrequirements. Since these vehicles are not currently required to have anchoragesfor rear seat lap/shoulder belts, those anchorages would have to be installed.In many cases, such installations would require structural changes to thevehicles. NHTSA recognizes that it would be necessary to give the manufacturerssufficient time to make the engineering and design changes necessary toinstall rear lap/shoulder belts. Some of the commenters to the ANPRM pointedout difficulties that would be presented for existing designs of vehiclemodels in complying with a requirement for rear seat lap/shoulder belts.To accommodate these legitimate needs, while ensuring that rear seat lap/shoulderbelts would be available as soon as practicable, this notice proposes thata final rule apply to convertible passenger cars and the other vehicletypes discussed in this notice manufactured on or after September 1, 1991.<ITAG tagnum="84">Economic and Other Impacts Associated With This Proposal </ITAG>NHTSA has analyzed this proposal and determined that it is not ``major''within the meaning of Executive Order 12291. The information currentlyavailable to the agency about the manufacturers' plans to voluntarily installrear seat lap/shoulder belts is that 99.4 percent of all cars will havethose belts installed by the dates proposed in this rule, that 94.4 percentof utility vehicles will have rear seat lap/shoulder belts voluntarilyinstalled by the proposed dates, 98.0 percent of compact vans will haverear seat lap/shoulder belts installed by the proposed dates, and 100 percentof light trucks, standard vans, and small buses will have rear seat lap/shoulderbelts installed by the proposed dates. The manufacturers of these vehicleshave chosen to install rear seat lap/shoulder belts absent any regulatoryrequirement to do so, so the costs of those rear seat lap/shoulder beltsare not treated as a cost attributable to this rule. The costs to manufacturersto install rear seat lap/shoulder belts in those vehicles that would nothave these belts if this rule is not made final are estimated to be $1.5million. This is well below the $100 million costs that are needed to classifya rule as ``major'' for the purposes of Executive Order 12291. This proposal is, however, ``significant'' within the meaning of the Departmentof Transportation regulatory policies and procedures, because of the publicinterest in this proposal. In accordance with the requirements of the Department'sregulatory policies and procedures, a Preliminary Regulatory Evaluation(PRE) has been prepared for this proposal, and a copy of the PRE has beenplaced in the public docket for this rulemaking action. A copy of the PREmay be obtained by writing to: Docket Section, NHTSA, Room 5109, 400 SeventhStreet SW., Washington, DC 20590. Additionally, the agency has analyzed the effects of this proposal on smallentities, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act. Based on thisanalysis, I hereby certify that this proposal, if adopted as a final rule,would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number ofsmall entities. Few, if any, of the vehicle manufacturers qualify as smallentities. To the extent that any vehicle manufacturers qualify as smallentities, their number would not be substantial. The proposed requirementswould not affect the manufacturing process of any safety belt manufacturersthat are small entities, nor will it significantly affect the retail priceof vehicles purchased by any small organizations or small governmentalunits. The agency has also analyzed this proposal under the National EnvironmentalPolicy Act and determined that it would not have a significant effect onthe human environment, if it were adopted as a final rule. This proposal has also been analyzed in accordance with the principlesand criteria contained in Executive Order 12612, and NHTSA has determinedthat this proposal does not have sufficient federalism implications towarrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has already approved NHTSA'srequirement that instructions appear in a vehicle owner's manual concerningthe proper use of any tension-relieving devices installed at front outboardseating positions in cars (OMB andplusmin;2127-0541). However, this proposalwould expand the scope of that requirement to apply to rear outboard seatingpositions of cars and other vehicle types. This expansion is consideredto be an information collection requirement, as that term is defined byOMB in 5 CFR Part 1320. Accordingly, this proposed requirement will besubmitted to OMB for its approval, pursuant to the requirements of thePaperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>). Comments on this proposed information collection requirementshould be submitted to: Office of Management and Budget, Office of Informationand Regulatory Affairs, Washington, DC 20503, Attention: Desk Officer forNHTSA. It is requested that comments sent to the OMB also be sent to theNHTSA rulemaking docket for this proposed action. Interested persons are invited to submit comments on the proposal. It isrequested but not required that 10 copies be submitted. All comments must not exceed 15 pages in length. (49 CFR 553.21). Necessaryattachments may be appended to these submissions without regard to the15-page limit. This limitation is intended to encourage commenters to detailtheir primary arguments in a concise fashion. If a commenter wishes to submit certain information under a claim of confidentiality,three copies of the complete submission, including purportedly confidentialbusiness information, should be submitted to the Chief Counsel, NHTSA,at the street address given above, and seven copies from which the purportedlyconfidential information has been deleted should be submitted to the DocketSection. A request for confidentiality should be accompanied by a coverletter setting forth the information specified in the agency's confidentialbusiness information regulation. 49 CFR Part 512. All comments received before the close of business on the comment closingdate indicated above for the proposal will be considered, and will be availablefor examination in the docket at the above address both before and afterthat date. To the extent possible, comments filed after the closing datewill also be considered. Comments received too late for consideration inregard to the final rule will be considered as suggestions for furtherrulemaking action. Comments on the proposal will be available for inspectionin the docket. The NHTSA will continue to file relevant information asit becomes available in the docket after the closing date, and it is recommendedthat interested persons continue to examine the docket for new material.Those persons desiring to be notified upon receipt of their comments inthe rules docket should enclose a self-addressed, stamped postcard in theenvelope with their comments. Upon receiving the comments, the docket supervisorwill return the postcard by mail. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 49 CFR Part 571 </ITAG>Imports, Motor vehicle safety, Motor vehicles. In consideration of the foregoing, NHTSA proposes to amend 49 CFR andSection;andSection;571.208 and 571.210 as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 571_[AMENDED] </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 571 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 15 U.S.C. 1392, 1401, 1403, 1407; delegation of authorityat 49 CFR 1.50.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 571.208 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>2. S4.1.4 of Standard No. 208 would be revised to read as follows:S4.1.4 <T3>Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1989.</T3>S4.1.4.1 Except as provided in S4.1.5 and S4.1.4.2, each passenger carmanufactured on or after September 1, 1989 shall comply with the requirementsof S4.1.2.1. Until September 1, 1993, each car whose driver's designatedseating position complies with the requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) by meansnot including any type of seat belt and whose right front designated seatingposition is equipped with a manual Type 2 seat belt that meets the requirementsof S5.1, with the Type 2 seat belt assembly adjusted in accordance withS7.4.2, shall be counted as a vehicle complying with S4.1.2.1. A vehicleshall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturerestablishes that it did not have reason to know in the exercise of duecare that such vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of thisstandard.S4.1.4.2 Each passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1989shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly at every forward-facingrear outboard designated seating position. Type 2 seat belt assembliesinstalled in compliance with this requirement shall comply with StandardNo. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If aType 2 seat belt assembly installed in compliance with this requirementincorporates any webbing tension-relieving device, the vehicle owner'smanual shall include the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standardfor the tension-relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c)of this standard.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. S4.1.5.1 of Standard No. 208 would be revised to read as follows:S4.1.5.1 If the Secretary of Transportation determines, by not later thanApril 1, 1989, that State mandatory safety belt usage laws have been enactedthat meet the criteria specified in S4.1.5.2 and that are applicable tonot less than two-thirds of the total population of the 50 States and theDistrict of Columbia (based on the most recent Estimates of the ResidentPopulation of States, by Age, Current Population Reports, Series P-25,Bureau of the Census), each passenger car manufactured under S4.1.3 orS4.1.4 on or after the date of that determination shall comply with therequirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3. If such a determinationis made, each passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1989shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly at every forward-facingrear outboard designated seating position. Type 2 seat belt assembliesinstalled in compliance with this requirement shall comply with StandardNo. 209 (49 CFR andSection; 571.209) and with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.If a Type 2 seat belt assembly installed in compliance with this requirementincorporates any webbing tension-relieving device, the vehicle owner'smanual shall include the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standardfor the tension-relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c)of this standard.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>4. A new S4.2.4 would be added to Standard No. 208, to read as follows:S4.2.4 <T3>Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles manufactured on or afterSeptember 1, 1991 with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less.</T3> Each truckand each multipurpose passenger vehicle, except a motor home, manufacturedon or after September 1, 1991 that has a gross vehicle weight rating of10,000 pounds or less shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat beltassembly at every forward-facing rear outboard designated seating position.Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed in compliance with this requirementshall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR andSection; 571.209) and withS7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 seat belt assembly installedin compliance with this requirement incorporates any webbing tension-relievingdevice, the vehicle owner's manual shall include the information specifiedin S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the tension-relieving device, and thevehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c) of this standard. As used in this section,``motor home'' means a motor vehicle with motive power that is designedto provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidenced by the presenceof at least four of the following facilities: cooking; refrigeration orice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air conditioning; a potablewater supply system including a faucet and sink; and a separate 110-125volt electrical power supply and/or an LP gas supply.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>5. S4.4 of Standard No. 208 would be amended by adding a new S4.4.3 toread as follows:S4.4 <T3>Buses.</T3><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>S4.4.3 <T3>Buses manufactured on or after September 1, 1991.</T3>S4.4.3.1 Each bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000pounds shall comply with the requirements of S4.4.2.1 or S4.4.2.2.S4.4.3.2 Each bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds orless shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly at thedriver's designated seating position and at every forward-facing outboarddesignated seating position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed in compliancewith this requirement shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209)and with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. The lap belt portion of a Type2 seat belt assembly installed at the driver's seating position shall includean automatic locking retractor, which retractor shall not retract webbingto the next locking position until at least \3/4\ inch of webbing has movedinto the retractor. In determining whether an automatic locking retractorcomplies with this requirement, the webbing is extended to 75 percent ofits length and the retractor is locked after the initial adjustment. Ifa Type 2 seat belt assembly installed in compliance with this requirementincorporates any webbing tension-relieving device, the vehicle owner'smanual shall include the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standardfor the tension-relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c)of this standard.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>6. S7.1.1 of Standard No. 208 would be revised to read as follows:S7.1 <T3>Adjustment</T3>.S.7.1.1 Except as specified in S7.1.1.1 and S7.1.1.2, the lap belt of anyseat belt assembly furnished in accordance with S4.1.1 and S4.1.2 shalladjust by means of an automatic locking retractor that complies with andSection;571.209 to fit persons whose dimensions range from those of a 50th percentile6-year-old child to those of a 95th percentile adult male and the uppertorso restraint shall adjust by means of an emergency locking retractoror a manual adjusting device that complies with andSection; 571.209 to fitpersons whose dimensions range from those of a 5th percentile adult femaleto those of a 95th percentile adult male, with the seat in any positionand the seat back in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position.However, an upper torso restraint furnished in accordance with S4.1.2.3.1(a)shall adjust by means of an emergency-locking retractor that complies withandSection; 571.209. In the case of a swivel seat, the seat shall complywith the above requirements with the seat in any position in which it canbe occupied while the vehicle is in motion and with the seat back in themanufacturer's nominal design riding position.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 571.210 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>7. S4.1.1 of Standard No. 210 would be revised to read as follows:S4.1.1 Seat belt anchorages for a Type 2 belt assembly shall be installedfor each forward-facing outboard designated seating position in passengercars other than convertibles and for each designating seating positionfor which a Type 2 seat belt assembly is required by Standard No. 208 (49CFR andSection; 571.208) in vehicles other than passenger cars. Seat beltanchorages for a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be installed for eachrear forward-facing outboard designated seating position in convertiblepassenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1991.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on November 23, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Barry Felrice,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Administrator for Rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-27509 Filed 11-25-88; 9:55 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>