<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88823-0016 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-23-88.f2.A1015</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">10 CFR Part 52 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Early Site Permits; Standard Design Certifications; and Combined Licensesfor Nuclear Power Reactors </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Nuclear Regulatory Commission is considering addinga new Part to its regulations which would provide for issuance of earlysite permits, standard design certifications, and combined constructionpermits and conditional operating licenses for nuclear power reactors.The proposed rule sets out the review procedures and licensing requirementsthat would apply to applications for these new licenses and certifications.The proposed action is intended to achieve the early resolution of licensingissues, thereby enhancing the safety and reliability of nuclear power plants,and reducing the complexity and uncertainty of the licensing process.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>The comment period expires October 24, 1988. Comments receivedafter this date will be considered if practical to do so, but only thosecomments received on or before this date can be assured of consideration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments may be sent to the Secretary of the Commission,Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, or may be hand-delivered to One White Flint North,11555 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852, between 7:30 am and 4:15 pmweekdays. Copies of comments received may be examined at the Commission'sPublic Document Room at 1717 H Street NW., Washington, DC, between thehours of 7:45 am and 4:15 pm weekdays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Steven Crockett, Attorney, Officeof the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington,DC 20555, telephone: (301) 492-1600.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Public Meeting</ITAG>The NRC staff will conduct a public meeting to answer questions on themeaning and intent of any of the provisions of this proposed rule, andto hear and, if appropriate, respond to preliminary views on any of theprovisions of this proposed rule. It is hoped that such a meeting wouldbe helpful to persons who intend to submit written comments on the proposedrule. The meetings will begin at 9:00 am, on September 16, 1988, in theConference Theater of the Crowne Plaza Holiday Inn, 1750 Rockville Pike,Rockville, Maryland 20852, telephone (301) 468-1100. <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background </ITAG>The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has long believed that standardized nuclearpower plant designs and other means of achieving early resolution of licensingissues could significantly enhance the safety and reliability of nuclearplants, and could likewise enhance public participation in the licensingprocess while reducing the complexity and uncertainty of that process.The considerable variation in the design, construction, operation and maintenanceof nuclear plants has led to an operating reactor population of great variabilityand diversity, even among reactors from the same vendor. While giving freedomto innovation during the early years of the industry, when innovation wasmost needed, the ``one-of-a-kind'' approach may also have hindered thegrowth of significant economies of scale of benefit to safety and to theefficiency and predictability of regulation. Standardization of reactordesigns should result in greater accumulation of construction and operatingexperience with a given design, easier transfer of that experience fromone reactor to another, and more easily maintained qualified vendor support,all of which should advance safe and reliable operation. Moreover, by permittingearly identification and resolution of safety issues, standardization andother means of achieving early resolution of licensing issues should affordpublic participants in the licensing process an earlier entry into thatprocess, greatly reduce the number and importance of safety issues whichare decided late in the process, and permit a speedy, yet thorough, NRCstaff review whenever an application incorporates a certified standardizeddesign. Thus, early resolution of issues should lead to a simpler and morepredictable licensing process. Through such devices as early site reviews, final design approvals, andreviews of duplicate and replicate plants, the NRC has for some time offeredapplicants the means to achieve a degree of standardization and to reachearly resolution of issues. The NRC will continue to offer these means.\1\<NOTE/> However, it is the opinion of the Commission that the nuclearpower industry is now sufficiently advanced in technology and organizationto enable applicants to submit essentially complete designs or major portionsthereof for certification by rulemaking before construction and thus securethe benefits of a greater degree of standardization and early resolutionof issues. Moreover, the NRC now has under review several designs whichare amenable to standardization, and the industry is showing increasinginterest in these designs. For the past several years, the Commission haspursued Congressional affirmation of the goals of standardization in theform of a Nuclear Power Plant Standardization and Licensing Act. However,much of what this proposed legislation would provide can be put into effectnow, under the Commission's existing statutory authority. The Commissiontherefore proposes to add to its regulations a new Part, which is describedin Sections II-V below.  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The NRC's current policy on replication appears in thisFederal Register notice after this Supplementary information. The Commissionwelcomes comment on this policy, in particular on whether the NRC shouldcontinue to offer the option of replication.The Commission announced its intention to pursue rulemaking on standardizationin its recent Policy Statement on Nuclear Power Plant Standardization (52FR 34884; September 15, 1987). The Policy Statement, now superceded bythis proposed rule and preamble, described the Commission's experiencewith standardization, set out the Commission's reasons for pursuing a greaterdegree of standardization, and outlined some of the crucial elements theCommission would seek to embody in a rule. The Policy Statement providedfor a sixty-day comment period and gave notice that a public workshop wouldbe held during the comment period so that the NRC and interested partiescould have a more thorough  discussion of the Policy Statement and thepending rulemaking than written comments alone would permit. The workshopwas held in Bethesda on October 20, 1987, with representatives of the NRCstaff, the Department of Energy, and the industry participating. Duringthe Workshop, the NRC outlined the proposed rule and answered preliminaryquestions about it. A transcript of the workshop may be found in the Commission'spublic document room, 1717 H Street, NW., Washington, DC 20555. During the comment period, the Commission received comments from six organizationsand two individuals. Chief among the comments were the highly detailedones submitted by the Nuclear Management and Resources Council (NUMARC),which were endorsed, or at least reflected to a large degree, by the commentssubmitted by the other organizations, among them two engineering firmsand three reactor manufacturers. These comments also may be found in theCommission's Public Document Room in Washington, DC. This proposed ruleincorporates many of the suggestions made in the comments. For instance,the rule provides for certification of ``advanced'' designs, establishesa rulemaking process which goes beyond notice and comment, provides thata design certification remains in effect during the proceeding on a requestfor renewal of the certification, and does not make the granting of a combinedlicense dependent upon State and local government certification of willingnessto participate in emergency planning, although it does seek the earliestpossible resolution of emergency planning issues. In some instances, the proposed rule does not incorporate suggestions madein the comments. These suggestions and our reasons for not including themare discussed in the appropriate places in Sections III, IV, and V below.In Section VI we raise certain questions on which we would appreciate comment.Some of these questions have to do with suggestions we have not incorporatedin the proposed rule. Although many intervenors have long supported standardization, even tothe point of arguing that the Commission should make standardization mandatory,some of the comments on the Policy Statement opposed standardization. Inparticular, one individual claimed that standardization will stifle engineeringingenuity, close the public out of the licensing process, spread the safetyproblems of a given design to a large number of reactors, and eventuallymeet defeat at the hands of a multitude of site-specific changes to a certifieddesign. This individual also claimed that it was not the proper role ofthe Commission to ``enhance the availability of nuclear plants'', as theCommission had put it in its Policy Statement on Standardization, or to``give priority'' to standardization rather than the safety problems ofpresent plants. To the contrary, the Commission believes that competition among designerswill more than adequately encourage ingenuity, that the public will bebetter able to participate in the licensing process if it is given an essentiallycomplete design even before any plant of that design is built, that gooddesign, thorough regulatory review, and long experience with nuclear powershould together go a long way to preclude significant safety problems incertified designs, and that the proposed rule's restrictions on changesin certified designs should assure a lasting and high degree of standardization.Under the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, the Commission is not permittedto develop nuclear power plants and then regulate what it has developed,but it may nonetheless do what it can by way of sound procedural mechanismsand appropriate distribution of resources to encourage and enable othersto develop better designs and build better plants. The principal aim insuch ``enhancement'' is, as always, public health and safety. In the lightof this overarching aim, the Commission's statement that it intends togive priority to standardized designs and the like must not be misreadto mean that the safety of the presently operating plants will become lessimportant than the review of standardized designs. This is not the casenow and will not become so. The Commission means only to give priorityamong applicants to those proffering or referencing standardized designsand early site permits. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. General Scope and Structure </ITAG>Part 52 is intended to improve the licensing of nuclear power plants bythe use of three procedural innovations, two of which have been in partialuse by the Commission for several years. The first of these is the earlysite permit or site-bank concept, already in partial use through the proceduresof Appendix Q to 10 CFR Part 50. Subpart A of Part 52 formalizes the earlysite approval process, allowing a prospective applicant to obtain a permitfor one or more pre-approved sites on which future nuclear power stationscan be located. Subpart B carries forward the standard design approvalprocess of Appendix O to Part 50 in much the same way, allowing a prospectiveapplicant, vendor, or other interested party to obtain Commission approvalof a design of a complete nuclear power plant or a major portion of sucha plant. Subpart C establishes procedures for the issuance of a combinedconstruction permit and conditional operating license (hereafter referredto as a combined license) for a nuclear power plant. The combined licenseis essentially a construction permit which also requires considerationand resolution of many of the issues currently considered at the operatinglicense stage. It does not authorize operation. Operation will be authorizedonly after the Commission has decided that the relevant license conditionshave been met. The procedures also provide an opportunity for a hearingon carefully-defined issues before operation is authorized. Although apre-approved site and certified standard design need not be referencedfor the combined license, maximum efficiency will result if site-relatedissues, as well as design-related issues, have been resolved before commencementof the combined license proceeding. This structure reveals the overall purpose of Part 52: to improve reactorsafety and to streamline the licensing process by encouraging the use ofstandard designs and by permitting early resolution of environmental andsafety issues related to the reactor site and design. As a result, thescope of the combined license proceeding for a facility can be far morelimited than the scope of the two-step licensing process currently in use.Similarly, after the combined license proceeding, the regulatory matterswhich would remain for resolution before authorization to operate underthe combined license would be much more limited and well-defined than arethe issues which remain to be resolved in an operating license proceedingunder the current practice. All three subparts of the proposed Part 52 draw heavily on existing provisionsin 10 CFR Part 50 and its appendices. Reference to pre-existing sectionsobviates the need to repeat identical provisions. In addition, most ofthe provisions of Part 50 have been in use for many years and are commonlyunderstood by applicants, intervenors, and the NRC staff. Finally, Part50 should remain intact because licensing under it may be expected to continuefor some time in parallel with licensing under the improved proceduresof Part 52. If, in the future, all licensing is conducted under Part 52,the two parts can be combined into a single part containing all provisionsapplicable to the licensing of production and utilization facilities.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Definitions_Section 52.3</ITAG>This section contains largely self-explanatory definitions of ``combinedlicense,'' ``early site permit,'' ``standard design,'' and ``standard designcertification''. The omnibus provision in paragraph (e) incorporates otheruseful definitions from Part 50 and the Atomic Energy Act. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Subpart A_Early Site Permits </ITAG>This subpart allows any prospective applicant for a construction permitor a combined license under Subpart C to apply for an early site permit,notwithstanding the fact that an application for a construction permitor combined license for a facility has not been filed. Filing requirementsare set out in andSection;andSection; 52.15 and 52.17. The application shoulddescribe, among other things, the number, type, and thermal power levelof the facilities for which the site may be used. Section 52.17(b) requiresthat the application contain a plan for redress of the site for use inthe event that site preparation activities are performed under the permitand the permit expires without having been referenced in an applicationfor a construction permit or a combined license under Subpart C of Part52. Finally, andSection; 52.17(c) requires the application to demonstratethat the area surrounding the site is amenable to emergency planning whichwould provide reasonable assurance that adequate protective measures couldbe taken in the event of a radiological emergency at the site. This lastparagraph of andSection; 52.17 also requires the application to include adescription of contacts and arrangements made with local, state, and federalagencies with responsibility for coping with emergencies. Section 52.19, along with conforming amendments to 10 CFR Part 170 whichare currently being made as part of a general revision of Part 170, establisha new procedure for collection of fees associated with the review of anapplication for an early site permit or a renewal thereof. The applicantfor the permit will be assessed these fees only when an application referencingthe early site permit is filed while the permit is valid. If no applicationreferencing the early site permit is filed, the permit holder must paythese fees at the end of the initial twenty-year period. Fees for a renewedpermit will be assessed in the same manner. However, if an applicationfor an early site permit or renewal is denied or withdrawn, any outstandingfees will be immediately due and payable by the applicant for the permitor renewal. Section 52.21 states that an early site permit is a Commission license,and is subject to the applicable procedural requirements of 10 CFR Part2. The issues presented in an early site permit proceeding are to a considerableextent environmental, but because they also involve significant safetyissues, a report by the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS)on the permit application is required by andSection; 52.23. Section 52.25 provides that issuance of an early site permit allows theholder of the permit to conduct site preparation activities without havingto seek prior NRC approval. The holder possesses what is commonly referredto as an ``LWA-1'' for the site and may perform the activities permittedin 10 CFR 50.10(e)(1). Section 52.25 also requires redress of the siteif the permit is not renewed and not referenced in an application. An early site permit is valid for an initial period of twenty years (andSection;52.27) and may, upon application, be extended for periods of up to twentyyears each (andSection; 52.29), provided certain criteria are met (andSection;52.31). Section 52.29 provides that any person whose interests may be affectedby renewal of the permit may request a hearing. An early site permit for which a timely application for renewal has beenfiled remains in effect until the Commission has determined whether torenew the permit. If an early site permit is not renewed, it continuesto be valid in any proceeding on an application for a construction permitor a combined license which references the early site permit and was docketedprior to the expiration of the early site permit (andSection; 52.29(c)).An application for renewal must be filed not less than twelve nor morethan thirty-six months prior to the expiration date (andSection; 52.29(a)).An approved site may be used for purposes not related to the constructionof a nuclear power facility (for example, a fossil-fueled station or apark) provided that the Commission is informed of all significant non-nuclearuses prior to actual construction or site modification activities (andSection;52.35). A permit may be revoked if a non-nuclear use would interfere witha nuclear use, or would so alter the site that important assumptions underlyingissuance of the permit were called into question. Section 52.39(a) provides that, notwithstanding the provision in 10 CFR50.109 for backfits aimed at substantial increases beyond adequate protection,during the initial or renewal period in which an early site permit is ineffect, the Commission may not impose more stringent requirements on theearly site permit or the site for which the permit was issued unless theCommission determines either that significant new information shows thatmore stringent requirements are necessary to bring the site or the permitinto compliance with the Commission's regulations and orders in effectat the beginning of the initial or renewal period, or that more stringentrequirements are necessary for adequate protection of the public healthand safety. Section 52.39(b) provides that an applicant for a constructionpermit, operating license, or combined license, or an amendment to sucha license, who has filed an application referencing an early site permitmay request a variance from one or more elements of the permit. <ITAG tagnum="84">V. Subpart B_Certified Standard Designs </ITAG>The Commission's existing rules regarding standard designs are found inAppendices M, N, and O, to 10 CFR Part 50. Appendix M concerns licensesto manufacture one or more nuclear power reactors to be installed and operatedat sites not identified in the license application. Appendix N concernslicenses to construct and operate nuclear power reactors of duplicate designat multiple sites. Appendix O governs the staff review and approval ofstandard designs for an entire nuclear power reactor or a major portionthereof, and includes a provision for Commission approval of a standarddesign in a rulemaking proceeding. This Subpart concerns only the latterprovision of Appendix O. Subpart B is intended to set forth the proceduresand requirements for Commission approval of standard designs by rulemaking.The term ``certification'' is used for this approval to distinguish itfrom the preliminary and final staff approval of standard designs as setforth in Appendix O.Section 52.43 addresses the relationship of Subpart B to Appendices M,N, and O of 10 CFR Part 50, as described in the preceding paragraph. TheseAppendices represent different approaches to standardization and will remainin effect, as will the replicate plant approach to standardization. AppendicesM and N may be used independently of Subpart B unless the applicant alsowishes to use a certified standard design. A final design approval underAppendix O is a prerequisite for certification of a standard design underthis Subpart. An application for a final design approval must state whetherthe applicant intends to seek certification of the design, because staffreview of a design for which certification is sought may be different fromstaff review of a design for which only a final design approval is sought.For the same reason, anyone who holds a final design approval on the effectivedate of this rule and wishes to apply for certification of the design mustobtain a new final design approval. However, the application in this casemay simply update and supplement the application which was filed for theoriginal final design approval, and the staff's review of the new applicationneed not revisit issues settled in the original review. Sections 52.45 and 52.47 contain the requirements for filing and contentsof applications for certifications of designs. These sections are draftedin general terms so that Part 52 will not have to be amended every timethe information and safety criteria in 10 CFR Parts 20, 50, 73, and 100undergo some further development. The NRC staff is currently developingsafety criteria for application in the review of advanced reactor designs.These criteria will define minimum safety requirements for advanced reactorsand will provide for assessment and documentation of the enhanced safetythe Commission expects these reactor designs to embody. Part 52 deals onlywith procedural aspects of the certification of reactor designs. The staffwill advise the prospective applicant for certification on precisely whatinformation is required for the staff's consideration of the application.Certification of a reactor design which differs significantly from a reactordesion which has been built and operated may be granted only after thedesign has been shown to be sufficiently mature. There is a presumptionin andSection; 52.45 of the proposed rule that this maturity will have tobe demonstrated through comprehensive testing of a prototype. The samesection of the rule sets forth the criteria which must be satisfied ifthe presumption is to be overcome. The same criteria must be satisfiedby any applicant proposing to demonstrate the maturity of a design by meansof a prototype of only part of the design. If an applicant for a constructionpermit or combined license under this Part chooses to reference a finaldesign approval for a design whose maturity must be demonstrated by prototypeand has not yet been so demonstrated, the applicant will be subject tothe requirements of andSection; 50.34(a)(8) regarding research and developmentto confirm the adequacy of the design. Ideally, designs for which certification is sought will be for an essentiallycomplete plant. The designs would make more straightforward the preparationof a probabilistic risk assessment and safety analysis and would help minimizethe extent of the staff's review of the license applications which referencea single design. The designs would also help assure that no two plantsof the same design would vary significantly from each other. For thesereasons, the NRC will give priority in allocation of resources to supportreview and approval of applications for essentially complete designs. However,the NRC will entertain applications for certification of a major portionof a plant if, and only if, that portion contains all buildings, structures,systems, and components that can significantly affect the safe operationof the plant. See andSection; 52.45(d) below. Applications for certification of any design must contain a level of detailcomparable to that required for a final design approval under AppendixO and sufficient to enable the staff to judge the applicant's proposedmeans of assuring that construction conforms to design, and to reach afinal conclusion on all matters which must be decided before the certificationcan be granted. See andSection; 52.47 below. Section 52.49 parallels andSection; 52.19 with regard to fees. Conformingamendments are being made to Part 170 as part of the general revision ofthat Part. One engineering firm argued that fees would be a substantialdisincentive to potential applicants for certification. And, of course,any fee the NRC charges is to some degree a disincentive. However, theagency is now legally bound to charge fees which account for a substantialpart of its budget. Design review will require substantial resources which,under a series of statutes going back to the Independent Offices AppropriationsAct, the agency must recoup at least in part. However, the Commission is free under current law to lessen the disincentiveeffect of the fees it must charge for review of standardized designs. Therefore,in addition to not charging an application fee, the NRC will defer anyfees associated with review of the application, pending the filing of applicationsfor construction permits or combined licenses referencing the certifiedstandard design. Any outstanding fees will become due and payable by theholder of the design certification at the end of the initial period ofthe certification. Fees for the renewal of a standard design certificationwill be assessed in the same manner. Section 52.51 provides that a standard design certification is a rule thatwill be issued in accordance with the provisions of Subpart H of 10 CFRPart 2. Subpart H of 10 CFR Part 2 implements section 553 of the AdministrativeProcedure Act for NRC rulemaking proceedings. 10 CFR 2.805(b) providesthat the Commission may hold informal hearings and may structure them asthe Commission determines will best serve the purposes of the proceeding.In addition to notice of an application for a design certification, andan opportunity to provide written comments on the application, the Commissionwill provide an opportunity to request an informal hearing on the applicationbefore an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board. Any hearing held will providean opportunity for written presentations made under oath or affirmation,and for oral presentations and questioning if the Board finds them eithernecessary for the creation of an adequate record, or the most expeditiousway to resolve controversies. Ordinarily, the questioning will be doneby members of the Board, using the Board's questions or questions submittedto the Board by the parties. The Board may also request authority to useadditional procedures such as discovery, or may request that the Commissionconvene a formal adjudication on discrete issues involving substantialdisputes of fact, necessary for the Commission's decision, that cannotbe resolved with sufficient accuracy except in formal adjudication. Thestaff will be a party in any informal hearing, and the decision in thehearing will be based only on information on which all parties to the hearinghave had an opportunity to comment. The major issues associated with the review of an application for a certifiedstandard design concern the safety features of the design. Section 52.53therefore provides for mandatory ACRS review of the application. Reviewby the ACRS will be limited to issues on which the ACRS has not made findingsand recommendations in any earlier review of the design. The Commissionmay, of course, ask the ACRS to report on any matter within its expertise.The certified standard design will initially be valid for ten years (andSection;52.55), but it may be renewed, upon application, for periods of an additionalfive to ten years each (andSection; 52.57). The procedures to be used fora rulemaking proceeding on the application for renewal must be those requiredfor rulemakings on applications for initial certification of designs. Adesign certification for which a timely application for renewal has beenfiled remains in effect until the Commission has determined whether torenew the certification. If the certification is not renewed, it continuesto be valid in any proceeding ultimately based on an application whichreferences the certified design and was docketed prior to the expirationof the certification (andSection; 52.57(b)). Section 52.59 contains the criteria for evaluating an application for renewal.The initial burden is on the applicant to show that the design complieswith the Atomic Energy Act and all the Commission's regulations other thanthe design certification itself. During the rulemaking on the applicationfor renewal, the Commission may, in addition to requiring that the designconform to current regulations and orders, impose more stringent safetyrequirements on the certification, but only if the Commission determinesthat there is a substantial increase in overall protection of the publichealth and safety or the common defense and security to be derived fromthe more stringent requirements and that the direct and indirect costsof implementation of those requirements are justified in view of this increasedprotection. If a renewal application is denied, the applicant may revisethe design and file a new application for a standard design certification.See andSection; 52.59(b). The stability of a certified standard design is essential to the conceptof standardization. For this purpose, andSection; 52.63 contains provisionswhose purpose is to preserve design stability against three possible sourcesof change. First, 52.63(a), which parallels andSection; 52.39 for early sitepermits, provides that, during the initial or renewal period in which adesign certification is in effect, the Commission will not require designchanges unless the Commission determines, in a notice and comment rulemaking,that significant new information shows that the changes are necessary tobring the design or the plants referencing it into compliance with theCommission's regulations and orders in effect when the certification wasissued or renewed, or that the changes are necessary for adequate protectionof public health and safety. Of course, as the Atomic Energy Act requires,the Commission will make such determinations without regard to economiccosts. Modifications to a design certification rule will be applied toall plants referencing the certified design. The Commission believes that carrying out modifications by way of rulemakingwill not hamper the Commission's ability to act quickly in the event thatplants referencing a certified design pose undue risks. There is no reasonwhy such a rulemaking should proceed less quickly than a license amendmentproceeding for the same purpose. Indeed, the procedures for rulemakingwould appear to be simpler than those for license amendment. Moreover,the Commission has the authority to issue immediately effective interimrules, pending completion of final rulemaking resolutions of undue riskissues.Members of the public may challenge a design certification rule by meansof petitions for rulemaking and, during licensing proceedings on applicationswhich reference a standardized design, only by claims that adequate protectionof public health and safety, or compliance with the Commission's regulationsand orders, requires modification of the rule. NUMARC urged that a designcertification rule be subject to challenge by a member of the public onlyin a rulemaking proceeding. However, members of the public cannot be barredfrom making claims in a proceeding that the criteria by which the Commissionis to make its decision on the application are not met. Moreover, paragraph7 of Appendix O to 10 CFR Part 50, of which Subpart B of the proposed ruleis an elaboration, provides for challenge to the design certification ruleoutside of rulemaking. Second among the provisions aimed at maintaining stability for certifieddesigns, andSection; 52.63(b) provides that the holder of a design certificationmay request an amendment to the design by way of notice and comment rulemaking.The Commission will grant the amendment if it complies with the AtomicEnergy Act and the Commission's regulations and orders. An amendment toa design certification initiated by the holder of the certification willbe applied to all plants referencing the design only if the amendment isnecessary for adequate protection of the public health and safety. Third and last, andSection; 52.63(c), which parallels 52.39(b) for earlysite permits, provides that a licensee or an applicant for a facility licenseor amendment which references a certified standard design may request anexemption from one or more elements of the design certification rule. TheCommission will grant the request if it complies with the requirementsof 10 CFR 50.12(a). NUMARC suggested that a lesser standard than andSection;50.12 be applied to a request for an exemption, namely, that the requestfor an exemption simply meet the Commission's regulations (except, of course,for the particular design certification regulation itself). However, theCommission believes that the benefits of standardization will not be fullyachieved unless significant site-specific variation among plants referencinga given certified design is kept to an irreducible minimum. In harmonywith the aim of keeping variation to a minimum, andSection; 52.63(d) permitsthe licensee of a plant built according to a standardized design to makea change to the standardized portion of the plant, without prior Commissionapproval, only if the change does not involve changes to the design asdescribed in the rule certifying the design, or in the certifying ruletogether with any exemption which may have been granted the licensee underandSection; 52.63(c). <ITAG tagnum="85">VI. Subpart C_Combined Construction Permits and Conditional OperatingLicenses </ITAG>Section 161h of the Atomic Energy Act and 10 CFR 50.52 provide that theCommission may issue a single license for several activities which couldotherwise be licensed separately. However, this provision has not beenapplied to construction permits and operating licenses for nuclear powerplants. Indeed, the current licensing process has not changed substantiallysince it was originally enacted. In the early years of the nuclear powerindustry, there were many first-time nuclear plant applicants, designers,and consultants, and many novel design concepts. Accordingly, the processwas structured to allow licensing decisions to be made while design workwas still in progress and to focus on case-specific reviews of individualplant and site considerations. Construction permits were commonly issuedwith the understanding that open safety issues would be addressed and resolvedduring construction, and that issuance of a construction permit did notconstitute Commission approval of any design feature. Consequently, theoperating license review was very broad in scope. Now that the nuclearindustry has matured, it is possible to describe and evaluate plant designson a generic basis, to have designs essentially complete in scope and levelof detail prior to construction, and to propose and evaluate plant siteswithout plant design details. These circumstances make it possible to combinethe construction permit proceeding with much of the operating license proceedinginto a single proceeding for the issuance of a combined construction permitand conditional operating license. Full-power operation can then be authorizedunder the combined license following an opportunity for a hearing on amore limited set of carefully defined issues. The application for a combined license may, but need not, reference a standarddesign which has been certified under Subpart B, or a site for which anearly site permit has been issued under Subpart A (andSection; 52.73). Ifthe facility is to be of a design which has been certified, the scope ofthe proceeding on the application for a facility license is narrowed, themajor safety questions having been resolved in the earlier rulemaking onthe design. Similarly, if the facility is to be located on a site for whichan early site permit has been issued, the scope of the facility licenseproceeding is further narrowed. If an early site permit is not referenced,the early site review procedures of 10 CFR Part 2 remain available to expeditethe environmental review. Obviously, the efficiency and effectiveness ofthe combined licensing process is maximized if both a certified standarddesign and a pre-approved site are referenced. For this reason, the Commissionanticipates that this will be the preferred approach, particularly withregard to standard designs. In order to encourage standardization, theCommission will give priority among applications to those which referencecertified standard designs and pre-approved sites. Sections 52.75 throuoh 52.79 contain the requirements for filing and contentsof applications. It should be noted that an environmental report is notrequired if a pre-approved site is proposed for the facility (andSection;52.77). The applicant must make good faith efforts to obtain certificationsfrom responsible State and local governmental agencies that the proposedemergency plans are practicable and that the responsible agencies are committedto execution of their responsibilities under the plans. If the certificationscannot be obtained, the applicant must nonetheless demonstrate that theproposed plans provide reasonable assurance that adequate protective measureswill be taken in the event of a radiological emergency at the plant (andSection;52.79(d)). The antitrust review will be conducted as it has been done inthe past for construction permit applications. Because the antitrust reviewcan proceed in parallel with the technical review, the antitrust reviewshould not affect the efficiency of the combined license proceeding.Sections 52.81 and 52.83 incorporate, where appropriate, the technicalstandards and requirements of Part 50 as they would be applied to powerplant license applicants and licensees under the existing system. Thatis, applications for a combined license will be reviewed according to thePart 50 standards for construction permits and operating licenses, whereappropriate (andSection; 52.81), and holders of Part 52 combined licenseswill be held to the appropriate Part 50 standards for plants under constructionor, upon authorization for operation, in operation (andSection; 52.83). Alllimitations contained in the Part 50 provisions (for example, requirementsfor plants receiving operating licenses after a certain date) carry forwardto Part 52. The combined license hearing will be governed by the appropriate sectionsof 10 CFR Part 2 (andSection; 52.85). ACRS review of the application is mandatory(andSection; 52.87), although the scope of the report will be much narrowerif the application references a certified standard design or a pre-approvedsite that the ACRS has previously reviewed. Section 52.89 provides that,if the application references an approved site or a certified standarddesign, the environmental review must focus on the suitability of the sitefor the design and any other significant environmental issue not consideredin any previous proceeding on the site or the design. It should be notedthat because both the early site permit and the standard design certificationrequire the preparation of an environmental impact statement, only an environmentalassessment need be prepared in connection with the application for a combinedlicense. If the application does not reference a pre-approved site, theusual Part 51 procedures must be followed for review of the environmentalpart of the application. As noted above in the discussion of Subpart A, once the application fora combined license has been docketed, an applicant who plans to use a sitefor which an early site permit has been issued may perform ``LWA-1'' activities(see andSection; 50.10(e)(1)) without prior NRC approval. If the applicationdoes not reference an approved site, the applicant must request this authorizationbefore performing ``LWA-1'' activities (andSection; 52.91). If the activitiesare carried out and the application is withdrawn or denied, redress ofthe site will, in some cases, be required. To perform ``LWA-2'' activities,all applicants must seek authorization from the Licensing Board under andSection;50.10(e)(3)(i), which allows further construction activities at the siteprior to issuance of a construction permit or combined license. Section 52.93 governs the extent to which a certified standard design oran early site permit may be modified by the applicant during a proceedingon an application for a combined license. As provided in andSection; 52.93(a),the applicant may request an exemption from one or more elements of thedesign for that particular facility. The Commission will grant the requestif it complies with the requirements of 10 CFR 50.12(a). As provided inandSection; 52.93(b), if the application for the combined license referencesan early site permit, the applicant may also request a variance from someelement of the permit. Section 52.97 provides that the Commission may issue a combined licensefor a facility if the applicable requirements of andSection;andSection; 50.40,50.42, 50.43 and 50.50 have been met and there is reasonable assurancethat the facility will be constructed and operated in conformity with thelicense, the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, and the Commission'sregulations. In addition to technical specifications, the license willinclude the inspections, tests, and analyses that the licensee shall performand the acceptance criteria therefor which will provide reasonable assurancethat the facility has been constructed and will be operated in accordancewith those requirements. The Commission will verify the licensee's compliancethose requirements through its inspection program (andSection; 52.99). Section 105c. of the Atomic Energy Act requires that the Commission determinewhether ``significant changes'' have taken place with respect to the antitrustsituation during the review of an application for an operating license.This is done because the competitive circumstances could alter markedlybetween the issuance of the construction permit and the completion of thefacility. The proceeding on the application for a combined license includesconsideration of the antitrust situation. However, because operation undera combined license cannot be authorized until the plant is constructed,andSection; 52.101 provides for possible further antitrust review at thestage when authorization of operation is being considered. If significantchanges have occurred since issuance of the combined license, the statutoryantitrust review must precede commercial operation of the facility andcould result in the imposition of additional license conditions. However,because most issues will be decided prior to issuance of a combined license,and because the scope of the proceeding authorizing operation under thelicense will be correspondingly narrowed, the time between issuance ofthe combined license and the authorization of operation should be shortenough to make significant changes in the antitrust situation unlikely.Before the facility may operate, the holder of the combined license mustapply for authorization of operation under the combined license. The Commissionwill publish a notice of the proposed authorization in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>pursuant to 10 CFR 2.105. Within 30 days, anyperson whose interests may be affected by the authorization may requesta hearing on the basis (1) that there has been a nonconformance with thelicense, the licensee's written commitments, the Atomic Energy Act, orthe Commission's regulations and orders, which has not been corrected andwhich could materially and adversely affect the safe operation of the facility;or (2) that some modification to the site or the design is necessary toassure adequate protection of public health and safety or the common defenseand security. The petitioner must set forth with reasonable specificitythe facts and arguments which form the basis for the request. These provisionsare designed to accord finality to the Commission's earlier decisions regardingthe facility and to assure that the operating license proceeding is focusedon significant safety issues.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Commission Questions </ITAG>The Commission will, of course, appreciate receiving comment on any aspectof this proposed rule. However, the Commission will be particularly appreciativeof comment on the following questions: 1. In implementing by rulemaking the Commission's legislative proposalson standardization, does this proposed rule take full advantage of theCommission's authority under the Atomic Energy Act? Does it in any wayexceed the Commission's authority? 2. Should a design certification take the form of a license rather thana rule? Does the Commission have the authority under existing law to licensea design? NUMARC believes that the rights and obligations which attachto a license may be more clearly understood than those which would attachto a certification which took the form of a rule. The proposed rule accordswith paragraph 7 of Appendix O to 10 CFR Part 50 in treating the certificationas a rule. Rulemaking may provide greater procedural flexibility than alicense proceeding does, and certification by rule would be open to a widerpool of applicants than certification by license (see 10 CFR 50.38). 3. What procedures are appropriate for design certification by rulemaking?4. Should the Commission require, as part of a certified standard design,the standardization of construction practices, operation and maintenancepractices, quality assurance, and personnel training? 5. Section 52.45(d) of the proposed rule says that the NRC will entertainan application for certification of a design of only a major portion ofa plant only if that portion contains all buildings, structures, systems,and components that can ``significantly affect the safe operation of theplant''. The intent of this language is to rule out of consideration forcertification any incomplete design in which events in the balance of plantcould have an adverse impact on the safety of that portion of the plantfor which certification is sought. Would some phrase other than ``significantlyaffect the safe operation of the plant'' better serve as a standard bywhich to determine whether to accept an application for certification ofan incomplete design? Should the NRC, in addition, require of any suchapplication a showing of good cause, or the like, for seeking certificationof a design of less than full scope? On the other hand, should the language of andSection; 52.45(d) be more lenientand permit an application for certification of a design of a major portionof a plant, as long as the application contains the requirements for theinterface between the portion for which certification is sought and allbuildings, structures, systems, and components which can ``significantlyaffect the safe operation of the plant,'' but does not contain the detaileddesign for such buildings, structures, systems, and components? Such anapproach would be more consistent with the legislation the Commission proposedin March of 1987. Section 104 of the proposed legislation would entertainan application for certification of ``any major subsystem which representsa discrete element'' of a nuclear power facility. 6. What are the appropriate standards to apply to a request by a holderof a design certification to amend the certification? If the amendmentis granted, should all plants which reference the certification be requiredto backfit to comply with the amended certification, or only some, as requiredby the proposed rule? 7. In order to prevent continual regression from standardization amongplants initially built according to the same design, should stricter standardsthan those in 10 CFR 50.12 be applied to requests for exemptions from adesign certification rule? 8. The proposed rule generally permits the NRC to impose modificationson site permits and design certifications only for the sake of complianceor adequate protection. Under the proposed rule, only when an early sitepermit or a design certification comes up for renewal would the NRC beable to impose modifications which went beyond requiring adequate protection.Does the proposed rule provide a reasonable degree of finality to earlysite permits and design certifications? 9. The proposed rule places a term of twenty years on early site permitsand allows for an unlimited number of renewals of up to twenty years each.Should a longer or shorter term be placed on the permit? What should therespective burdens of the permit holder and the NRC be at renewal? 10. How might the proposed rule provide for a ``sign-as-you-go'' processof NRC inspection of a plant being constructed according to a certifieddesign? NUMARC suggested instituting such a process in order to securethe earliest possible resolution of quality assurance and design conformancequestions. The NRC encourages the earliest possible resolution of thesequestions. To this end, the rule requires applications for design certificationsand combined licenses to propose for inclusion in the certification orlicense inspections, tests, analyses, and related acceptance criteria whichwill help provide reasonable assurance that the facility has been wellconstructed. See andSection;andSection; 52.47 and 52.79 of the proposed rule.Moreover, the NRC would, during construction authorized by this part, devotethe resources necessary to achieve the earliest possible staff-level identificationand resolution of quality assurance and design conformance questions. However,the NRC does not see how Commission-level finality can be afforded theresolution of such questions without risking an almost continual hearingon the construction of the plant. 11. The National Governors' Association adopted the following Recommendation,among others, at its 79th annual meeting, July 26-28, 1987: ``In the future,emergency plans should be approved by the NRC before it issues the constructionpermit for any new nuclear power plant.'' To what extent should approvalof emergency plans be required before an early site permit or a combinedlicense is issued? Are the provisions of the proposed rule adequate inthis regard? See andSection;andSection; 52.17(c) and 52.79(d). 12. The staff is considering whether there is a need for further rulemakingor guidance for future reactors, both light-water reactors and other types,to assure that future license applications adequately address the Commission'sSafety Goal Policy Statement (51 FR 30028; August 21, 1986), and the licensingcriteria set forth in the Commission's Severe Accident Policy Statement(50 FR 32138; August 8, 1985), particularly the criteria that call fordemonstration of compliance with the applicable parts of 10 CFR 50.34(f)and completion of a probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) together with asystematic consideration of any severe accident vulnerabilities the PRAmight expose. Is the language in andSection;andSection; 52.47(a) and 52.47(b)sufficient to assure that future applications adequately address thesematters? Given the Commission's guidance, in its Policy Statement on SafetyGoals for the Operation of Nuclear Power Plants, that the Safety Goalsshould not be used to make individual licensing decisions (51 FR at 30031-32),should the rule contain the requirement in andSection; 52.47(b)(3) that anapplicant provide ``a realistic assessment of the degree to which the designconforms to the Commission's Safety Goals''? <ITAG tagnum="84">Replicate Plant Concept </ITAG>The replicate plant concept involves an application by a utility for alicense to construct or operate one or more nuclear power plants of essentiallythe same design as one already licensed.The design of the plant already licensed (termed the base plant design)may be replicated at both the construction permit and operating licensestages, and in applications for combined construction permits and operatinglicenses in a one-step licensing process. Replication of an approved baseplant design at the construction permit stage is a prerequisite for itsreplication at the operating license stage. Although replication of thebase plant design at the operating license stage is not mandatory, thatis, the operating license application may be submitted as a custom plantapplication, it is strongly recommended. An application for a replicate plant must demonstrate compliance with thefour licensing requirements for new plant designs as set forth in the Commission'sSevere Accident Policy Statement (50 FR 32138; August 8, 1985). Each application proposing to replicate a previously licensed plant willbe subjected to a qualification review to determine the acceptability ofthe base plant for replication and to define specific matters that mustbe addressed in the application for the replicate plant. A further requirementfor qualification is that the application for a replicate plant must besubmitted within five years of the date of issuance of the staff safetyevaluation report for the base plant. The qualification review will considerthe following information: (1) The arrangement made with the developers of the base plant design forits replication; (2) The compatibility of the base plant design with the characteristicsof the site proposed for the replicate plant; (3) A description of any changes to the base plant design, with justificationfor the changes; (4) The status of any matters identified for the base plant design in thesafety evaluation report, or subsequently identified by the ACRS or duringthe public hearings on the base plant application as requiring later resolution;(5) Identification of the major contractors, with justification for theacceptability of any that are different than those used by the base plantapplicant; and (6) A discussion of how the replicate plant design will conform to anychanges to the Commission's regulations which have become effective sincethe issuance of the license for the base plant. <ITAG tagnum="84">Environmental Impact: Categorical Exclusion </ITAG>The proposed rules would amend the procedures currently found in Part 50and its appendices for the filing and reviewing of applications for constructionpermits, operating licenses, early site reviews, and standard design approvals.As such they meet the eligibility criteria for the categorical exclusionset forth in 10 CFR andSection; 51.22(c)(3). That section applies to ``[a]mendmentsto * * * Part[] 50 * * * which relate to (i) procedures for filing andreviewing applications for licenses or construction permits or other formsof permission * * *.'' As the Commission explained in promulgating thisexclusion, ``[a]lthough amendments of this type affect substantive partsof the Commission's regulations, the amendments themselves relate solelyto matters of procedure. [They] * * * do not have an effect on the environment.''(49 FR 9352, 9371, col. 3; March 12, 1984) (final environmental protectionregulations).\2\<NOTE/> Accordingly, pursuant to 10 CFR 51.22(b), no environmentalimpact statement or environmental assessment need be prepared in connectionwith these proposed rules.\3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ It makes no substantive difference for the purpose ofthe categorical exclusion that the proposed amendments will be placed inPart 52 rather than in Part 50. The amendments are, in fact, amendmentsto the Part 50 procedures and could have been placed in that Part. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The requirements concerning testing of full-size prototypesof advanced reactors, see andSection; 52.45(c) of the proposed rule, mayappear not to fit into the category excluded by andSection; 51.22(c)(3),since to comply with the requirement, an applicant most likely will haveto build and test a prototype plant, an act clearly with an environmentalimpact. Nonetheless, andSection; 52.45(c) is eligible for exclusion underandSection; 51.22(c)(3). Unlike, for instance, the promulgation of a safetyrule which applies to operating plants, the formal action of promulgatingandSection; 52.45(c) will have only a potential impact on the environment.That impact becomes actual only if a designer chooses to pursue certificationof an advanced design. Under the present circumstances, no meaningful environmentalassessment or impact statement can be made. Cf. 49 FR at 9372, cols. 2-3(entering into an agreement with a State under Section 274 of the AtomicEnergy Act has no immediate or measurable environmental impact and thereforewarrants a categorical exclusion). The issuance of the construction permitand operating license for a prototype plant would, of course, be a majorfederal action with a significant impact on the environment, and wouldentail the preparation of an environmental impact statement. Cf. id., col.3 (the States must prepare detailed environmental analyses before theylicense certain activities). <ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act Statement </ITAG>The proposed rule contains information requirements that are subject tothe Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (``the Act'') (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.).This proposed rule will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget(OMB) for review and approval under the requirements of the Act. When theproposed rule is submitted to OMB, the Commission, in compliance with section3507(a)(2)(B) of the Act, will publish a notice in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>stating that the Commission has submitted therule to OMB and setting forth the information which section 3507(a)(2)(B)requires the agency to set forth in the notice. Pending submission of the proposed rule to OMB, it may be useful to commentersto note three aspects of the information collection requirements in thisproposed rule. First, most of them rely on information collection requirementsalready approved by OMB for promulgation in other parts of 10 CFR, particularlyPart 50. Second, the rule is expected to reduce the reporting burden onapplicants for construction permits and operating licenses for nuclearplants, because any person seeking a Part 52 combined license which referencesa Part 52 early site permit and a Part 52 design certification will, simplyby referencing the permit and certification, be relieved of the burdenof providing much of the information Part 50 requires of applicants forconstruction permits and operating licenses. Third, the public reportingburdens which would be imposed by Part 52 are estimated to range from alow for an early site permit (which would require only part of the informationrequired for a construction permit) to a high for certification of an advancedreactor design (which probably would involve the licensing under Part 50of a full-size prototype). The Commission welcomes any suggestions for reducing the burdens whichwould be imposed by the information collection requirements in the proposedrule. The numbers of the sections of the proposed rule which set forththe information requirements are listed in andSection; 52.8 of the proposedrule. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Analysis </ITAG>As presently constituted, the American population of nuclear power reactorsconsists largely of one-of-a-kind designs. Experience has shown that thehighly individualistic character of this population has consumed enormousresources in the processes of design, construction, and safety review.Because, typically, design of a plant was not complete when constructionof it began, many safety questions were not resolved until late in thelicensing proceeding for that plant. This late resolution of questionsintroduced great uncertainty into proceedings, because the process of resolutionoften entailed lengthy safety reviews, construction delays, and backfits.Moreover, the low incidence of duplication among designs has meant thatexperience gained in the construction and operation of a given plant hasoften not been useful in the construction and operation of any other plant,and has made the generic resolution of continuing safety issues more complicated.In the face of this experience with a population of unique plants, therehave long been fundamentally only three alternatives for Commission action,the last two of them not mutually exclusive: either make no effort to bringabout an increased degree of standardization, or propose legislation onstandardization, or enact by rulemaking as much of a scheme for promotingstandardization as the Commission's current statutory authority permits.The Commission has for some time concluded against the first alternative,having decided that a substantial increase in standardization would enhancethe safety and reliability of nuclear power plants and require fewer resourcesin safety reviews of plants, and that the Commission should have in placeprovisions for the review of standardized designs and other devices forassuring early resolution of safety questions. The Commission has thereforepursued standardization both by proposing legislation_without success_andby promulgating rules, in particular Appendices M, N, and O to Part 50of 10 CFR. Lacking legislation on standardization, the Commission believesthat the most suitable alternative for encouraging further standardizationis to fill out and expand the Commission's regulatory scheme for standardizationand early resolution of safety issues. Therefore, the Commission now proposes to promulgate a new set of regulations,to be placed in a new Part, 10 CFR Part 52. This new Part facilitates theearly resolution of safety issues by providing for pre-construction-permitapproval of power plant sites, Commission certification of standardizeddesigns, and the issuance of licenses which combine permission to constructa plant with a conditional permission to operate it once construction ofit has been successfully completed. Ideally, a future applicant will reference an approved site and a certifieddesign in an application for a combined license, thus obviating the needfor an extensive review of the application and construction. The provisionin Part 52 for Commission certification of designs has the additional objectiveof encouraging the use of standardized designs, thereby adding to the benefitsof early resolution the safety benefits of accumulated experience and theeconomic benefits of economies of scale and transferable experience. Quantification of the costs and benefits of this rulemaking is probablynot possible. Much depends on the extent to which the industry pursuesstandardization. Clearly, if the Commission and the industry spend theresources necessary to certify a score of designs and then no applicantreferences any of them, those resources will have been largely wasted.On the other hand, it is just as clear that if a score of plants uses asingle certified design, there will have been a great saving of the resourcesof the industry, the agency, and the interested public alike. To be addedto the uncertainties surrounding the industry's response, there are alsouncertainties concerning the costs of the certification process, and thecosts of developing the designs themselves, especially the advanced designs,which, it is presumed, will require testing of prototypes. However, ifthe industry finds it in its interest to proceed with the development ofnuclear power, there is every reason to expect that the safety and economicbenefits of standardization will far outweigh the upfront costs of designand Commission certification: Review time for applications for licenseswill be drastically reduced, the public brought in to the process beforeconstruction, construction times shortened, economies of scale created,reliability of plant performance increased, maintenance made easier, qualifiedvendor support made easier to maintain, and, most important, safety enhanced.Thus, the rationale for proceeding with this rulemaking: There is no absoluteassurance that certified designs will in fact be used by the utilities;however, it is certain that if the reasonably expected benefits of standardizationare to be gained, then the Commission must have the procedural mechanismsin place for review of applications for early site approvals, design certifications,and combined licenses. The most fundamental choice is, of course, the industry's,to proceed or not with standardization, according to its own weighing ofcosts and benefits. But the Commission must be ready to perform its reviewresponsibilities if the industry chooses standardization. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act Certification </ITAG>The proposed rule will not have a significant impact on a substantial numberof small entities. The proposed rule will reduce the procedural burdenon NRC licensees by improving the reactor licensing process. Nuclear powerplant licensees do not fall within the definition of small businesses insection 3 of the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 632, the Small BusinessSize Standards of the Small Business Administration in 13 CFR Part 121,or the Commission's Size Standards published at 50 FR 50241 (Dec. 9, 1985).The impact on intervenors or potential intervenors will be neutral. Forthe most part, the proposed rules will affect the timing of hearings ratherthan the scope of issues to be heard. For example, many site and designissues will be considered earlier, in connection with the issuance of anearly site permit or standard design certification, rather than later,in connection with a facility licensing proceeding. Similarly, a combinedlicense proceeding will include consideration of many of the issues thatwould ordinarily be deferred until the operating license proceeding. Thus,the timing rather than the cost of participating in NRC licensing proceedingswill be affected. Intervenors may experience some increased preparationcosts if they seek to reopen previously decided issues because of the increasedshowing that will be required. Once a hearing commences, however, an intervenor'scosts should be decreased because the issues will be more clearly definedthan under existing practice. Therefore, in accordance with the RegulatoryFlexibility Act of 1980, 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Commission hereby certifiesthat the proposed rule, if promulgated, will not have a significant economicimpact on a substantial number of small entities and that, therefore, aregulatory flexibility analysis need not be prepared. <ITAG tagnum="84">Backfit Analysis </ITAG>If this proposed rule becomes final, it will not modify or add to the systems,structures, components, or design of a facility; or the design approvalor manufacturing license for a facility; or the procedures or organizationrequired to construct or operate a facility. However, it could be arguedthat this rule will modify and add to the procedures or organization requiredto design a facility, because the rule would add to, or else at least spellout, the requirements for applicants for design certifications. Moreover,the rule, if made final, will, at the very least, substantially modifythe expectations of anyone who had hoped to apply for a design certificationunder the existing paragraph 7 of Appendix O, particularly of any suchwho presently hold preliminary or final design approvals under that Appendix.Nonetheless, the Commission believes that the backfit rule does not applyto this proposed rule and, therefore, that no backfit analysis pursuantto 10 CFR 50.109(c) is required for this proposed rule. The backfit rulewas not intended to apply to every action which substantially changes settledexpectations. Clearly, the backfit rule would not apply to a rule whichwould impose more stringent requirements on all future applicants for constructionpermits, even though such a rule arguably might have an adverse impacton a person who was considering applying for a permit but had not doneso yet. In this latter case, the backfit rule protects the constructionpermit holder, not the prospective applicant, or even the present applicant.The proposed rule below is of the character of such a hypothetical rule.The proposed rule arguably imposes more stringent requirements for designcertification and thereby may have an adverse impact on some persons. However,the effects of any final rule based on this proposed rule will be largelyprospective, and such a final rule will not require any present holderof a design approval (no person holds a design certification) to meet newstandards in order to remain in possession of such an approval.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 10 CFR Part 52 </ITAG>Administrative practice and procedure, Antitrust, Backfitting, Combinedlicense, Early site permit, Emergency planning, Fees, Inspection, Limitedwork authorization, Nuclear power plants and reactors, Probabilistic riskassessment, Prototype, Reactor siting criteria, Redress of site, Reportingand recordkeeping requirements, Standard design, Standard design certification.For the reasons set out in the preamble and under the authority of theAtomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, the Energy Reorganization Act of1974, as amended, and 5 U.S.C. 553, the Commission is proposing to addto 10 CFR Chapter I a new Part 52: <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 52_EARLY SITE PERMITS; STANDARD DESIGN CERTIFICATIONS; AND COMBINEDLICENSES FOR NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">General Provisions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.1 Scope. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.3 Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.8 Information collection requirements: OMB approval. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="76">Subpart A_Early Site Permits </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.11 Scope of subpart. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.13 Relationship to Subpart F of 10 CFR Part 2. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.15 Filing of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.17 Contents of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.18 Standards for review of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.19 Permit and renewal fees. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.21 Hearings. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.23 Referral to the ACRS. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.25 Extent of activities permitted. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.27 Duration of permit. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.29 Application for renewal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.31 Criteria for renewal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.33 Duration of renewal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.35 Use of site for other purposes. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.37 Reporting of defects and noncompliance; revocation, suspension,modification of permits for cause. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.39 Finality of early site permit determinations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="76">Subpart B_Standard Design Certifications </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.41 Scope of subpart. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.43 Relationship to 10 CFR Part 50, Appendices M, N, and O. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.45 Filing of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.47 Contents of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.49 Fees for design certification and certification renewal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.51 Administrative review of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.53 Referral to the ACRS. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.55 Duration of certification. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.57 Application for renewal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.59 Criteria for renewal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.61 Duration of renewal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.63 Finality of standard design certifications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="76">Subpart C_Combined Licenses </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.71 Scope of subpart. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.73 Relationship to Subparts A and B. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.75 Filing of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.77 Contents of applications; general information. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.79 Contents of applications; technical information. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.81 Standards for review of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.83 Applicability of Part 50 provisions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.85 Administrative review of applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.87 Referral to the ACRS. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.89 Environmental review. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.91 Authorization to conduct site activities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.93 Exemptions and variances. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.97 Issuance of combined licenses. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.99 Inspection during construction. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.10  Pre-operational antitrust review. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">52.103 Authorization to operate under a combined license.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 103, 161, 182, 183, 186, 189, 68 Stat. 936, 948,953, 954, 955, 956, as amended, sec. 234, 83 Stat. 1244, as amended (42U.S.C. 2133, 2201, 2232, 2233, 2236, 2239, 2282); secs. 201, 202, 206,88 Stat. 1242, 1244, 1246, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5841, 5842, 5846). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">General Provisions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Scope. </ITAG>This part governs the issuance of early site permits, standard design certifications,and combined construction permits and conditional operating licenses fornuclear power facilities under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(68 Stat. 919), and Title II of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (88Stat. 1242). <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Definitions.  </ITAG>(a) As used in this part_ ``Combined license'' means a combined construction permit and conditionaloperating license for a nuclear power facility issued pursuant to SubpartC of this part. ``Early site permit'' means a Commission approval, issued pursuant to SubpartA of this part, for a site or sites for one or more nuclear power facilities.``Standard design'' means a design which is sufficiently detailed and completeto support licensing of a nuclear power facility or approval of a majorportion of such a facility when referenced in an application for a constructionpermit, combined construction and conditional operating license, or standarddesign certification, as appropriate, and which is usable for a multiplenumber of units or at a multiple number of sites without reopening or repeatingthe review. ``Standard design certification'' means a Commission approval, issued pursuantto Subpart B of this part, of a standard design for a nuclear power facility,or a major portion of such a facility. A design so approved may be referredto as a ``certified standard design''. (b) All other terms in this part have the meaning set out in 10 CFR 50.2,or Section 11 of the Atomic Energy Act, as applicable. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Information collection requirements: OMB approval. </ITAG>(a) The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has submitted the information collectionrequirements contained in this part to the Office of Management and Budget(OMB) for approval as required by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44U.S.C. 3501, et seq.). OMB has approved the information collection requirementscontained in this part under control number 3150(b)_ .  (b) The approved information collection requirements contained in thispart appear in andSection;andSection; 52.15(b), 52.17, 52.29(a), 52.35, 52.37,52.39(b), 52.45, 52.47, 52.57(a), 52.63(b), 52.63(c), 52.75, 52.77, 52.79,52.83, 52.91(a), 52.93, 52.99, 52.101, and 52.103. <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_Early Site Permits </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.11</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Scope of subpart. </ITAG>This subpart sets out the requirements and procedures applicable to Commissionissuance of early site permits for approval of a site or sites for oneor more nuclear power facilities separate from and prior to the filingof an application for a construction permit or combined license for sucha facility.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Relationship to Subpart F of 10 CFR Part 2. </ITAG>The procedures of this subpart do not replace those set out in SubpartF of 10 CFR Part 2. Subpart F applies only when early review of site suitabilityissues is sought in connection with a forthcoming application for a permitto construct certain power facilities. This subpart applies when any personwho may apply for a construction permit under 10 CFR Part 50 or for a combinedlicense under 10 CFR Part 52 seeks an early site permit separately fromand prior to an application for a construction permit for a facility. Thissubpart may not be used once an application has been docketed pursuantto 10 CFR 2.603. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.15</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Filing of applications. </ITAG>(a) Any person who may apply for a construction permit under 10 CFR Part50, or for a combined license under 10 CFR Part 52, may file with the Directorof Nuclear Reactor Regulation an application for an early site permit.An application for an early site permit may be filed notwithstanding thefact that an application for a construction permit or a combined licensehas not been filed in connection with the site or sites for which a permitis sought. (b) The application must comply with the filing requirements of 10 CFR50.30 (a), (b), and (f). <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.17</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contents of applications. </ITAG>(a)(1) The application must contain the information required by 10 CFR50.33 (a)-(d) and 50.34(a)(1). In particular, the application should describethe following: (i) The number, type, and thermal power level of the facilities for whichthe site may be used; (ii) The boundaries of the site; (iii) The proposed general location of each facility on the site; (iv) The anticipated maximum levels of radiological and thermal effluentseach facility will produce; (v) The type of cooling systems, intakes, and outflows that may be associatedwith each facility; (vi) The seismic, meteorological, hydrologic, and geologic characteristicsof the proposed site (see Appendix A to 10 CFR Part 100); and (vii) The existing and projected future population profile of the areasurrounding the site. (2) A complete environmental report as required by 10 CFR 51.45 and 51.50must be included in the application. (b) The application must propose a plan for redress of the site in theevent that the activities permitted by andSection; 52.25(a) are performedand the site permit expires before it is referenced in an application fora construction permit or a combined license issued under Subpart C of thispart. The application must demonstrate that there is reasonable assurancethat redress carried out under the plan will achieve a self-maintaining,environmentally stable, and aesthetically acceptable site suitable forwhatever non-nuclear use may conform with local zoning laws. (c) The application must demonstrate that the area surrounding the siteis amenable to emergency planning which would provide reasonable assurancethat adequate protective measures could be taken in the event of a radiologicalemergency at the site. The application must include a description of contactsand arrangements made with local, state, and federal governmental agencieswith responsibility for coping with emergencies. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Standards for review of applications. </ITAG>Applications filed under this subpart will be reviewed according to theapplicable standards set out in 10 CFR Part 50 and its appendices as theyapply to applications for construction permits for nuclear power plants.In particular, the Commission shall prepare an environmental impact statementduring review of the application, and the Commission shall determine, afterconsultation with the Federal Emergency Management Agency in accord withthe applicable portions of 10 CFR 50.47(a)(2), whether the informationrequired of the applicant by andSection; 52.17(c) demonstrates that the areasurrounding the site is amenable to emergency planning which would providereasonable assurance that adequate protective measures could be taken inthe event of a radiological emergency at the site. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.19</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Permit and renewal fees. </ITAG>The fees charged for the review of an application for the initial issuanceor renewal of an early site permit are those for special projects, as definedin 10 CFR 170.3 and set forth in 10 CFR 170.21. There is no applicationfee. All fees for the review of an application are deferred as follows:(a) If an application is filed for a construction permit or combined licensefor a facility to be located at a site for which an early site permit hasbeen issued, the permit holder shall pay the applicable fees for the permitat the time the facility application referencing the early site permitis filed. If, at the end of the initial period of the permit, no facilityapplication referencing the early site permit has been docketed, the permitholder shall pay any outstanding fees for the permit. (b) If the permit is renewed, the permit holder shall pay any outstandingfees for the renewal at the time a facility application referencing theearly site permit is filed. If, at the end of the renewal period, no facilityapplication referencing the permit has been filed, the permit holder shallpay any outstanding fees for the renewal. (c) If an application for the issuance or renewal of an early site permitis denied or withdrawn, any outstanding fees associated with the reviewof the application are due immediately and payable by the applicant forthe permit or renewal.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.21</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Hearings. </ITAG>An early site permit is a partial construction permit and is thereforesubject to all procedural requirements in 10 CFR Part 2 which are applicableto construction permits, including the requirements for docketing in andSection;andSection;2.101(a) (1)-(4), and the requirements for issuance of a notice of hearingin andSection;andSection; 2.104 (a), (b)(1) (iv) and (v), (b)(2) to the extentit runs parallel to (b)(1) (iv) and (v), and (b)(3). All hearings conductedon applications for early site permits filed under this part are governedby the procedures contained in Part 2. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Referral to the ACRS. </ITAG>The Commission shall refer a copy of the application to the Advisory Committeeon Reactor Safeguards (ACRS). The ACRS shall report on those portions ofthe application which concern safety. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.25</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Extent of activities permitted. </ITAG>(a) The holder of an early site permit may perform the activities at thesite allowed by 10 CFR 50.10(e)(1) without first obtaining the separateauthorization required by that section. (b) If the activities permitted by paragraph (a) of this section are performedat a given site and the permit is not renewed for that site and not referencedin an application for a construction permit or a combined license issuedunder Subpart C of this part, then the permit remains in effect solelyfor the purpose of site redress, and the holder of the permit shall redressthe site in accord with the terms of the site redress plan required byandSection; 52.17(b). If, before redress is complete, a use not envisagedin the redress plan is found for the site or parts thereof, the holderof the permit shall carry out the redress plan to the greatest extent possibleconsistent with the alternate use. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.27</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duration of permit. </ITAG>An early site permit issued under this subpart is valid for twenty yearsfrom the date of issuance. An applicant for a construction permit or combinedlicense may, at its own risk, reference in its application a site for whichan early site permit application has been docketed but not granted. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.29</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for renewal. </ITAG>(a) Not less than twelve nor more than thirty-six months prior to the endof the initial twenty-year period, or any later renewal period, the permitholder may apply for a renewal of the permit. An application for renewalmust contain all information necessary to bring up to date the informationand data contained in the previous application. (b) Any person whose interests may be affected by renewal of the permitmay request a hearing on the application for renewal. The request for ahearing must comply with 10 CFR 2.714. If a hearing is granted, noticeof the hearing will be published in accord with 10 CFR 2.703. (c) An early site permit, either original or renewed, for which a timelyapplication for renewal has been filed, remains in effect until the Commissionhas determined whether to renew the permit. If the permit is not renewed,it continues to be valid in proceedings on an application for a constructionpermit or combined license referencing the permit and docketed before theend of the initial period of the permit, or a later renewal period. Anunrenewed permit also continues to be valid in proceedings on an applicationfor an operating license which is based on a construction permit referencingthe permit and docketed prior to expiration of the permit or renewal. (d) The application for renewal must be forwarded to the Advisory Committeeon Reactor Safeguards (ACRS), which shall review the application and reportits findings and recommendations to the Commission. The ACRS need not reconsiderissues on which it has made findings and recommendations in any earlierreview of the site which is the subject of the application. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.31</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Criteria for renewal. </ITAG>(a) The Commission shall grant the renewal if the Commission determinesthat the site complies with the Atomic Energy Act and the Commission'sregulations and orders in effect at the time of the renewal and any morestringent requirements the Commission may wish to impose after a determinationthat there is a substantial increase in overall protection of the publichealth and safety or the common defense and security to be derived fromthe more stringent requirements and that the direct and indirect costsof implementation of those requirements are justified in view of this increasedprotection. (b) A denial of renewal on this basis does not bar the permit holder oranother applicant from filing a new application for the site which proposeschanges to the site or the way in which it is used which correct the deficienciescited in the denial of the renewal. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.33</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duration of renewal. </ITAG>Each renewal of an early site permit will be for not less than ten normore than twenty years. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.35</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Use of site for other purposes. </ITAG>A site for which an early site permit has been issued under this subpartmay be used for purposes other than those described in the permit, includingthe location of other types of energy facilities. The permit holder shallinform the Director of Nuclear Reactor Regulation of any significant non-nuclearactivities for which the site is to be used. The information about theactivities must be given to the Director in advance of any actual constructionor site modification for the activities. If the Director finds that a particularnon-nuclear use may have a significant adverse effect on the suitabilityof the site for the purposes described in the early site permit, the Directormay issue an order to show cause why the permit should not be revoked ormodified.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.37</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Reporting of defects and noncompliance; revocation, suspension, modificationof permits for cause. </ITAG>For purposes of Part 21 and 10 CFR 50.100, an early site permit is a constructionpermit. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.39</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Finality of early site permit determinations. </ITAG>(a)(1) Notwithstanding any provision in 10 CFR 50.109, during the initialperiod in which a permit issued under this subpart is in effect, the Commissionmay not impose more stringent requirements, including more stringent emergencyplanning requirements, on the early site permit or the site for which itwas issued unless the Commission determines either that (i) Significant new information shows that a modification is necessaryto bring the permit or the site into compliance with the Commission's regulationsand orders in effect at the time the permit was issued; or (ii) A modification is necessary to assure adequate protection of the publichealth and safety or the common defense and security. (2) Similarly, notwithstanding any provisions in CFR 50.109, during anyrenewal period in which an early site permit issued under this subpartis in effect, the Commission may not impose more stringent requirements,including more stringent emergency planning requirements, on the permitor the site for which it was issued unless the Commission determines eitherthat (i) Significant new information shows that a modification is necessaryto bring the permit or the site into compliance with the Commission's regulationsand orders in effect at the time the permit was renewed; or (ii) A modification is necessary to assure adequate protection of the publichealth and safety or the common defense and security. (b) An applicant for a construction permit, operating license, or combinedlicense, or any amendment to this type of license, who has filed an applicationreferencing an early site permit issued under this subpart may includein the application a request for a variance from one or more elements ofthe permit. In determining whether to grant the variance, the Commissionshall be guided by the considerations set forth in 10 CFR 50.92, whichguide the Commission's determinations on applications for amendments toconstruction permits. <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart B_Standard Design Certifications </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.41</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Scope of subpart. </ITAG>This subpart sets out the requirements and procedures applicable to Commissionissuance of rules granting standard design certifications for nuclear powerfacilities, or major portions thereof, separate from the filing of an applicationfor a construction permit or combined license for such a facility. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.43</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Relationship to 10 CFR Part 50, Appendices M, N and O. </ITAG>(a) Appendix M to 10 CFR Part 50 governs the issuance of licenses to manufacturenuclear power reactors to be installed and operated at sites not identifiedin the manufacturing license application. Appendix N governs licenses toconstruct and operate nuclear power reactors of duplicate design at multiplesites. These appendices may be used independently of the provisions inthis subpart unless the applicant also wishes to use a certified standarddesign approved under this subpart. (b) Appendix O governs the staff review and approval of preliminary andfinal standard designs. These designs may be challenged in individual licensingproceedings. This subpart governs Commission approval, or certification,of standard designs by rulemaking, as set forth in paragraph 7 of AppendixO. A final design approval under Appendix O is a prerequisite for certificationof a standard design under this subpart. An application for a final designapproval must state whether the applicant intends to seek certificationof the design. If the applicant does so intend, the application for thefinal design approval must, in addition to containing the information requiredby Appendix O, comply with the applicable requirements of 10 CFR ChapterI, particularly andSection;andSection; 52.45 and 52.47. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.45</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Filing of applications. </ITAG>(a)(1) Any person may seek a standard design certification for an essentiallycomplete nuclear power facility, or a major portion of such a facility.An application for certification may be filed notwithstanding the factthat an application for a construction permit or combined license for sucha facility has not been filed. Applications for certification of less thana complete facility must meet the criteria set forth in paragraph (d) ofthis section. (2) Because a final design approval under Appendix O of 10 CFR Part 50is a prerequisite for certification of a standard design, a person whoseeks such a certification and does not hold, or has not applied for, afinal design approval, shall file with the Director of Nuclear ReactorRegulation an application for certification. Any person who seeks certificationbut already holds, or has applied for, a final design approval, also shallfile with the Director of Nuclear Reactor Regulation an application forcertification, because the NRC staff may require that the information beforethe staff in connection with the review for the final design approval besupplemented for the review for certification. (b) The applicant shall comply with the filing requirements of 10 CFR 50.30(a) and (b) as they would apply to an application for a nuclear power plantconstruction permit. (c) The NRC will entertain an application for certification of a reactordesign which differs significantly from reactor designs which have beenbuilt and operated. However, certification of such a design will be givenonly after the design has been shown to be sufficiently mature. (1) The maturity of such a design must be demonstrated by means of an appropriatelysited, full-size, prototype reactor, unless the following criteria aresatisfied:(i) The performance of each safety feature of the design has been demonstratedthrough either previous experience or full-scale testing; (ii) Interdependent effects among the safety features of the plant havebeen found acceptable by analysis, testing, or previous experience; and(iii) Sufficient data exist on the performance of the safety features ofthe plant to assess analytical tools used for safety analyses over a fullrange of operating and accident conditions, including equilibrium coreconditions and the response of the safety features over the lifetime ofthe plant. (2) The Appendix O final design approval of such a design must identifythe specific testing required for certification of the design. (d) Designs should be essentially complete in scope. The NRC will entertainan application for certification of a design of only a major portion ofa plant only if that portion contains all buildings, structures, systems,and components that can significantly affect the safe operation of theplant and are not fixed by site-specific considerations or parameters.In any case, site-specific elements, such as the service water intake structureor the ultimate heat sink, may be excluded from the scope of the design.However, excluded site-specific elements that can significantly affectsafe operation must be addressed by the application in the technical informationwhich andSection;andSection; 52.47(b) and 52.47(d) require the applicationto provide on the site parameters and interface requirements for the design.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.47</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Contents of applications. </ITAG>The application must contain a level of design information equivalent tothat required for a final design approval under Appendix O. The informationsubmitted for a design certification must include performance requirementsand design specifications sufficiently detailed to permit the preparationof procurement specifications and acceptance and inspection requirements.The information must also be sufficient to enable the staff to judge theapplicant's proposed means of assuring that construction conforms to designand to reach an final conclusion on all matters which must be decided beforethe certification can be granted. In particular, (a) The application must contain the technical information which is requiredof applicants for construction permits or operating licenses by Part 20,Part 50 and its appendices, and Parts 73 and 100, and which is not site-specificor irrelevant to the design for which the applicant is seeking certification.In particular, the application must demonstrate compliance with any applicableportions of the Three Mile Island requirements set forth in 10 CFR 50.34(f).The staff shall advise the prospective applicant for certification on whetherthe information required by the listed portions of 10 CFR Chapter I isappropriate to the staff's consideration of the application, and on whetherany additional technical information on the design is required. (b) The application must also include (1) The site parameters postulated for the design, and an analysis andevaluation of the design in terms of such parameters; (2) Proposed technical resolutions of the Unresolved Safety Issues andmedium- and high-priority Generic Safety Issues applicable to the desion;(3) A design-specific probabilistic risk assessment (``PRA''), togetherwith a consideration of any severe accident vulnerabilities that the PRAexposes and a realistic assessment of the degree to which the design conformsto the Commission's Safety Goals for plant operations; and (4) Proposed tests, analyses, inspections and acceptance criteria whichare necessary to provide reasonable assurance that a plant which referencesthe design is built and operated within the specifications of the design.(c) An application seeking certification of a modular design must describethe various options for the configuration of the plant and site, includingvariations in common systems, interface requirements, and system interactions.The final safety analysis and the probabilistic risk assessment should,when necessary, take into account differences among the various options,and the analysis should set forth any restrictions which will be necessaryduring the construction and startup of a given module to ensure the safeoperation of any module already on line. (d) An application for a design certification must meet the following criteria:(1) The application must contain interface requirements to be met by thoseportions of the plant for which the application does not seek certification.These requirements must be sufficiently detailed to allow completion ofthe final safety analysis and design-specific probabilistic risk assessmentrequired by paragraph (b) of this section. (2) The application must demonstrate that compliance with these interfacerequirements is verifiable through inspection, testing (either in the plantor elsewhere), previous experience, or analysis. Compliance with interfacerequirements dealing with reliability of components must be verifiablethrough previous experience or testing. (3) The application must also contain a representative design for thoseportions of the plant for which the application does not seek certification.The representative design must illustrate how the interface requirementscan be met, so as to aid the staff in its review of the final safety analysisand probabilistic risk assessment required by paragraph (b) of this section.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.49</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Fees for design certification and certification renewal. </ITAG>The fees charged for the review of an application for the initial issuanceor renewal of a standard design certification are set out in 10 CFR Part170, together with a schedule for their phased recovery as the certifiedstandard design is referenced. There is no application fee. All fees forreview of an application are deferred as follows: (a) Each time an application is filed for a construction permit or combinedlicense for a facility referencing the design for which a standard designcertification has been issued, the holder of the design certification shallpay the specified portion of the applicable fees for the approval at thetime the facility application referencing the certified standard designis filed. If, at the end of the initial period of the certification, nofacility application referencing the certified standard design has beenfiled, the holder of the design certification shall pay any outstandingfees for the certification. (b) If the standard design certification is renewed, the holder of thedesign certification shall pay the specified portion of any outstandingfees for the renewal each time a facility application referencing the certifiedstandard design is filed. If, at the end of the renewal period, a facilityapplication referencing the certified standard design has not been filed,the holder of the design  certification shall pay any outstanding feesfor the renewal. (c) If an application for the issuance or renewal of a certified standarddesign is denied or withdrawn, any fees associated with the review of theapplication are immediately due and payable by the applicant for the designcertification or renewal. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.51</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Administrative review of applications. </ITAG>A standard design certification is a rule that will be issued in accordancewith the provisions of Subpart H of 10 CFR Part 2. The Commission shallinitiate the rulemaking after an application has been filed under andSection;52.45(a) and shall specify in detail the procedures to be used for therulemaking. The rulemaking procedures must provide notice and comment andan informal hearing before an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board. The proceduresfor the hearing must include the opportunity for written presentationsmade under oath or affirmation and for oral presentations and questioningif the Board finds them either necessary for the creation of an adequaterecord or the most expeditious way to resolve controversies. Ordinarily,the questioning will be done by members of the Board, using either theBoard's questions or questions submitted to the Board by the parties. TheBoard may also request authority to use additional procedures, such asdiscovery, or may request that the Commission convene a formal adjudicationon discrete issues involving substantial disputes of fact, necessary forthe Commission's decision, that cannot be resolved with sufficient accuracyexcept in formal adjudication. The staff will be a party in the hearing.During the rulemaking, the treatment of proprietary information will begoverned by 10 CFR 2.790 and applicable Commission case law. The decisionin such a hearing will be based only on information on which all partieshave had an opportunity to comment. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.53</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Referral to the ACRS. </ITAG>The Commission shall forward the application to the Advisory Committeeon Reactor Safeguards (ACRS). The ACRS shall review the application andreport its findings and recommendations to the Commission. The ACRS neednot reconsider issues on which it has made findings and recommendationsin any earlier review of the design which is the subject of the application.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.55</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Duration of certification. </ITAG>A standard design certification issued pursuant to this subpart is validfor ten years from the date of issuance. An applicant for a constructionpermit or combined license may, at its own risk, reference in its applicationa design for which a design certification application has been docketedbut not granted. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.57</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Application for renewal. </ITAG>(a) Not less than twelve nor more than thirty-six months prior to expirationof the initial ten-year period, or any later renewal period, the holderof the design certification may apply for renewal of the certification.An application for renewal must contain all information necessary to bringup to date the information and data contained in the previous application.The procedures to be used for a rulemaking proceeding on the applicationfor renewal must be those required by andSection; 52.51 for rulemakings onapplications for initial certification of a design. (b) A design certification, either original or renewed, for which an applicationfor renewal has been timely filed remains in effect until the Commissionhas determined whether to renew the certification. If the certificationis not renewed, it continues to be valid in proceedings on an applicationfor a construction permit, combined license, or operating license referencingthe certified design and docketed prior to expiration of the certificationor renewal. (c) The Commission shall forward application for renewal to the AdvisoryCommittee on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS). The ACRS shall review the applicationand report its findings and recommendations to the Commission. The ACRSneed not reconsider issues on which it has made findings and recommendationsin any earlier review of the design which is the subject of the application.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.59</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Criteria for renewal. </ITAG>(a) The Commission shall issue a rule granting the renewal if the design,either as originally certified or as modified during the rulemaking onthe renewal, complies with the Atomic Energy Act and the Commission's regulationsand orders in effect at the time of the renewal, and any more stringentsafety requirements the Commission may wish to impose after a determinationthat there is a substantial increase in overall protection of the publichealth and safety or the common defense and security to be derived fromthe more stringent requirements and that the direct and indirect costsof implementation of those requirements are justified in view of this increasedprotection. (b) Denial of renewal does not bar the holder of the design certificationor another applicant from filing a new application for certification ofthe design which proposes design changes which correct the deficienciescited in the denial of the renewal. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.61</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duration of renewal. </ITAG>Each renewal of certification for a standard design will be for not lessthan five nor more than ten years. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.63</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Finality of standard design certifications. </ITAG>(a)(1) Notwithstanding any provision in 10 CFR 50.109, during the initialperiod in which a design certification issued under this Subpart is ineffect, the Commission may not impose more stringent safety requirementson the certification unless the Commission determines in a rulemaking eitherthat significant new information shows that a modification is necessaryto bring the certification or the referencing plants into compliance withthe Commission's regulations and orders in effect at the time the certificationwas issued, or that a modification is necessary to assure adequate protectionof the public health and safety or the common defense and security. (2) Similarly, notwithstanding any provision in 10 CFR 50.109, during anyrenewal period in which a design certification issued under this Subpartis in effect, the Commission may not impose more stringent safety requirementson the certification unless the Commission determines in a rulemaking eitherthat significant new information shows that a modification is necessaryto bring the certification or the referencing plants into compliance withthe Commission's regulations and orders in effect at the time the certificationwas renewed, or that a modification is necessary to assure adequate protectionof the public health and safety or the common defense and security. (3) Any modification the NRC imposes on a design certification rule underparagraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section will be applied to all plantsreferencing the certified design. (b) The holder of a standard design certification issued under this Subpartmay file a request for an amendment to the design certification by wayof notice and comment rulemaking. The Commission shall grant the amendmentrequest if it determines that the amendment will comply with the AtomicEnergy Act and the Commission's regulations. The amendment will be appliedto all plants referencing the design only if the amendment is necessaryfor adequate protection of the public health and safety or the common defenseand security. Any other amendment will apply only to plants referencingthe design after the amendment is granted. (c) An applicant for a construction permit, operating license, or combinedlicense, or a licensee whose license references a certified standard designissued under this subpart, may request an exemption from one or more elementsof the design certification. The Commission shall grant such a requestif it determines that the exemption complies with the Atomic Energy Act,the Commission's regulations and orders, and the requirements of 10 CFR50.12(a). Exemptions apply only to the license for which the exemptionwas requested. (d) The licensee of a plant built according to a standardized design maymake a change to the standardized portion of the plant, without prior Commissionapproval, only if the change does not involve changes to the design asdescribed in the rule certifying the design, or in the certifying ruletogether with any exemption which may have been granted the licensee underandSection; 52.63(c). <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart C_Combined Licenses </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.71</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope of subpart. </ITAG>This subpart sets out the requirements and procedures applicable to Commissionissuance of combined construction permits and conditional operating licenses(``combined licenses'') for nuclear power facilities. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.73</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Relationship to Subparts A and B. </ITAG>An application for a combined license under this subpart may, but neednot, reference a standard design certification issued under Subpart B ofthis part or an early site permit issued under Subpart A of this part.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.75</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Filing of applications. </ITAG>Any person except one excluded by 10 CFR 50.38 may file an applicationfor a combined license for a nuclear power facility with the Director ofNuclear Reactor Regulation. The applicant shall comply with the filingrequirements of 10 CFR 50.4 and 50.30 (a) and (b) as they would apply toan application for a nuclear power plant construction permit. The feesassociated with the filing and review of the application are set out in10 CFR Part 170. The applicant shall include an environmental report withthe application if it does not reference an early site permit. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.77</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contents of applications; general information. </ITAG>The application must contain all of the information required by 10 CFR50.33 and 50.33a as those sections would apply to an applicant for a nuclearpower plant construction permit. In particular, the applicant shall complywith the requirement of andSection; 50.33a(b) regarding the submission ofantitrust information.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.79</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contents of applications; technical information. </ITAG>(a) The application must contain the final safety analysis report requiredby 10 CFR 50.34(b). The report may incorporate by reference the final safetyanalysis report for a certified standard design, but must be supplementedto include, as appropriate, the information required of applicants foroperating licenses by 10 CFR Part 50. In particular, an application referencinga certified design must describe those portions of the design which aresite-specific, such as the service water intake structure or the ultimateheat sink. An application referencing a certified design must also demonstratecompliance with the interface requirements established for the design underandSection; 52.47(d) of this part. If the application does not referencea certified design, the application must comply with the requirements ofandSection; 52.47 of this part for level of design information, and shallcontain the technical information required by andSection;andSection; 52.47(a),52.47(b)(2) and (3), and, if the design is modular, 52.47(c). The applicationmust also include proposed technical specifications prepared in accordancewith the requirements of 10 CFR Part 50. (b) The application for a combined license must include the proposed inspections,tests, and analyses which the licensee shall perform and the acceptancecriteria therefor which will provide reasonable assurance that the facilityhas been constructed and will operate in conformity with the application,the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, and the Commission's regulations.(c) If the application references an early site permit, the applicationmust demonstrate the suitability of the site for the design and must discussany other significant environmental issue not considered in any previousproceeding on the site or the design. If the application does not referencean early site permit, then the application must contain the informationrequired by andSection; 52.17(b) of this part on redress of the site in theevent that the activities permitted by andSection; 52.91(a) of this subpartare performed. (d) The application must contain emergency plans which provide reasonableassurance that adequate protective measures can be taken in the event ofa radiological emergency at the site. (1) The applicant shall make good faith efforts to obtain certificationsby the responsible local and State governmental agencies that: (i) The proposed emergency plans are practicable; (ii) These agencies are committed to participating in any further developmentof the plans, including any required field demonstrations; and (iii) These agencies are committed to executing their responsibilitiesunder the plans in the event of an emergency. (2) The application must contain any certifications that have been obtained.If these certifications cannot be obtained, the application must demonstratethat the proposed plans nonetheless provide reasonable assurance that adequateprotective measures can be taken in the event of a radiological emergencyat the site. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.81</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Standards for review of applications. </ITAG>Applications filed under this subpart will be reviewed according to, asappropriate, the pertinent standards set out in 10 CFR Part 50 and itsappendices as they apply to applications for construction permits and operatinglicenses for nuclear power plants. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.83</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability of Part 50 provisions. </ITAG>Unless otherwise specifically provided in this subpart, all provisionsof 10 CFR Part 50 and its appendices applicable to holders of constructionpermits for nuclear power reactors also apply to holders of combined licensesissued under this subpart. Similarly, all provisions of 10 CFR Part 50and its appendices applicable to holders of operating licenses also applyto holders of combined licenses issued under this subpart who have receivedwritten authorization for full-power operation under andSection; 52.103.However, any limitations contained in Part 50 regarding applicability ofthe provisions to certain classes of facilities continue to apply. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.85</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Administrative review of applications. </ITAG>A combined license is subject to all applicable procedural requirementscontained in 10 CFR Part 2, including the requirments for docketing (andSection;2.101) and issuance of a notice of hearing (andSection; 2.104). All hearingson combined licenses are governed by the procedures contained in Part 2.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.87</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Referral to the ACRS. </ITAG>The Commission shall forward the application to the Advisory Committeeon Reactor Safeguards (ACRS). The ACRS shall review the application andreport its findings and recommendations to the Commission. The ACRS neednot reconsider issues on which it has made findings and recommendationsin any earlier review of the site or the design which is the subject ofthe application. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.89</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Environmental review. </ITAG>If the application references an early site permit or a certified standarddesign, the environmental review must focus on the suitability of the sitefor the design and any other significant environmental issue not consideredin any previous proceeding on the site or the design. The results of thislimited review must be presented at the hearing on the application. However,the Commission may not modify any final determination on an issue thathas been considered and decided in any earlier proceeding on the referencedsite or design, except as provided in andSection; 52.39 and 52.63 regardingfinality of early site permit determinations and finality of standard designcertifications, respectively. If the application does not reference anearly site permit or a certified standard design, all of the environmentalreview procedures set out in 10 CFR Part 51 must be followed, includingthe issuance of a final environmental impact statement.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.91</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Authorization to conduct site activities. </ITAG>(a) If the application references an early site permit, the applicant mayperform the site preparation activities authorized in andSection; 52.25 afterthe application for a combined license has been docketed. Otherwise, theapplicant shall request authorization to conduct site preparation activitiespursuant to 10 CFR 50.10(e)(1) and (2). In either case, authorization toconduct the activities described in 10 CFR 50.10(e)(3)(i) may be grantedonly after the presiding officer in the combined license proceeding makesthe additional finding required by 10 CFR 50.10(e)(3)(ii). (b) If, after an applicant for a combined license has performed the activitiespermitted by paragraph (a) of this section, the application for the licenseis withdrawn or denied, and the early site permit referenced by the applicationexpires or the holder of the early site permit so requests, then the applicantshall redress the site in accord with the terms of the site redress planrequired by andSection; 52.17(b). If, before redress is complete, a use notenvisaged in the redress plan is found for the site or parts thereof, theapplicant shall carry out the redress plan to the greatest extent possibleconsistent with the alternate use. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.93</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Exemptions and variances. </ITAG>(a) Applicants for a combined license under this subpart, or any amendmentto a combined license, may include in the application a request, under10 CFR 50.12, for an exemption from one or more of the Commission's regulations,including any part of a design certification rule. The Commission shallgrant such a request if it determines that the exemption will comply withthe Atomic Energy Act, the Commission's regulations, and the requirementsof 10 CFR 50.12(a). (b) An applicant for a combined license, or any amendment to a combinedlicense, who has filed an application referencing an early site permitissued under this subpart may include in the application a request fora variance from one or more elements of the permit. In determining whetherto grant the variance, the Commission will be guided by the considerationsset forth in 10 CFR 50.92, which guide the Commission's determinationson applications for amendments to construction permits. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.97</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Issuance of combined licenses. </ITAG>(a) The Commission may issue a combined license for a nuclear power facilityupon finding that the applicable requirements of andSection;andSection; 50.40,50.42, 50.43, 50.47, and 50.50 have been met, and that there is reasonableassurance that the facility will be constructed and operated in conformitywith the license, the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, and the Commission'sregulations. (b) The Commission shall identify in the license the inspections, tests,and analyses that the licensee shall perform and the acceptance criteriatherefor which provide reasonable assurance that the facility has beenconstructed and will be operated in conformity with the license, the provisionsof the Atomic Energy Act, and the Commission's regulations. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.99</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Inspection during construction. </ITAG>After issuance of a combined license, the Commission shall assure throughinspections, tests, and analyses that construction of the facility is completedin conformity with the combined license, the provisions of the Atomic EnergyAct, and the Commission's regulations. The Commission shall apply to holdersof combined licenses the same inspection program applied to holders ofnuclear power plant construction permits. Holders of combined licensesshall comply with the provisions of andSection;andSection; 50.70 and 50.71.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.101</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Pre-operational antitrust review. </ITAG>Prior to conversion of a combined license to an operating license, theNRC staff shall conduct an antitrust review pursuant to andSection; 50.42(b)to determine whether significant changes in the licensee's activities orproposed activities have occurred subsequent to the previous review bythe Attorney General and the Commission in connection with the issuanceof the combined license. If the Commission determines that significantchanges have occurred, the antitrust review required by section 105c(1)of the Atomic Energy Act must be completed prior to commencement of commercialoperation of the facility. Upon completion of this review, and followingreceipt of the advice of the Attorney General, the Director of NuclearReactor Regulation may impose any additional license conditions neededto avoid creating or maintaining a situation inconsistent with the antitrustlaws as specified in section 105a of the Atomic Energy Act. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.103</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Authorization to operate under a combined license. </ITAG>(a) Before the facility may operate, the holder of the combined licenseshall apply for authorization of operation under the combined license.If the combined license is for a modular design, each module is the subjectof a separate authorization. The Commission shall publish a notice of theproposed authorization in the <T3>Federal Register</T3> under 10 CFR 2.105. Within 30 days, any personwhose interests may be affected may request a hearing on the basis either(1) that there has been a nonconformance with the license, the licensee'swritten commitments, the Atomic Energy Act, or the Commission's regulationsand orders, which has not been corrected and which could materially andadversely affect the safe operation of the facility; or (2) that significantnew information shows that some modification to the site or the designis necessary to assure adequate protection of public health and safetyor the common defense and security. The petitioner shall set forth withreasonable specificity the facts and arguments which form the basis forthe request. (b) If a hearing is not requested, or if all requests are denied, the Commissionmay authorize operation under the combined license, as provided in andSection;50.56, upon making the findings in andSection; 50.57.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, MD, this 17th day of August 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Samuel J. Chilk, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-18964 Filed 8-22-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>