<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88829-0111 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-29-88.f2.A1110</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7454 et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Exemptions; State Street Bank and Trust Company (the Bank)et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5669, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-4677, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="15">State Street Bank and Trust Company (the Bank); Located in Boston,Massachusetts </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7454] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(b)(2) of the act shall not apply to: (1) The proposed purchaseand sale of equity securities between collective investment index funds(the Index Funds) sponsored by the Bank; (2) the proposed purchase andsale of equity securities between the Index Funds and various model-drivencollective investment funds (the Model-Driven Funds) sponsored by the Bank;(3) the proposed purchase and sale of equity securities between the Model-DrivenFunds; and (4) the proposed purchase and sale of equity securities betweenthe Index Funds or Model-Driven Funds (together, the Funds) and variouslarge pension plans (the Large Plans), under the terms and conditions setforth in this notice of proposed exemption. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Bank is a Massachusetts trust company which is subject to the supervisionand examination of the Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks. The Bank isa member of the Federal Reserve Bank and its depositors' accounts are insuredby the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The Bank manages substantialamounts of assets, typically as a trustee or investment manager, for avariety of clients, including employee benefit plans subject to Title Iof the Act (the Client Plans). The Bank's client accounts may be managedeither as separate accounts for a single client or as commingled accounts(for example, group trusts organized pursuant to Rev. Rul. 81-100) formultiple clients (the Client Accounts). 2. The Bank is one of the largest investment managers in the United Statesin the area of passive investment management. Passive management involvesinvestment in a fixed portfolio of securities, rather than a portfoliowhich changes according to an ongoing ``active'' evaluation of the desirabilityof particular equity securities. The Bank states that approximately $18.3billion of its assets under management as of August 21, 1987 consistedof domestic and foreign equity securities being passively managed in theIndex Funds and the Model-Driven Funds. Approximately $16.5 billion ofthe assets of the Funds are assets of the Client Plants. The Bank has no beneficial ownership interest in any of the Funds. However,the Bank does maintain a defined benefit pension plan and a 401(k) savingsplan for its eligible employees (the Bank Plans). The Bank states thatthe assets of the Bank Plans are invested from time to time in one or moreIndex Funds or Model-Driven Funds. As of August 31, 1987, the aggregatevalue of the assets of the Bank Plans was approximately $118.2 million.3. The assets managed by the Bank in the Index Funds are invested pursuantto a strategy which attempts to replicate the performance of a predeterminedthird-party index, such as the Standard andamp; Poor's 500 Composite StockPrice Index (the Sandamp;P 500 Index). The assets managed by the Bank inthe Model-Driven Funds are invested pursuant to a strategy whereby investmentsare made in accordance with predetermined computer models. The applicantstates that because the Funds are passively managed, the holdings of eachFund remain static unless one of several potential ``trigger events'' occurs.First, an independent third party, such as Standard and Poors (Sandamp;P),may change the makeup of its index, which would require corresponding changesin the make-up of the portfolio of the Index Funds corresponding to thatindex. Second, a threshold screen applied by the Bank may eliminate certain securitiesfrom the Index Fund or Model-Driven Fund even though such securities continueto be incldued in the related index or mdoel. Such a screening processmay occur when the companies issuing the particular securities declarebankruptcy or are involved in an acquisition or merger. However, the Bankexcludes relatively few securities of companies from its Index Fund portfoliosfor such reasons at any given time. The Bank states that, as a generalrule, it will follow the decision of the third party creator of the indexand will not exclude a security until it has been dropped from the indexby the third party. For example, when Texaco, Inc., went into bankruptcy,its stock was not dropped from the Sandamp;P 500 Index and, therefore, thestock was retained in the Bank's Sandamp;P Index Funds. However, as an exceptionto the general rule situations may arise where the Bank's screening processmay produce a ``trigger event''. For example, a successful tender offermay be made for a security that has been held in the Index Fund. In suchcases, the Bank states that the Index Fund typically will tender its positionin that security. Thus, even though Sandamp;P may continue to carry the securityin the Sandamp;P 500 Index until the tender offer transaction has finallyclosed, the Bank will not attempt to acquire additional shares of thatsecurity in order to maintain its position. Rather, the Bank states thatit will invest the cash proceeds of the tendered securities in its shortterm investment vehicles until a replacement security has been chosen bySandamp;P and will then reposition the Bank's Sandamp;P Index Fund in thatnew security. The Bank notes that relatively few securities held in theFunds' portfolios are subject to tender offer transactions at any particualrtime. Third, the computer model upon which a particular Model-Driven Fund isbased may change as a result of a change in the underlying objective criteria.Such criteria for the computer model are either prepared by an independentorganization and made available to the Bank or are the product of investmentstrategies developed by the Bank's personnel. For example, the investment objective of a particular Model-Driven Fundmay be to track as closely as possible the performance of the Sandamp;P 500Index, without having the Fund invest in all 500 securities of the Sandamp;P500 Index. In order to accomplish this result, the Bank may use an ``optimizer''computer program, prepared by an independent organization, which selectsthe 200 representative securities that are most likely to track the performanceof the Sandamp;P 500 Index. Alternatively, the Bank might utilize an approachwhereby those stocks in the Sandamp;P 500 Index which have the smallest capitalizationwould be excluded. Under either of these two approaches, once the approachhas been selected for the particular Model-Driven Fund, everything is drivenautomatically by either the ``optimizer'' computer program or by the capitalizationof the various stocks in the Sandamp;P 500 Index.Fourth, the net amount available for investment in the particular IndexFund or Model-Driven Fund may increase or decrease, either due to the receiptof income which must be reinvested, the addition of assets to the ClientAccount, or the withdrawal of assets from the Client Account. The applicantstates that in the case of the Client Plans, all such additions or deletionsare made at the direction of an independent fiduciary. However, in thecase of the Bank Plans, the additions or deletions are made at the directionof the Bank.4. The applicant represents that since the Index Funds and the Model-DrivenFunds are passively managed portfolios, the need to purchase or sell aparticular security arises as the result of the occurrence of one of thetriggering events described above. Such ``trigger events'' are, in mostcases, the result of an event which occurs independent of any exerciseof investment discretion by the Bank. Therefore, the Bank states that theamount, nature and timing of trades for both the Index Funds and the Model-DrivenFunds, in most cases, are not subject to the exercise of any material degreeof discretion by the Bank. The Bank notes that it would be exercising discretionin the context of trades which might arise by reason of the Bank's exerciseof its discretion to change the computer models upon which certain of itsModel-Driven Funds are based. However, the Bank represents that any cross-tradeopportunities which arise by reason of its discretionary changes to theunderlying computer models (i.e. the third triggering event described above)for any of the Mode-Driven Funds would not be executed with respect tothose Funds. The Bank also notes that it would be exercising discretionin the context of cross-trades which arise as a result of additions ordeletions to a Fund made by the Bank Plans. However, the Bank representsfurther that the Funds would be able to take advantage of cross-trade opportunitieswith a Fund that has produced a ``trigger event'' as a result of the additionsor deletions made to that Fund by one of the Bank Plans only in certainlimited circumstances (see Paragraph andplusmin;10).With respect to the timing of the transactions once a ``trigger event''has occurred, the Bank states that it attempts to replicate any changesin the underlying index or model as quickly as possible. For example, whenassets are deposited in an Index Fund, assets to be invested in domesticsecurities are typically invested within three days. If the assets aredeposited in an international Index Fund, the Bank states that the ordersare typically placed with independent brokers within three days, althoughthe actual execution of those orders may take longer depending upon theparticular overseas market. The Bank states further that if assets arebeing withdrawn from a Fund and sales must be made, such sales are typicallyimplemented within three days of the withdrawal.5. The applicant states that the Funds are often required to sell a particularsecurity when one or more of the other Funds will be in the process ofpurchasing that same security. If the Funds effect the required transactionson the open market, each Fund incurs substantial transaction costs, includingbrokerage commissions, the so-called ``marketmaker's spread'', and thepotential adverse market impact which may be caused by the trade itself.The Bank states that if it were able to effect these transactions by meansof a pre-arranged direct cross-trade between the Funds that must sell theparticular security and the Funds which must buy that same security, theBank could substantially reduce the amount of the commission costs forthe Funds, and could eliminate entirely the marketmaker's spread and anypotential for adverse market impact. Based on a review of the potentialdirect cross-trade opportunities during the period from January 1, 1987to September 30, 1987, the Bank estimates that the ability to effect directcross-trades would generate substantial savings to the Funds. The Banksstates that the proposed cross-trading of the securities between the variousFunds would be effected as quickly as possible, generally within threedays.6. In addition to transactions arising in connection with the automatictrading activities of the Index Funds and Model-Driven Funds, the Bankstates that it is often retained to assist one of the Large Plans in liquidatingall or a substantial portion of the securities held by the Large Plan.In such situations, the Bank acts as a ``trading adviser'' to the LargePlan. Each of the Large Plans has total assets of at least $50 million.The Bank states that it is not a fiduciary for the Large Plan with respectto the underlying asset allocation decision which results in the LargePlan allocating assets to the Funds. Specifically, the Bank is not a fiduciaryby reason of investment advice to the Large Plan when acting in the roleof ``trading adviser'' to the Large Plan. Typically, the Bank's role asa ``trading adviser'' involves only advice on the mechanical aspects ofaccomplishing the Large Plan's asset allocation decision, such as arrangingfor the stock transactions so as to minimize transaction costs. Such liquidationsare the result of the decision of an independent plan fiduciary to restructurethe portfolio, in some cases to allow such portfolio to be managed by theBank as an Index Fund or a Model-Driven Fund and in other cases to facilitatethe realignment of the portfolio in connection with a change in investmentmanagers or investment strategy. The applicant states that in the courseof these restructrurings, the Large Plan will often be selling certainsecurities which the Funds are simultaneously in the process of purchasingas a result of a ``trigger event.'' In such cases, the Large Plan and theFunds effect the transactions on the open market and, as a result, boththe Large Plan and the Funds incur the transaction costs described above.7. The Bank represents that it would be in the best interest of the PlanClients and the Large Plan for direct cross-trades to be arranged and effectedto the maximum extent possible. The Bank states that the avoidance or reductionof transaction costs made possible by direct cross-trading between theFunds, or between the Funds and the Large Plans, would be an economic benefitto the Plan Clients and the Bank Plans.8. The Bank represents that it would receive its customary investment managementor trustee fees with respect to the Plan Clients and its fee for actingas ``trading adviser'' to a Large Plan. However, the Bank would not receiveany additional compensation on account of its effecting the direct cross-trades.The Bank represents further that to the extent that it is necessary toutilize a broker-dealer, all direct cross-trades would be effected throughan independent broker-dealer which is not affiliated with the Bank. TheBank anticipates that the utilization of such an independent broker-dealermay be necessary in some cases to efficiently process the mechanical aspectsof the direct cross-trade, particularly when the Bank is not the custodianor trustee for both parties to the transaction. For example, the need foran independent broker-dealer may arise in the context of transactions betweenthe Funds, for which the Bank is the trustee or custodian, and one of theLarge Plans, for which the Bank is only a ``trading adviser'' for the transactionand not a trustee or custodian for the assets of the Large Plan involved.The Bank states that where it is the trustee or custodian for both parties,the Bank may be able to efficiently process the mechanical aspects of thetrade without the involvement of any broker-dealer, thereby resulting inthe complete avoidance of any brokerage commissions. In no event wouldthe Bank or any of its affiliates receive any brokerage commissions orother additional compensation as result of the direct cross-trades.9. The Bank represents that all direct cross-trades would be for cash effectedat a price equal to the closing price reported by the independent pricingservice customarily utilized by the Bank for purposes of valuing the particularequity securities (and in the case of foreign securities, the particularcurrency). The independent pricing service used by the Bank gathers priceinformation from all the relevant sources (i.e. the New York Stock Exchange,the American Stock Exchange, NASDAQ, etc.) and compiles the informationinto a format which is usable by the Bank. The Bank states that in theevent that the number of shares of a particular security which all of theFunds and Large Plans propose to sell on a given day exceeds the numberof shares of such security which all the Funds or the Large Plans proposeto buy, or vice versa, the direct cross-trade opportunity would be allocatedamong potential sellers or buyers on the basis of a queue system.The Bank proposes to utilize an approach whereby all investment funds wouldbe placed in a queue, initially in alphabetical order. Any new Funds wouldbe placed at the end of the queue as they come on line. Thus, the queuesystem would merely establish a listing of the Funds as potential buyersor sellers of securities. When cross-trade opportunities arise, the Bankwould go down the list matching any buyers and sellers in the order inwhich they appear on the list until one side of the transaction or theother has been fully exhausted. The Bank states that after each cross-tradeopportunity, the Fund at the top of the list would be rotated to the bottomof the list, regardless of whether that Fund participated in the cross-trade.Thus, the applicant states that since the queue moves up by one Fund aftereach cross-trade opportunity, all the Funds would have an opportunity toparticipate in direct cross-trading opportunities.10. The Bank states that when direct cross-trades occur between the Fundsand one or more of the Large Plans, the transactions would be effectedonly if the following conditions are satisfied: 1) The Large Plan's fiduciary,which is independent of the Bank, is fully informed in writing in advanceof the cross-trading opportunity; 2) such fiduciary provides advance writtenapproval, authorizing the Bank to engage in a cross-trade transaction;and 3) the Large Plan's fiduciary is informed in writing of the resultsof all direct cross-trading activity.  With respect to the participation of the Bank Plans in the Funds whichwould engage in the proposed direct cross-trading program, the Bank statesthat a Fund would not be eligible to participate in the cross-trading opportunitiesif the assets of the Bank Plans in the Fund exceed 10% of the total assetsof the Fund. In addition, the Bank states that even if the 10% limitationis satisfied with respect to a particular Fund, the Fund would not be eligibleto participate in direct cross-trading opportunities if the triggeringevent for the cross-trade opportunity involves the deposit of assets froma Bank Plan into the Fund or the withdrawal of assets by a Bank Plan fromthe Fund, and the Bank Plan's assets involved in such deposit or withdrawalconstitute more than 5% of the total assets of the Bank Plan.  11. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionswould satisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because,among other things: (a) The Funds would buy or sell equity securities indirect cross-trading transactions only in response to various ``triggerevents'' which, in most cases, arise independent of the exercise of investmentdiscretion by the Bank; (b) the Large Plans would engage in cross-tradesonly in situations where the Bank has no discretion with respect to theinvestment decision; (c) the price for the equity securities would be theclosing price for the securities on the day of trading; (d) the directcross-trading between the Funds, or between the Funds and the Large Plans,would be conducted as quickly as possible, with securities transactionsbeing effected generally within at least three days of the ``trigger events''for the Funds; (e) the Funds and Large plans would save significant amountsof money on brokerage commissions and other expenses normally associatedwith such transactions; and (f) the Bank would receive no additional feesas a result of the proposed cross-trades.  Notice to Interested Persons: A notice will be mailed by first class mailto each Plan which invests in the Funds. The notice will contain a copyof the notice of pendency of exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and an explanation of the rights of interestedparties to comment on or request a hearing regarding the proposed exemption.Such notice will be sent to the above-named parties within two weks ofthe publication of the notice of pendency in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.  For Further Information Contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="15">Eastwood Printing and Publishing Company Profit Sharing Plan and Trust(the Plan); Located in Denver, Colorado</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7506]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption  </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406 (a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedsale (the Sale) by the Plan to Siegel Investment Company (SIC), a limitedpartnership and a party in interest with respect to the Plan, of a certainparcel of real property located in Denver, Colorado (the Property); providedthat the terms and conditions of the transaction are at least as favorableto those obtainable by the Plan in an arm's-length transaction with anunrelated party.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary Of Facts And Representations  </ITAG>1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan with 22 participants and totalassets of $1,215,547.94 as of September 30, 1987. Noah Siegel (Mr. Siegel)is the Plan trustee and also the owner of the Employer. Mr. Siegel, hiswife and two children are the owners of SIC.  2. The Property is located at 3201-3225 Blake Street, Denver, Coloradoand covers a total area of 65,826 square feet. On-site improvements includea one-story building providing office and warehouse space and a paved yardwith access to a railroad right-of-way. The real estate directly contiguousto the Property is owned by SIC.  On March 31, 1981, the Plan purchased the Property for $200,065 from AlfredJ. Zarlengo, who, the applicant represents, is unrelated to the Plan, Mr.Siegel or SIC. During the term of its holding of the Property, the Planexpended $26,000.58 on taxes, insurance and maintenance. In addition, thePlan paid approximately $25,000 for capital improvements to the Propertyin 1985.  From 1981 to 1985, the Property was leased to Colorado Sheepskin Services,Inc. for $790 per month. The Property's vacant yard was also leased tocontractors who were not parties-in-interest. Since August, 1987, a portionof the Property has been leased to Graphic Arts Mailing, Inc., who theapplicant represents, is not a party-in-interest. The Plan received rentalpayments of $1,500 per month, totalling $18,000 annually under the lease.The Plan pays real estate taxes, insurance and maintenance costs estimatedto be $8,400 per annum.3. The Property's fair market value was determined as of November 5, 1985as $315,000 by Philip J. Barkan, S.R.A. and S.R.E.A., of Denver, Colorado(the Barkan Valuation). The Property was subsequently appraised by CliffordL. Cryer, M.A.I. and S.R.P.A., and W. Earl Wilson, Associate Appraiser,of Cryer andamp; Company Appraisers, Inc. (the Cryer Appraisal). The CryerAppraisal determined the Property's fair market value as of October 5,1987 to be $285,000. By update to the Cryer Appraisal as of April 22, 1988,Messrs. Cryer and Wilson considered the special value of the Property toSIC as a contiguous landowner and determined that there was none in thisinstance.4. SIC now proposes to purchase the improved Property from the Plan forcash in amount of $315,000, the fair market value determined in the BarkanValuation. SIC represents that the Plan will pay no real estate commissionsor fees of any kind, including legal fees, in connection with the transaction.5. The applicant represents that the transaction will be in the best interestsof the Plan and protective of the rights of the Plan's participants andbeneficiaries because it will enable the Plan to divest itself of an illiquidinvestment which represents approximately 25 percent of the Plan's assets.The Plan's increased liquidity resulting from the Sale will facilitatedistributions to terminated employees whose interests have vested in thePlan.6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction satisfiesthe exemption criteria set forth in section 408(a) of the Act because:(a) The Plan will receive at least the appraised fair market value forthe Property; (b) the Sale will be a one-time transaction; (c) the Salewill be consummated for cash; (d) the Plan will incur no cost or fees withrespect to the transaction; and (e) the applicant has represented the Saleto be in the best interest and protective of the Plan and its participantsand beneficiaries because it will increase the Plan's liquidity and facilitatedistribution of Plan assets to them.<ITAG tagnum="84">Tax Consequences of Transaction</ITAG>The Department of the Treasury has determined that if a transaction betweena qualified employee benefit plan and its sponsoring employer (or affiliatethereof) results in the Plan either paying less than or receiving morethan fair market value such excess may be considered to be a contributionby the sponsoring employer to the plan and therefore must be examined underapplicable provisions of the Internal Review Code, including sections 401(a)(4), 404 and 415.For Further Information Contact: Mrs. Betsy Scott of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="15">The O.C. Tanner Company Retirement and Savings Plan, the O.C. TannerManufacturing Retirement and Savings Plan, the O.C. Tanner ManufacturingSales Representatives' Retirement and Savings Plan, the O.C. Tanner EmployeesSavings Plan and the O.C. Tanner Retirement and Savings Plan Group Trust(collectively, the Plans); Located in Salt Lake City, Utah</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application Nos. D-7604 through D-7608]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption</ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsections 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application for section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to a series of loans(the Loans) by the Plans to the O.C. Tanner Company (the Employer), involvingup to 25% of each of the Plan's assets, provided that the terms of thetransactions are not less favorable to the Plans than those obtainablein arm's-length transactions with unrelated parties.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Plans are qualified employee profit sharing plans and a qualifiedgroup trust with approximately 1,210 participants and total assets of approximately$26.6 million as of December 31, 1987. All of the Plans' assets are commingledin a group trust for investment purposes. The Employer is a closely heldcorporation engaged in the manufacture and marketing of emblematic jewelry.The trustee of the Plans is Obert C. Tanner and the administrative committeeappointed to manage and administer the Plans includes Messrs. O. Don Ostler,W. Lowell Benson and Robert K. Anger, all of whom are employees of theEmployer. 2. The Department granted a previous exemption to the applicant effectiveJuly 1, 1984 (Prohibited Transaction Exemption (PTE) 84-112, 49 FR 30608,July 31, 1984), to permit a series of loans by the Plans to the Employerinvolving up to 25% of each of the Plan's assets. The applicant requeststhat this exemption be expanded to include two new plans of the Employerthat were not covered by the prior exemption (i.e., the O.C. Tanner EmployeesSavings Plan and the O.C. Tanner Retirement and Savings Plan Group Trust).The Plans propose to make the Loans over the remainder of the 10-year periodwhich began July 1, 1984, the effective date of PTE 84-112, to the Employerinvolving up to, but never in excess of, 25% of the assets of each of thePlans, the amount of the Loans to be adjusted quarterly. The principalamount of the Loans will become fixed for the duration of the Loans atthe end of 10 years from July 1, 1984 (i.e., June 30, 1994). That is, noadditional loans will be made after June 30, 1994.3. Loans made from the Plans are documented by one promissory note fromthe Employer to the group trust. Each calendar quarter representativesof the Employer meet with the Plans' independent fiduciary (see representation7) to consider adjustment of the Loan balance. If a new Loan is to be allowed,the Employer pays off the previous Loan first and then executes a new promissorynote reflecting the increased Loan balance. Prior to executing a new promissorynote, the independent fiduciary reviews the process and issues a reportstating that the new Loan is appropriate and suitable for the Loans. 4. The Loans will be repaid in quarterly payments of interest and principalto be made through the quarter ending June 30, 1989, each equal to theamount that would be necessary to amortize the current principal amountof the Loans at the then interest rate, in 20 equal consecutive quarterlypayments. Since the entire outstanding principal balance on the Loans willvary, payments will be calculated as if the entire outstanding principalbalance on the Loans were to be repaid with interest in level paymentsover 5 years. The Employer will be charged a rate of interest no less thanthe fair market rate of interest that would be charged by an unrelatedlender for arms'-length loans of comparable amount, security, terms andconditions, as determined by the independent fiduciary. The interest ratewill be adjusted at least annually and may be adjusted also whenever theprincipal amount of the Loans is increased or, in the opinion of the independentfiduciary, whenever the market rate for comparable loans changes sufficientlythat a lender would reasonably be expected to request that the terms ofthe Loans be renegotiated. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rate of intereston the Loans shall always equal or exceed the ``prime'' rate of interestcharged by Chase Manhattan Bank plus two percent (2%). 5. The Loans will be secured by a first mortgage on the Employer's manufacturingfacilities and related real property (the Property), located at and inthe vicinity of 1930 South State Street, Salt Lake City, Utah. The mortgagewill be evidenced by a standard trust deed, designating the Plans as beneficiariesand the independent fiduciary as trustee. The Property has been appraisedby George Y. Fujii, an independent MAI appraiser with the firm of RevalInc., Salt Lake City, Utah, as having a fair market value of $14,060,000as of June 1988.\1\<NOTE/> The Employer represents that it will add any additional collateralthat may be required while the Loans are outstanding to assure that thevalue of the collateral is at all times equal to at least 200% of the outstandingbalance of the Loans. A certified MAI appraiser will review this valuationat least annually. During the Loans' outstanding period, the Property willbe kept adequately insured for the benefit of the Plans against fire orother loss at the expense of the Employer, and the independent fiduciarywill determine at least annually that adequate insurance has been maintained.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ This appraisal was based on the premise that the Employerwould continue to reside in the buildings acting as collateral. The Employerhas agreed, in the case that it moves its offices from the buildings actingas the collateral, to immediately repay all of the Loans. 6. In the event that the independent fiduciary shall retain or engage anattorney or attorneys to collect, enforce, or protect the Plans' interestswith respect to the Loans, the Employer shall pay all of the costs andexpenses of such collection, enforcement, or protection, including reasonableattorneys' fees, and the independent fiduciary may take judgement for allsuch amounts, in addition to the unpaid principal balance of Loans andaccured interest thereon. 7. The trustee of the Plans will continue to appoint Kent D. Watson, C.P.A.(Mr. Watson), of Price Waterhouse, Salt Lake City, Utah, a certified publicaccountant who is experienced with both large and small business operationsand who is the managing partner of the Price Waterhouse office in SaltLake City, to serve as an independent fiduciary for the proposed Loans.Other than his previous service as independent fiduciary under PTE 84-112,Mr. Watson has no other relationship with the Employer or the Plans. Mr.Watson has been advised by legal counsel with regard to his duties, responsibilities,and liabilities as a fiduciary under the Act. Mr. Watson represents thathe is aware of and understands the requirements of the Act and his responsibilitiesunder it. In addition to reviewing the specific terms and conditions ofthe proposed Loans, Mr. Watson has represented that he will (a) Examinethe Plans' investment portfolio; (b) consider the cash flow needs of thePlans; (c) give consideration to whether a sale of any of the Plans' assetsis necessary; (d) examine the diversification of each Plan's assets inlight of the loan investment; and (e) review the terms of the Loans toassure that they comport with the Plan's investment schemes. Mr. Watsonwill determine, prior to the making or increase of the Loans, that theLoans are appropriate and suitable as an investment for the Plans, thatthey are sound and reasonable under the circumstances and that any saleor liquidation of assets held by the Plans that might be required in orderto make such loan or increase is prudent and reasonable. Mr. Watson willbe responsible under the loan agreement for supervising the Loans to ensurethat (1) The amount of the Loans never exceeds 25% of each Plan's assets,(2) the interest rate is always at least a fair market rate, (3) the Loansare at all times secured by a first mortgage on property worth at least200% of the outstanding principal obligation, and (4) installments andrepayment of the Loans are timely made. Mr. Waston has examined the termsof the proposed Loans and has initially determined that they are appropriateand suitable for the Plans. He will be required to make the same determinationimmediately prior to consummation of each of the transactions and willbe empowered and required to approve each increase in the principal amountof the Loans. He will further be empowered and directed to enforce theterms of the loan agreement between the Plans and the Employer, includingbringing suit or other appropriate process against the Employer in theevent of default, allowing 10 days to foreclose on the mortgage; ascertainingat least annually that the Employer is maintaining adequate insurance onthe Property in the Plans' favor against fire or other lose; and reportingat least annually to the trustee of the Plans on the performance of theLoans, including whether the value of the collateral remains equal to atleast 200% of the outstanding balance of the Loans. Mr. Watson represents that all of the prior Loans were administered inaccordance with the terms set forth in PTE 84-112 and that the Loans wereand continue to be an appropriate investment for the Plans. As independentfiduciary, Mr. Watson will be entitled to such information from the Employerand the Plans as may reasonably be necessary to fulfill his responsibilities,and he shall be paid reasonable compensation plus reimbursement for reasonableexpenses, if any, including legal or appraisal fees or costs, as agreedupon with the trustee of the Plans. The Employer may also indemnify himfor his acts performed reasonably and in good faith, while acting as theindependent fiduciary. 8. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionsmeet the statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of theAct because: (a) The Loans are secured by real estate with an appraisedvalue that is and will remain at least twice the amount of the Loans; (b)the Employer will insure the Property and add additional collateral sothat the value of collateral securing the Loans is always at least 200%of the outstanding balance of the Loans; (c) the Loans have and will continueto be administered by an independent fiduciary; and (d) the trustee andthe independent fiduciary have determined that the transactions are appropriatefor the Plans and in the best interest of the Plan's participants and beneficiariesand protective of their interests. For Further Information Contact: Alan H. Levitas of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="15">Alton Engineering Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan); Located in Bethesda,Maryland</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7640]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption</ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of theCode shall not apply to the proposed sale by the Plan of three limitedpartnership interests (the Interests) and a certain parcel of improvedreal property (the Property) to George J. Quinn (Mr. Quinn), a disqualifiedperson with respect to the Plan, provided that the sale price is no lessthan the fair market value of the Interests and the Property as of thedate of sale. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts And Representations</ITAG>1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan which, as of April 30, 1988, had oneparticipant and total assets of approximately $1,227,725. The trusteesof the Plan are Mr. Quinn and his wife, Eileen S. Quinn. 2. The sponsor of the Plan is the Alton Engineering Company (the Employer).The Employer is a Maryland corporation located at 9407 Elsmere Court, Bethesda,Maryland. Mr. Quinn is the sole stockholder of the Employer. The Employeris engaged in the business of providing general contracting services. However,the Employer has been relatively inactive since 1980 and has had only oneactive employee, Mr. Quinn. The Employer decided to terminate the Plan effective April 30, 1984. Atthe time of termination, all of the participants in the Plan, except forMr. Quinn, had terminated their employment with the Employer. By letterdated July 25, 1986, the Internal Revenue Service determined that the Planwas qualified upon termination. The participant's interests in the Planwere subsequently liquidated, except for the amount due to Mr. Quinn. Therefore,Mr. Quinn is the only remaining participant in the Plan.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Because Mr. Quinn is the only participant in the Planand the employer is wholly-owned by Mr. Quinn, there is no jurisdictionunder Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, thereis jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975 of theCode. 3. The Interests are described as follows: (1) a 1.365% interest in the Columbia Pike Limited Partnership (the ColumbiaPike L.P.), which owns a single parcel of improved real property locatedat 5600 Columbia Pike, Fairfax County, Virginia; (2) a 1.249% interestin a 37.7 acre parcel of unimproved real property located in MontgomeryCounty, Maryland, which is owned by the Wilgus Associates Limited Partnership(Wilgus) and held by the Plan under the Paramount Development Limited Partnership(the Paramount L.P.), which is a partner with Wilgus; and (3) a 2.5% interestin the Cohen-Donnelly Associates Limited Partnership, which owns the following:(i) A garden apartment complex located on Missouri Avenue and 13th Street,NW., Washington, DC; (ii) a 3-story, walk-up apartment building locatedat 5301 New Hampshire Avenue, NW., Washington, DC; and (iii) and a purchasemoney deed of trust secured by a 3-story garden apartment development locatedat 7406 Hancock Avenue, Takoma Park, Maryland. The Property is a 100% fee simple interest in certain improved real propertylocated at 32 N Street, SE., Washington, DC. 4. The Plan acquired the Interests and the Property from unrelated partiesprior to the effective date of the Act. In addition to the Interests ownedby the Plan, Mr. Quinn owns a 2.5% interest in the Paramount L.P., andholds or controls, along with the Employer, a 12.6% interest in the ColumbiaPike L.P. (together, the Quinn Interests). The applicant represents thatthe Quinn interests were acquired, in each case, at the same time thatthe Plan acquired its Interests in those same partnerships, which was priorto the effective date of the Act. The applicant states that part of theQuinn Interests in the Columbia Pike L.P. were later sold to other investors,some of whom are related to Mr. Quinn. The applicant states further thatthere haved been no additional acquisitions of ownership interests in anyof the limited partnerships (the Partnerships) by either Mr. Quinn, theEmployer, or the Plan.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ In this proposed exemption, the Department expresses noopinion as to whether the continued holding of the Interests by the Planand the Quinn Interests by Mr. Quinn, subsequent to the effective dateof the Act, violated any provision of Part 4 of Title I of the Act. The applicant represents that neither the Property nor the underlying propertiesowned by the Partnerships have ever been leased to, or used by, a partyin interest or disqualified person with respect to the Plan. 5. The Interests and the Property were appraised on November 20, 1987 byJohn E. Gogarty, M.A.I. (Mr. Gogarty), an independent, qualified real estateappraiser and consultant in Washington, DC. Mr. Gogarty states that theInterests and the Property had a fair market value of approximately $347,350and $45,000, respectively, as of November 20, 1987. Mr. Quinn proposesto purchase the Interests and the Property from the Plan for cash in anamount equal to their fair market value, as estabished by Mr. Gogarty'sappraisal. The applicant states that Mr. Gogarty's appraisal will be updatedfor purposes of the proposed transaction and that there will be no brokeragecommissions or other expenses incurred by the Plan in connection with thesale. 6. The applicant represents that the proposed transaction is in the bestinterests of the Plan because the Interests and the Property are not easilyliquidated and that the Plan may not be able to obtain the appraised fairmarket value for the Interests and the Property if the Plan is forced tosell these assets on the open market. In addition, the applicant statesthat the Plan may lose its tax qualified status unless it is liquidatedshortly. Mr. Quinn has considered taking the Interests and the Propertyas a distribution in kind as part of his total distribution from the Plan.However, Mr. Quinn represents that he wants to ``roll over'' his entiredistribution from the Plan to an individual retirement account (IRA) andhas had difficulty finding a corporate trustee that is willing to holdthe Property and the Interests in an IRA. Therefore, Mr. Quinn believesthat the proposed transaction will assist the Plan in liquidating its assetsand will enable the Plan to expedite the distribution of such assets. 7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because:(a) The sale will be a one-time transaction for cash; (b) the Plan willreceive an amount equal to the fair market value of the Interests and theProperty, as established by an independent, qualified appraiser; and (c)the Plan will not pay any brokerage commissions or other expenses withrespect to the sale. Notice to Interested Persons: Because Mr. Quinn is the only participantin the Plan, it has been determined that there is no need to distributethe notice of proposed exemption to interested persons. Comments and requestsfor a public hearing are due 30 days from the date of publication of thisproposed exemption in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. For Further Information Contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="84">General Information </ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following: (1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries; (2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and (3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction. (4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption. <ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 25th day of August, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and WelfareBenefits Administration, U.S. Department of Labor. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-19714 Filed 8-29-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>