<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88114-0020 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-14-88.f2.A1019</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Parts 1033 and 1046</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. AO-166-A57 and AO-123-A58]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Milk in the Ohio Valley, and Louisville-Lexington-Evansville MarketingAreas; Recommended Decision and Opportunity to File Written Exceptionson Proposed Amendments to Tentative Marketing Agreements and To Orders</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This decision recommends certain changes in the poolingprovisions of the Ohio Valley and Louisville-Lexington-Evansville milkorders based on industry proposals considered at a public hearing heldJune 30-July 1, 1987. As recommended, a pool distributing plant physicallylocated in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansville marketing area would beregulated under that order irrespective of the market in which the planthas most of its fluid milk products distribution.The decision also recommends another change in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansvilleorder. This change slightly modifies the method for accounting for excessdiversions to nonpool plants. These changes are needed to reflect currentmarketing conditions and to insure orderly marekting.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments are due on or before January 29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments (four copies) should be filed with the HearingClerk, Room 1079, South Building, United States Department of Agriculture,Washington, DC 20250.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:</T2>Maurice M. Martin, Marketing Specialist,USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968, South Building,P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-7311.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This administrative action is governedby the provisions of sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291.The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires the Agency toexamine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to 5U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The amendments would promoteorderly marketing of milk by producers and regulated handlers.This action changes the current regulatory status of a pool distributingplant that is located in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansville marketingarea but is regulated by the Ohio Valley order because a greater portionof its fluid milk products distribution is in the latter order's marketingarea. It would regulate such plant under the Louisville-Lexington-Evansvilleorder. Such action is expected to equate the cost of raw milk suppliesto the pool plant so situated with its principal competition. The economicimpact of such action will be to increase returns to dairy farmers whosemilk will be pooled under the Louisville-Lexington-Evansville order whileslightly reducing returns to dairy farmers whose milk will continue tobe pooled under the Ohio Valley order. The overall economic impact of theaction is expected to be minimal.<T3>Prior document in this proceeding:</T3><T3>Notice of Hearing:</T3> Issued June 15, 1987; published June 19, 1987(52 FR 23306).<ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>Notice is hereby given of the filing with the Hearing Clerk of this recommendeddecision with respect to proposed amendments to the tentative marketingagreements and the orders regulating the handling of milk in the Ohio Valley,and Louisville-Lexington-Evansville marketing areas. This notice is issuedpursuant to the provisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Actof 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicable rules of practiceand procedure governing the formulation of marketing agreements and marketingorders (7 CFR Part 900).Interested parties may file written exceptions to this decision with theHearing Clerk, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, 20250, bythe 15th day after publication of this decision in the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Four copies of the exceptions should be filed.All written submissions made pursuant to this notice will be made availablefor public inspection at the office of the Hearing Clerk during regularbusiness hours (7 CFR 1.27(b)).The proposed amendments set forth below are based on the record of a publichearing held at Louisville, Kentucky, on June 30-July 1, 1987, pursuantto a notice of hearing issued June 15, 1987 (52 FR 23306).The material issues on the record of the hearing relate to:1. Regulation of a distributing plant physically located in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansvillemarketing area but currently regulated by the Ohio Valley milk order.2. Diversion of producer milk under the Louisville order.3. Pool plant qualification requirements for a balancing plant operatedby a cooperative association and regulated by the Ohio Valley order.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof:1. <T3>Regulation of a distributing plant physically located in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansvillemarketing area but currently regulated by the Ohio Valley milk order</T3>The Louisville-Lexington-Evansville order (Louisville order) should beamended to provide that a distributing plant which meets the pooling standardsof the Louisville order and one or more other Federal orders and whichis located in the Louisville order's marketing area shall be a pool plantunder the Louisville order irrespective of the quantity of fluid milk productsdistributed in any other Federal order market. However, such pool plantstatus shall be accorded only as long as the Louisville order's Class Iprice at the plant is not less than the Class I price that would be applicableat the plant if regulated under the order for the Federal order marketingarea in which the plant has the greatest route disposition.Presently, when a distributing plant qualifies for pooling under the Louisvilleorder and another order, it is regulated in the market in which it hasthe greater route sales.``Lock-in'' provision adopted herein for the Louisville order cannot achieveits intended purpose without a corollary change in the pooling standardsof the Ohio Valley order. Thus, the Ohio Valley order should provide thatany plant with route sales in the Ohio Valley marketing area shall be exemptfrom full regulation under that order, even though it has more sales inthe Ohio Valley market than in the other market, if the plant is subjectto full regulation under the other order.Both Dairymen, Inc. (DI), and Milk Marketing, Inc. (MMI), proposed (proposals1 and 2 as listed in the Notice of Hearing) that a distributing plant thatis physically located in the Louisville order's marketing area (Order 46)should be regulated by that order irrespective of the quantity of suchplant's route disposition in any other Federal order marketing area. ProposalNo. 1 would amend Order 46 by locking in such a plant under the order andproposal No. 2 is intended to amend the Ohio Valley order (Order 33) byreleasing from regulation such a plant even though such plant may havemore fluid milk sales in the Order 33 area than in the Order 46 area.A witness for DI stated that this action is necessary in order to minimizedisruptive market conditions in the Kentucky supply area. The witness indicatedthat the proposal would only affect the Kroger Company's (Kroger) distributingplant located in Clark County, Kentucky (Order 46 marketing area), butcurrently regulated by Order 33. He said that the milk procurement andsales patterns of the Kroger plant establish a primary association of theplant with the Order 46 market.The DI witness testified that the traditional method of pooling a distributingplant has always been on the basis of the market in which the plant hasthe most sales. The justification for this method, he said, was to ensurethat all handlers having the major portion of their sales in the same orderarea were subject to the same minimum order prices and other regulatoryprovisions. He said that this principle rested on an assumption that suchcompeting plants would be located in the same geographic area.Also, the witness for DI said that the traditional method of pooling fluidmilk plants has become outdated because of large processing plants, suchas chain store plants, that have sales over wide geographical areas. Theproposal, he said, better serves the principle of trying to assure thatall handlers competing for milk procurement and sales in an order areaare subject to the same price as their competition. He indicated the proposalwould regulate a distributing plant under the order for the marketing areawhere it is physically located even though its route distribution was greaterin another Federal order's marketing area.The spokesman for DI said that producers supplying the Kroger plant arelocated within the same geographic area as producers who supply Order 46plants and to some extent producers who supply plants regulated under theTennessee Valley, Nashville, and Alabama-West Florida orders. He said thatthis proposal would minimize any blend price inequities which may occurbetween producers located within this same geographic supply area becausea distributing plant would be regulated within the same area from whichit procures its milk supply. Producers, he says, who supply other Federalorder plants located in the same general area are receiving significantlydifferent blend prices.A witness for MMI also testified in support of proposals 1 and 2. He saidthat MMI cannot service the Kroger plant at competitive prices and thatthis problem is caused by the difference between the Order 33 blend priceand blend prices in markets to the south. He stated that in order for MMIto make their members' pay prices competitive, MMI has found it necessaryto charge the Kroger plant at Winchester a surcharge of 15 cents on allthe milk that Kroger purchases. The MMI witness stated that the 15-centsurcharge to Kroger has helped MMI maintain a competitive position in theprocurement area and that they have used that surcharge to pay for suchthings as subsidies to milk haulers, over-order premiums to MMI's members,and to pay extra premiums in certain competitive areas.The spokesman for NMI said that a higher blend price is needed at the Winchesterplant because the Order 33 blend price and the normal over-order chargeis not sufficient to assure an adequate supply of milk at that location.He said that Federal order prices should be the prime determinant in theassurance of adequate supplies and it should not be the responsibilityof suppliers to selectively determine that certain plants should pay higherover-order charges than other plants with the same Federal order ClassI price. The blend price must be increased, he said, by either having ahigher Class I price at that location or having the plant regulated byanother market with a higher percentage of Class I utilization.A witness for the Kroger Company (Kroger) testified in support of theseproposals. The Kroger witness said that for the first 5 months of 1987,the Winchester plant's Class I sales in the Order 46 marketing area averagedmore than 33 percent of its total fluid milk sales and that its fluid milksales in the Order 33 marketing area averaged less than 50 percent of itstotal fluid milk sales. He said that of the total in-area packaged ClassI sales for Order 46, its sales represent about 16 percent of the totalmarket and that of the total in-area packaged Class I sales for Order 33,its sales represent about 8 percent of the total. In addition, he said,that when comparing its Class I sales in each of the two order areas ofthe first 5 months of 1987 with the same period of 1986, sales in the Order33 area have declined and sales in the Order 46 area have increased.The spokesman for Kroger said that because of the recent increases in theClass I differentials in the southern markets, Winchester has not beenas attractive a market outlet as before. This, he said, has contributedto the need for Kroger to pay, beginning in September 1986, an additional15-cent per hundredweight surcharge over the regular premium price andthat this surcharge amounted to approximately $439,000 for the first fivemonths of 1987.The Kroger witness said that these proposals would make the Winchesterplant more competitive with other plants in the procurement of milk. Inaddition, he said that the lock-in proposals would equalize producer'spay prices under the order in the Winchester plant's procurement area andshould eliminate the need for the 15-cent surcharge.A representative for Huntington Interstate Milk Producers Association (Huntington)also testified in support of the lock-in proposals. He said that Huntingtonsupplies Order 33 milk plants including the Winchester plant. In recentweeks, he said, Huntington had lost a few members because a supply plantat Maysville, Kentucky, was offering these producers the Order 46 weightedaverage price, which is higher than the Order 33 blend price.A representative for the National Farmers Organization (NFO), which hasmember producers on both the Order 33 and Order 46 markets, testified inopposition to the lock-in proposals. Exhibits that were introduced by NFOshowed that if the Kroger plant were to be pooled under Order 46, thatorder's blend price would have increased at least 11 cents and as muchas 18 cents for the first 5 months of 1987. In addition, the exhibits showedthat the blend price in Order 33 for this same period would have been decreasedbetween 6 and 9 cents.The witness for NFO said that the proposals would have the effect of penalizingproducers whose milk is pooled on Order 33 in order to save some milk forthe Kroger plant at Winchester. The NFO witness said that the differencein blend prices for the two markets could be as much as 49 cents. He saidthat such a disparity in blend prices between these two close-togetherregulated markets will create inequities among producers within the samemilk shed. Furthermore, he said, the base-excess plan of Order 46 willcreate additional friction with the Order 33 producers.While acknowledging the uniqueness of the Kroger problem, the representativeof NFO held that a plant should be regulated under the Federal order forthe area in which it has the most sales. It was his position that producersin the market in which the plant has the greater proportion of its saleshave a right to share in the Class I sales associated with that plant.A brief was filed by the Louis Trauth Dairy, Inc. (Trauth) in oppositionto proposals 1 and 2. In his Order 33 handler's view, the proposals representa radical departure from the policies established for regulating plantsunder marketing orders. Its brief asserts that the proponents have notmet their burden of proof and that the record shows that milk is regularlydiverted away from the Winchester plant, thereby indicating that plantdoes not have a supply problem. The testimony presented at the hearing indicates that under current marketingconditions the lock-in provisions for the Louisville order as proposedby DI and MMI would apply only to Kroger's distributing plant at Winchester,Kentucky. The adoption of the proposal is warranted because of special circumstancessurrounding the operation of the Winchester plant. The plant is locatedin the marketing area of the Louisville order. It began operating in November1982 and during this month the plant was a pool distributing plant underthe Ohio Valley order. From December 1982 through March 1983, it was apool city plant (pool distributing plant) under the Louisville order. Sincethen, the plant has continued to be pooled under the Ohio Valley order.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Offical notice is taken on the lists of pool handlersunder Federal Orders 33 and 46 as published by the respective market administratorsfor the months of November 1982 through September 1987. The Winchester plant distributes fluid milk products in five Federal ordermarkets and in unregulated areas of West Virginia and Kentucky. Most ofits sales, however, are concentrated in two markets: the Ohio Valley marketand the Louisville market. Data introduced into the record show that duringthe January-May 1987 period the Kroger plant had nearly 50 percent of itsClass I distribution in the Ohio Valley market, about 34 percent in theLouisville market and about 16 percent in all other areas, including theEastern Ohio-Western Pennsylvania, Tennessee Valley and Indiana Federalorder markets. The entire raw milk supply for the Kroger plant is obtained from DI andMMI (which includes milk of Huntington Interstate Milk Producers) and comesfrom producers principally located in Kentucky. The plant receives milkdirectly from the farms of producers and incidental or supplemental suppliesfrom supply plants operated by MMI. Most of the plant's milk supply isobtained from producers located in the same geographical area as producerssupplying handlers regulated by the Louisville order and other orders southand east of the plant's location. The record indicates that in at least18 Kentucky counties there are producers who supply the Kroger plant aswell as other producers in the same counties that supply plants regulatedunder the following other orders: Alabama-West Florida, Georgia, Louisville,Nashville, and Tennessee Valley (southern markets). While the Class I prices under the Louisville and Ohio Valley orders atthe Kroger plant's location are identical, the uniform weighted averageprice of producers under the Louisville order usually have been higherthan the comparable Ohio Valley prices. For example, during the 53-monthperiod from Janaury 1983 through May 1987, the uniform weighted averageprices to producers under the Louisville order exceeded the comparableOhio Valley order's prices during 49 months. The amount of these differencesranged from a low of one cent to a high of 35 cents per hundredweight andaveraged 14 cents for the 49 months. A similar situation exists for theWinchester plant in competing for milk supplies with handlers regulatedin other southeastern order markets where both Class I prices and uniformprices to producers are substantially higher than such prices under theOhio Valley order. As indicated by the record evidence, the higher pay prices available toproducers under the Louisville and other southeastern order in the Kentuckysupply area have created difficulties for the Kroger plant at Winchesterin procuring adequate supplies. The principal difficulty cited in thisregard was the impact of the present 15-cent per hundredweight additionalcharge by both DI and MMI on all milk purchases by Kroger. It is evidentfrom the record evidence that this 15-cent charge, which has been in effectsince September 1986, was designed to overcome the difficulties of maintainingan adequate supply of milk for the Kroger Winchester plant as a resultof producer pay price differences between the two markets in question.Although the record clearly establishes that a higher price is requiredat this location to attract adequate supplies, the present extra 15-centcharge used for this purpose places the Kroger Company at a competitivedisadvantange with other handlers that it competes with for sales. As noted previously, usually a distributing plant that qualifies for poolingunder more than one order during the same month is regulated under theorder for the area in which such plant's route distribution is the greatest.This tends to insure that all handlers having their principal sales ina market are subject to the same prices and other regulatory requirements.This conditions of pooling a distributing plant is the basis for regulatingthe Kroger plant under the Ohio Valley order, because a greater quantityof its sales is distributed in such order's marketing area than in anyother order marketing area. The pricing problems affecting the procurement of adequate milk suppliesfor the Winchester plant, however, are severe enough to override the traditionalbasis for pooling a distributing plant that qualifies as a pool plant undermore than one order during the same month. Under such circumstances, considerationmust be given to regulating the Winchester plant in the market in whichthere is reasonable assurance that it will have available an adequate supplyof producer milk. It is concluded that the Kroger Winchester plant or anyother distributing plant located in the Louisville marketing area can bereasonably assured of and adequate supply if it is regulated under theLouisville order. It should be noted that under the type of lock-in provision adopted herein,the Kroger plant or another distributing plant so situated would continueto be pooled indefinitely under the Louisville order so long as the plantmeets such order's performance requirements for a pool distributing plant.This condition of pooling is intended to assure that the Winchester plantis primarily engaged in the processing and distribution of fluid milk productsto an extent that such plant's route distribution in the marketing areais a major competitive factor.As noted earlier, under the lock-in provision adopted herein, such poolplant status is accorded a distributing plant so long as the Louisvilleorder's Class I price applicable at such plant's location is not less thanthe Class I price applicable at the same plant's location under anotherorder for a market where it has its greatest route distribution. This additionalcondition of pooling is intended to prevent any competitive price advantageaccruing to a plant that otherwise would be locked-in under the adoptedprovision.Under the lock-in provision adopted herein, the Louisville order wouldregulate the Winchester plant even though it had a greater proportion ofits route distribution in the marketing area of the Ohio Valley order.However, the intent of this pooling arrangement is in conflict with thepresent pooling requirements of the Ohio Valley order since it does nothave a complementary provision which will permit the plant to be locked-inunder the Louisville order. As proposed by the lock-in proponents, theOhio Valley order should be amended to provide for such a complementaryprovision.In opposing the proposed lock-in provision at the hearing and in post-hearingbriefs, opponents maintained that no departure should be made from thelong established policy concerning regulation of a distributing plant thatqualifies for pooling under two or more orders. It was the position ofopponents that the record evidence did not warrant any departure from suchestablished policy regarding the Winchester operation. Contrary to opponents'position, the pricing problems of Kroger are severe enough to warrant overridingthe customary pooling provisions as related to the Kroger operation andsupport the adoption of the proposed lock-in provision.NFO contended that the proposed lock-in proposal, if adopted, will widenthe difference in producer pay prices between the Louisville and Ohio Valleyorders to the extent that it will create inequities among producers withinthe same supply area. The record evidence, however, does not support thisclaim. Rather, adoption of the proposals will tend to provide uniformityof prices to producers within the procurement area of the Winchester plant.2. <T3>Diversion of producer milk under the Louisville order. </T3>Rule concerningthe diversion of producer milk from pool plants to nonpool plants shouldbe modified to provide a procedure for accounting for over-divisions tononpool plants. On the basis of this record, however, other division proposalsshould not be adopted. Such proposals would (1) relax the delivery requirementof an individual producer to establish division eligibility for the monthsof March through August; and (2) modify the basis of determining the quantityof producer milk that may be diverted to nonpool plants during the September-Februaryperiod.Presently, the order provides that during the months of March through Augustat least two days' production (one delivery for a producer on every-other-daypickup) of a producer must be physically received at a pool plant eachmonth in order for the milk of such producer to be eligible for diversionto a nonpool plant as producer milk. During the September-February period,monthly diversions of a producer's milk to a nonpool plant cannot exceed22 days' production (11 every-other-day pickup).NFO proposed that diversion eligibility for a producer be reduced to oneday's production received at a pool plant and that diversions to nonpoolplants during each of the months of September through February not exceed60 percent of the producer milk received at a pool plant. At the hearing,however, NFO revised its diversion limitation proposal to increase the60 percent factor to 70 percent and to permit diversion limits to be basedeither on 70 percent of total producer deliveries to pool plants or onthe number of days of production of an individual producer that is actuallydelivered to a pool plant. Also, it proposed that under either option,diversion limitations should apply uniformly to both a cooperative associationand a proprietary handler.In support of its proposal to reduce the delivery requirement for an individualproducer during the March-August period, a spokesman for NFO testifiedthat the present two-day delivery requirement has occasionally caused problemswhen one day's production of a large producer has been picked up by twodifferent bulk tank trucks on succeeding days without both trucks deliveringto a pool plant. According to the witness, this method of handling canresult in some producer milk being depooled. The spokesman indicated thatthis is because the diverting handler, having assumed that all producerswhose milk was on each truck met the two-day delivery requirement, wouldnot discover the error until after the end of the month, when it was toolate to correct the problem. To minimize or avoid the problem, the witnessstated, it is necessary for the diverting handler to have the milk on anevery-other-day truck route delivered to a pool plant at least twice amonth solely to make certain that the two-day delivery requirement is met.He stated that this causes excessive hauling and handling because the additionalmilk delivered to the pool plant is not needed. Reducing the delivery requirementto one day, according to the witness, would eliminate this unnecessaryexpense and simplify monitoring producer shipments.Also, NFO proposed that the limits on the quantity of milk that may bediverted to nonpool plants during the September-February period be basedeither on a percentage of a handler's total producer milk receipts at poolplants or, as presently provided, on the number of days of production ofan individual producer that may be diverted to a nonpool plant. The purposeof the proposal, as stated by NFO's witness, is to provide the divertinghandler with a choice in achieving efficient diversion of reserve milksupplies to nonpool plants. Proponent's spokesman testified that basingdiversion limitations only on the number of delivery days of an individualproducer causes a handler unnecessary handling, pumping and hauling milksolely to maintain producer status for some of its dairy farmers. In NFO'sview, the proposal would not encourage the pooling of greater quantitiesof producer milk under the order than is permitted now. Rather, NFO claimedthat is would provide for increased efficiency in marketing reserve milk.A spokesman and DI testified in opposition to NFO's proposals concerningdiversions to nonpool plants. This witness argued that the present diversionprovisions are adequate because there is every indication that the amountof milk being diverted by handlers in the market was well within the existinglimits. He stated that liberalization of the diversion provisions wouldmake less milk available to the fluid market at a time when market conditionscall for greater shipments. To this end, DI offered two counter proposalswhich would (1) require that eight day's production of a producer be receivedat a pool plant during each of the months of September through Februaryand (2) that the amount of milk that a handler may divert to nonpool plantsnot exceed a volume to one-third of the handler's producer milk physicallyreceived at or diverted from pool plants during such months. At the hearing and in post-hearing briefs, both MMI and Kroger supportedDI's position regarding diversions to nonpool plants. Neither the delivery requirement for an individual producer or the limitson diversions to nonpool plants during September through February shouldbe modified on the basis of this record. The testimony presented by NFO in support of its proposal to change toa one-day delivery requirements, to a large extent, was general in natureand lacked ``specificity.'' Its witness, for example, did not provide anyevidence regarding the probelm that NFO has had in meeting the order'spresent delivery requirement. Although the NFO witness testified that thetwo-day delivery requirement occasionally caused qualification problemswhen one day's production of a large producer was picked up in the samebulk tank truck that was also picking up 2 days' production of other producers,there was no evidence presented which indicated the number of times thatthis problem occurred or the quantity of milk of its member producers thatwas depooled. The record evidence does not demonstrate that the two-daydelivery requirement is excessive or that it is not needed to demonstratethat a producer is genuinely associated with the fluid market. Accordingly,the proposal is denied. The basic issue developed on the record with respect to NFO's other diversionproposal concerns whether to provide an alternative option of basing diversionlimitations on a percentage of a handler's total producer milk supply andwhat constitutes reasonable diversion limits in light of the market's presentsupply-demand conditions so that fluid milk plants are assured of adequatemilk supplies. The record evidence indicates that Class I utilization for Order 46 averaged59.9 percent for 1986 and ranged from a low of 50.4 percent in June toa high of 72.4 percent in September. For the first five months of 1987,Class I utilization averaged 63.0 percent compared to an average of 56.0percent for the same period in 1986. This supply-demand situation indicatesthat allowing a diverting handler to divert to a nonpool plant as muchas 70 percent of its total producer receipts, as proposed by NFO, wouldnot be appropriate. Also, the record evidence suggests that all handlers on the marekt areable to operate within the diversion limits as now contained in the presentorder. For instance, data contained in the record shows that for 1986 divertedmilk, as a percentage of producer receipts, ranged from a low of 16.5 percentfor September to a high of 31.5 percent in May. Also, for the first fivemonths of 1987, diversions to nonpool plants averaged 22.1 percent comparedto 26.2 percent for 1986. Conversely, on the basis of this record there is no apparent need to limitdiversions to nonpool plants to the extent proposed by DI. There was nodemonstration by DI that the current limit on the amount of milk that maybe diverted is causing in any way disruptive marketing conditions. In view of these considerations, the diversion limits, as now providedin the order, are appropriate for this market, considering current supply-demandconditions. The record evidence does not provide a compelling basis forchanging the present diversion limits. Accordingly, all proposals to changediversion limits are denied. As indicated previously, the order should be revised to specify the procedurefor accounting for over-diverted milk. As proposed by both NFO and DI andas herein adopted, the order is revised to provide that milk diverted inexcess of the diversion limits as prescribed by the order shall not beproducer milk and that the diverting handler shall designate the dairyfarmers' deliveries that shall not be producer milk. Also, if the divertinghandler fails to make such designation, none of the diverted milk of suchhandler shall be producer milk. This modification is desirable and appropriate.Subsequent to the hearing, NFO filed a petition to have the hearing reopenedin the event that the Secretary determines that DI's counter proposalsthat were offered in response to NFO's proposals concerning diversionsto nonpool plants would be ``worthy of consideration.'' Since DI's proposalswere not adopted, the issue raised in NFO's petition is moot. DI proposed at the hearing to amend the performance standards for a pooldistributing plant. As proposed, diverted milk would be included alongwith milk physically received at the distributing plant as the base incalculating a plant's Class I utilization percentage. A specified minimumClass I utilization percentage is used as one of the condition's that mustbe met in determining the pooling status of a distributing plant underthe order. Counsel for NFO objected to the proposal on the basis that it was not includedin the hearing notice and thus was outside the scope of the hearing. TheAdministrative Law Judge (ALJ) presiding at the hearing ruled that theproposal was not properly noticed and thus sustained the objection of NFO'scounsel.   DI, in its brief, renewed the request to allow for testimony to be takenon the proposal since it was its position that the proposal was withinthe scope of the hearing. After a careful review of the matter, it is concludedthat the ALJ's ruling in this regard was proper. Therefore, the motionreverse the ruling of the ALJ is denied.   3. <T3>Pooling provisions for a plant operated by a cooperative associationand regulated under the Ohio Valley order. </T3>As noted in the hearingnotice, a proposal of NFO would have reduced from 50 percent to 40 percentthe quantity of members' milk that must be delivered to pool distributingplants in order to qualify a plant operated by a cooperative associationas a pool plant. At the hearing, NFO did not present any testimony in supportof the proposal and in its brief NFO stated that it wanted to withdrawthe Proposal. Witnesses for both MMI and the Kroger Company testified inopposition to the proposal. Accordingly, no further consideration is givento the proposal in this proceeding.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision.  <ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings   </ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the Ohio Valley and Louisville-Lexington-Evansvilleorders were first issued and when they were amended. The previous findingsand determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed, except where theymay conflict with those set forth herein.   (a) The tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as hereby proposedto be amended, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, will tend toeffectuate the declared policy of the Act;   (b) The parity prices of milk as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the aforesaid marketing areas, and the minimum pricesspecified in the tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as herebyproposed to be amended, are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors,insure a sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and be in thepublic interest; and   (c) The tentative marketing agreements and the orders, as hereby proposedto be amended, will regulate the handling of milk in the same manner as,and will be applicable only to persons in the respective classes of industrialand commercial activity specified in, marketing agreements upon which ahearing has been held.<ITAG tagnum="84">Recommended Marketing Agreements and Order Amending the Orders</ITAG>The recommended marketing agreements for the Ohio Valley and Louisville-Lexington-Evansvillemarketing areas are not included in this decision because the regulatoryprovisions thereof would be the same as those contained in the orders,as hereby proposed to be amended. The following order amending the orders,as amended regulating the handling of milk in such marketing areas is recommendedas the detailed and appropriate means by which the foregoing conclusionsmay be carried out.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Parts 1033 and 1046</ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products.1. The authority citation for CFR Parts 1033 and 1046 continues to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-674.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1033_MILK IN THE OHIO VALLEY MARKETING AREA</ITAG>2. Section 1033.56 is amended by revising the first sentence of paragraph(a) through the first comma and adding a new paragraph (c) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1033.56</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plants subject to other Federal orders.</ITAG>(a) Except as specified in andSection; 1033.31 and in paragraphs (b) and(c) of this section, * * *<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) A plant qualified pursuant to andSection; 1033.12(a) which also meetsthe requirements of a fully regulated plant pursuant to the provisionsof another Federal order on the basis of distribution in such other marketingarea and from which the Secretary determines route disposition, exceptfilled milk, during the month in this marketing area is greater than routedisposition in such other marketing area but which plant is, nevertheless,fully regulated under such other Federal order.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1046_MILK IN THE LOUISVILLE-LEXINGTON-EVANSVILLE MARKETING AREA</ITAG>3. Section 1046.7 is amended by revising paragraph (e) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1046.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Pool plant.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e) The term ``pool plant'' shall not apply to the following plants:(1) A producer-handler plant;(2) Unless determined otherwise by the Secretary, a milk plant during anymonth in which the milk at such plant would be subject to the pricing andpooling provisions of other order issued pursuant to the Act, except:(i) A plant that qualifies as a pool plant pursuant to paragraph (a), (b),(c) or (d) of this section and a greater volume of fluid milk products,except filled milk, is disposed of from such plant in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansvillemarketing area to other pool plants and to retail or wholesale outletsthan in the marketing area regulated pursuant to such other order duringthe current month; and(ii) A plant that qualifies as a pool plant pursuant to paragraph (a) ofthis section and which also meets the pooling requirements of another Federalorder on the basis of route disposition if the plant is located in theLouisville-Lexington-Evansville marketing area and this order's Class Iprice applicable at the plant is not less than the Class I price that wouldbe applicable at the plant if regulated under the order for the Federalorder marketing area in which the plant has the greatest route disposition;and(3) A plant that qualifies as a pool plant pursuant to paragraph (a) ofthis section and which also meets the requirements of a fully regulatedplant pursuant to the provisions of another Federal order on the basisof distribution in such other marketing area and from which the Secretarydetermines route disposition, except filled milk, during the month in thismarketing area is greater than route disposition in such other marketingarea but which plant is, nevertheless, fully regulated under such otherFederal order.4. Section 1046. 13 is amended by adding a new paragraph (c)(4) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1046.13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Producer milk.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) * * *(4) Any milk diverted in excess of the limits prescribed in paragraph (c)(3)of this section shall not be producer milk. The diverting handler shalldesignate the farmer deliveries that shall not be producer milk. If thehandler fails to make such designation, no milk diverted by such handlerpursuant to this paragraph shall be producer milk.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on: January 7, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J. Patrick Boyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-682 Filed 1-13-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>