<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88506-0051 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-06-88.f2.A1050</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="56">Extension of Previously-Granted Interim Orders Under the SemiconductorChip Protection Act of 1984</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Patent and Trademark Office, Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Extension of interim orders.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> On November 18, 1987, a Notice of Initiation of Proceedingswas published at 52 FR 44200, whereby the Commissioner requested commentson the extension of existing interim orders under the Semiconductor ChipProtection Act of 1984. A hearing was held on March 16, 1988. To promotethe development of international comity in the protection of mask works,the Commissioner extended the existing interim orders until May 31, 1988.By Amendment 2 to Department Organization Order 10-14, the Secretary ofCommerce delegated to the Assistant Secretary and Commissioner of Patentsand Trademarks (hereinafter the Commissioner) the authority, under section914 of the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984 (SCPA), 17 U.S.C.914, to make findings and issue orders for interim protection of semiconductormask works produced in foreign countries. Pursuant to the SemiconductorChip Protection Act Extension of 1987, Pub. L. 100-159, the Commissioner'sauthority to grant interim protection orders was extended until July 1,1991.Interim orders have been issued, and extended, in favor of mask works producedin eighteen (18) countries_Japan, Australia, Sweden, Switzerland, Finland,Canada, and the twelve Member States of the European Communities (EC).This proceeding was initiated to review the further progress that has beenmade toward establishing legal protection of semiconductor mask works inthe eighteen (18) subject countries, and to permit the Commissioner todetermine, on a case-by-case basis, whether to extend the orders or torecommend that permanent protection be granted through the issuance ofa Presidential proclamation pursuant to section 902(a)(2) of the SCPA,17 U.S.C. 902(a)(2).Comments were received from or on behalf of all countries that have beengranted interim protection under the SCPA. At the hearing on March 16,1988, testimony was received from the Government of Switzerland, the Commissionof the European Communities, the Electronic Industry Association of Japan,and the U.S. Semiconductor Industry Association.Based on the record, the Commissioner has decided to extend all eighteen(18) interim protection orders until May 31, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES:</T2> The effective date of this order shall be June 1, 1988.The termination date of this order shall be May 31, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Michael K. Kirk, Assistant Commissionerfor External Affairs, by telephone at (703) 557-3065, or by mail markedto his attention and addressed to Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks,Box 4, Washington, DC 20231.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> The SCPA established a new form ofintellectual property protection for mask works that are fixed in semiconductorchips. Mask works are defined as a ``series of related images, howeverfixed or encoded,'' that represent the three-dimensional pattern in thelayers of the semiconductor chip. Thus, the subject matter of protectionunder the SCPA are the layout designs of semiconductor chips, known insome countries as ``integrated circuit layout designs'' or as ``semiconductortopographies.'' The SCPA provides a ten-year term of protection for originalmask works measured from their date of registration or first commercialexploitation anywhere in the world. To maintain protection, mask worksmust be registered in the United States Copyright Office within two yearsof first commercial exploitation.Protection for foreign mask works may be extended under both section 902and section 914 of the SCPA. Protection of foreign mask works under section902 continues until revoked. Section 902 sets out three different waysthat foreign mask works may become eligible for protection in the UnitedStates. First, on the date the work is registered or is first commerciallyexploited anywhere in the world, the mask work is protectible if its owneris a national, domiciliary or sovereign authority of a foreign nation thatis party to a treaty that provides protection of mask works and to whichthe United States is also a party, or a stateless person wherever domiciled.Second, foreign mask works may be protected when they are first commerciallyexploited in the United States. The third way, set forth in section 902(a)(2),is when the foreign mask work comes within the scope of a Presidentialproclamation. The President may issue a proclamation upon finding thata foreign nation extends protection to mask works of U.S. nationals ordomiciliaries (1) on substantially the same basis as it protects mask worksof its own nationals and domiciliaries, or (2) on substantially the samebasis as the SCPA.Section 914 was included in the SCPA as a transitional provision, intendedby Congress to encourage other countries to pass laws extending protectionto this new form of intellectual property. Once laws were in place, itwas reasoned, permanent protection for foreign mask works could be conferredunder section 902 or through a multilateral treaty that extended coverageto mask works. Section 914 gives the Secretary of Commerce authority toissue orders extending interim protection to foreign mask work owners uponthe satisfaction of certain conditions. First, the Secretary must findthat the foreign nation is making good-faith efforts and reasonable progresstoward entering into a treaty with the United States, or that the foreigngovernment is in the process of enacting legislation that will protectU.S. mask works on the same basis as domestic mask works, or a level similarto that provided under the SCPA. Second, the Secretary must determine thatnationals, domiciliaries and sovereign authorities of the foreign nationare not engaged in the misappropriation, unauthorized distribution, orcommerical exploitation of mask works. Finally, the Secretary must determinethat issuance of an interim order would promote the purposes of the SCPAand international comity with respect to the protection of mask works.Under the original terms of the SCPA, the Secretary's authority under section914 expired on November 7, 1987. Congress included the three-year transitionperid to encourage other countries time to enact legislation providingmask work protection. It was also thought that progress would be made underthe auspices of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) towardthe development of a multilateral treaty extending protection to integratedcircuit layout designs. While commendable progress has taken place on bothfronts, the Congress recently extended the Secretary's authority undersection 914 until July 1, 1991. <T3>See </T3>Pub. L. 100-159, November 8, 1987. The purpose of the extensionwas to enable the United States to ``provide a continued incentive forforeign nations to move expeditiously to enact chip protection legislation,''and to ``lay a sound basis for the development of a new multilateral treatyunder the auspices of the WIPO, or another appropriate forum.'' H.R. Rep.No. 100-388, 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 3-4 (1987).The Secretary of Commerce has delegated to the Commissioner of Patentsand Trademarks the authority under section 914 to make pertinent findingsand to issue orders for the interim protection of foreign mask works. ThePatent and Trademark Office established procedures for submission of requestsfor interim orders. The Commissioner has issued orders granting interimprotection under section 914 for mask works produced in Australia, Belgium,Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Greece,Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. With the exception of orders in favorof mask works produced in Switzerland and Finland, all of the interim ordershave been extended. <T3>See Interim Protection for Mask Works of Foreign Nationals, </T3>51FR 30690 (August 28, 1986). Orders for all eighteen (18) countries arein effect until May 31, 1988.On November 18, 1987, a Notice of Initiation of Proceedings was publishedat 42 FR 44200, whereby the Commissioner requested comments and scheduleda hearing concerning the status of the interim protection orders previouslyissued under section 914. The Commissioner announced that he would detemine,on a case-by-case basis, whether to extend the interim protection availableunder section 914 or to recomend that the President confer permanent protectionthrough a proclamation under section 902(a)(2) of the SCPA. On February25, 1988, a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking was published at 53 FR 5588-90,setting forth proposed regulations that specify the content and proceduresfor submission of requests to the Secretary of Commerce for the issuanceof such proclamations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Submissions of the Parties</ITAG>Comments were submitted by the Governments of Japan, Switzerland, Sweden,Finland, Canada, and Australia; the Commission of the European Communitiessubmitted comments on behalf of the EC Member States. Comments were alsoreceived from the Electronic Industries Association of Japan (EIAJ) andthe U.S. Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA). At the hearing on March16, 1988, testimony was received from the Government of Switzerland, theCommission of the European Communities, the EIAJ and the SIA.<ITAG tagnum="84">European Communities</ITAG>The views of the Commission of the European Communities were deliveredat the hearing by Mme. Margarita Langer, Director General for InternalMarkets and Industrial Affairs. Mme. Langer began her testimony by observingthat considerable progress has taken place in the EC relative to the legalprotection of semiconductor chip layout designs. On December 16, 1986,the Council of the EC issued its <T3>Directive on the Legal Protection of Topographies of SemiconductorProducts </T3>(Directive), 87/54/EEC, OJ No. L24, 27.1.87, p. 36. The Directivesets forth principles to be applied in all EC Member States, obligatingthem to enact laws and administrative provisions necessary to provide protectionfor topographies according to the principles.Mme. Langer stated that the standards of protection required under theDirective are substantially similar to those in the SCPA. Member Statesmust grant exclusive rights to authorize or prohibit the reproduction andcommercial exploitation of a protected topography, however, it is fixedor encoded. Reverse engineering is permitted, and no liability attachesto an innocent infringer prior to notice that the work is protected. Protectionis granted for ten years from the date of first commercial exploitationanywhere in the world, or from the date of the filing of an applicationfor registration in those Member States that require registration. Registrationand deposit of identifying material are optional; if the law of a MemberState requires a deposit, trade secret material must remain confidential.The Member States have discretion under the Directive to protect foreignmask works through membership in a multilateral treaty or through bilateralmeasures.The Directive required that all Member States enact legislation protectingsemiconductor topographies by November 7, 1987. Mme. Langer stated that,while legislation was not completed in all twelve Member States by thatdate, laws are in place in five Member States_Denmark, the Federal Republicof Germany, France, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. Protectionfor foreign mask works under all of these laws is based on the existenceof reciprocal protection in the particular foreign country.Mme. Langer reported that progress towards implementation of the Directivein the other seven states has been substantial. In Belgium, a draft lawhas been prepared and is awaiting presentation to the Parliament, followingendorsement by a newly-formed government. A presidential decision to implementthe Directive has been prepared in Greece, and implementing legislationis pending before the Greek Parliament. Adoption of a draft law in Spainis expected by May 1988. In Ireland, issuance of a national instrumentis expected shortly. Draft laws are before the Parliaments of Italy andLuxembourg. A decree-law has been prepared in Portugal, and at the timeof the hearing was awaiting action by the Portuguese Council of Ministers.To assure that U.S. mask works are protected in the EC while national lawsprotecting semiconductor topographies are finalized, the Council of theEuropean Communities adopted a decision on October 26, 1987, obligatingthe Member States to extend protection under the Directive to U.S. nationalsand domiciliaries until November 7, 1990. <T3>Council Decision of 26 October 1987, </T3>87/532/EEC, OJ No. L313,4.1187, p. 22. This protection is based on continued U.S. protection ofmask works produced in the EC. Mme. Langer testified that no mask misappropriationof mask works is taking place in the Member States. Since legislation isnot in place throughout the EC, Mme. Langer requested an extension of theinterim orders granting protection under section 914 of the SCPA to maskworks produced in the twelve Member States. She stated that the Commissionwill request a Presidential proclamation conferring permanent protectionunder section 902(a)(2) as soon as all laws are final.<ITAG tagnum="84">Government of Switzerland/Swiss Federation of Commerce and Industry(SFCI)</ITAG>The views of the Government of Switzerland, supported by the SFCI, wereconveyed at the hearing by Dr. Roland Grossenbacher, Assistant Director-Generalof the Swiss Federal Intellectual Property Office. Dr. Grossenbacher indicatedthat a degree of protection for mask works in Switzerland is currentlyavailable through a recently-enacted unfair competition statute. On theinternational level, he noted that the Government of Switzerland has stronglysupported the movement within WIPO to conclude a treaty on the protectionof integrated circuits. Dr. Grossenbacher stated that permanent protection of mask works will beestablished in the context of a total revision of the Swiss Copyright Act.Dr. Grossenbacher noted that a Federal commission concluded the preparationof a draft law in December, 1987, and that the draft includes a chapterconcerning the protection of mask works. He stated that the chapter isframed along the lines of the SCPA and the EC Directive. Dr. Grossenbacherindicated that final legislation should be in place by late 1989 or early1990.Protection of mask works under the proposed chapter is of a <T3>sui generis </T3>nature, according to Dr. Grossenbacher, even thoughit will likely be included in the Copyright Act. The subject matter ofprotection is to be topographies and parts of topographies manufacturedby any process, ``provided that their structure is not evident.'' Dr. Grossenbacherstated that the term ``parts of topographies'' indicates that protectionwill extend to discrete semiconductor devices that meet the requisite standardof originality.Like the SCPA, the Swiss draft contains exceptions to the rights of maskwork owners for reverse engineering and innocent infringement. The draftgoes beyond the SCPA, however, by providing that innocent infringers mustpay royalties to mask work owners for all uses of a protected work, notmerely for those occurring after the innocent infringer had notice thatthe work was protected. The draft provides for a ten-year term of protectionextending from the date of the application for registration or the dateof first commercial exploitation of the mask work, whichever comes first.Registration must be made within two years after first commercial exploitationto maintain protection for the ten-year period. While permitting any partyto inspect the register of mask works, the draft chapter safeguards againstdisclosure of trade secrets by precluding public access to the applicationfiles. Protection for foreign mask works under the draft will be provided on thebasis of reciprocity, according to Dr. Grossenbacher. Stating that no misappropriationof mask works has been or is taking place in Switzerland, Dr. Grossenbacherrequested that the order granting interim protection under the SCPA tomask works produced in Switzerland be extended for two years, until May31, 1990. <ITAG tagnum="84">Government of Sweden/Federation of Swedish Industries (FSI)</ITAG>In comments presented on behalf of the Government of Sweden and supportedby the FSI, the Swedish Ministry of Justice stated that an <T3>Act for the Protection of the Layout-Design of the Circuitry in SemiconductorProducts </T3>(Swedish Act) has been in force since April 1, 1987. TheGovernment has issued a Special Decree extending protection under the Actto mask works of U.S. nationals and domiciliaries, and to mask works firstcommercialized in the United States, until May 8, 1988. The basis for theprotection of U.S. works under the Special Decree is reciprocity. The Ministry stated that protection afforded to U.S. mask works under theSwedish Act and the Special Decree is substantially the same as that providedunder the SCPA. The Government and the FSI requested an extension of thesection 914 interim order in favor of Swedish mask works for an ``appropriate''period; the Government of Sweden will extend reciprocal protection to U.S.works under the Special Decree for an identical period. The Swedish Governmentis prepared to begin negotiations on the question of permanent protectionfor Swedish mask works under section 902 at any time, according to theMinistry. <ITAG tagnum="84">Government of Finland</ITAG>On behalf of the Government of Finland, the Finnish Ministry of Educationpresented a Progress Report on the preparation of integrated circuits legislation.The Ministry states that the State Copyright Committee published a report,<T3>Information Technology and Copyright, </T3>in April 1987. In the report,the Committee proposed a draft <T3>sui generis </T3>law for the protection of integrated circuit layoutdesigns. Fifty-seven written comments on the proposal were received, andreaction to the Committee draft was supportive. The Ministry reported that the proposed legislation is being modified toincorporate suggestions made in the written comments. The points of clarification are: More precise definitions; provision foran exclusive right of importation; deletion of a provision concerning privateuse; provisions covering reverse engineering and innocent infringement;simplification of the duration provision; and more precise formulationof penalties for infringement.The Ministry stated that a final version of the draft will be presentedto the Finnish Parliament in mid-1988.<ITAG tagnum="84">Government of Canada/Information Technology Association of Canada(ITAC)</ITAG>The Canadian Government, supported by ITAC, presented comments requestinga one-year extension of the order protecting Canadian mask works underthe SCPA. The Government noted that the Ministry of Consumer and CorporateAffairs issued a discussion paper in April 1987, containing recommendationsfor legislation protecting semiconductor layout designs. The Ministry hasstated its intention to introduce such legislation in the first half of1988. The Government also cited its strong support for multi-lateral effortsto conclude an international convention for the protection of integratedcircuit designs.<ITAG tagnum="84">Government of Australia</ITAG>In written comments presented on behalf of the Government of Australia,the Australian Attorney-General's Department reported that the design andmanufacture of integrated circuits is a small but growing sector of Australianindustry. The Department referred to its discussion paper published inMarch 1987, <T3>Copyright Protection for Artistic Works Industrially Applied,</T3>in which the need for legal protection for integrated circuits was recognized.Based on comments on the discussion paper, the Attorney-General has concludedtentatively that a <T3>sui generis</T3> regime of protection for integrated circuits shouldbe developed in Australia.While formal proposals for legislation have not yet been considered, theDepartment maintained that protection for U.S. mask works is currentlyavailable in Australia under the Copyright Act of 1968. Should a courtfind that the Act does not protect mask works, the Department stated thatit will seek immediate introduction of appropriate legislation. The Departmentrequests an appropriate extension of the order granting interim protectionin the United States to mask works produced in Australia.<ITAG tagnum="84">Electronic Industries Association of Japan (EIAJ)/Government of Japan</ITAG>The views of the EIAJ, with the concurrence of the Government of Japan,were delivered at the hearing by Mr. Robert Schwartz, Esquire, Washingtoncounsel to EIAJ. Mr. Schwartz testified that a Presidential proclamationshould be granted to Japan as soon as the Patent and Trademark Office hasissued final rules implementing section 902(a)(2) of the SCPA. He notedthat the Japanese <T3>Act Concerning the Circuit Layout of a Semiconductor Integrated Circuit</T3>has been in force since January 1, 1986. The standards of protection underthe Japanese Act are virtually identical to those under the SCPA, Mr. Schwartzclaimed, and protection is available for mask works produced anywhere inthe world, including the United States.Mr. Schwartz recalled the 1986 proceeding in which the Patent and TrademarkOffice considered extensions of previously-issued interim protection orders.He referred to two arguments made at a July 9, 1986, hearing against theissuance of a Presidential proclamation in favor of Japanese mask works;he stated that the concerns on which those arguments were based have beensuperseded by events. The first argument was that Presidential proclamationsin general should not be issued unless it is clear that they can also berevoked in light of changed circumstances. Mr. Schwartz stated that therecently-enacted SCPA Extension clarifies the President's authority torevoke proclamations issued under section 902(a)(2).The other argument against the issuance of a Presidential proclamationwas that as of July 1986 there had been only six months' experience underthe Japanese Act. Mr. Schwartz maintained that this concern is now obsolete.Japan now has two full years' experience under the Act, nearly 1500 maskworks have been registered in Japan as of March 1988, and roughly 18 percentof the applications processed in 1987 were from U.S. entities.Mr. Schwartz urged that interim protection for mask works produced in Japancontinue in force until final rules are issued and the appropriate actionstoward the issuance of a Presidential proclamation can be taken.<ITAG tagnum="84">U.S. Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA)</ITAG>Mr. William Cray, Operations Law Group Manager, Digital Equipment Corporation,presented the views of SIA at the March 16 hearing.SIA favors a blanket one-year extension of all 18 interim protection ordersunder section 914 of the SCPA, and opposes the issuance of a Presidentialproclamation under section 902(A)(2) to any country at this time. Mr. Craystated that section 914 is the best mechanism for review and evaluationof mask work legislation in the United States and foreign countries, thatthe extent of such review under the Presidential proclamation provisionsis not yet clear, and that section 914 provides full, if not permanent,protection to foreign mask work owners. He stated that the issuance ofa Presidential proclamation could jeopardize the negotiation of the multilateralintegrated-circuits treaty in WIPO (1) by relegating international dialogueconcerning mask work legislation solely to the treaty negotiations, and(2) because the grant of bilateral protection through a Presidential proclamationwill compromise the negotiation of a multilateral treaty.Mr. Cray noted SIA's longstanding concern that adequate protection forthe discrete class of semiconductor products be provided under both theSCPA and mask work protection laws of other countries.Concerning the degree of legal protection for mask works in each of thecountries under consideration, Mr. Cray urged that the Commission of theEuropean Communities continue its aggressive efforts to ensure that legislationcompatible with the Directive soon be in place in all EC Member States.Concerning the draft law in Switzerland, Mr. Cray made several recommendations_thatthe definition of ``topography'' be made more precise, that the limitationon the right of reproduction for purposes of analysis be clarified, andthat a provision for reverse engineering be included.Mr. Cray congratulated the Government of Sweden on the enactment of itsmask work protection law in April 1987, stating that SIA prefers to seethe law in operation for a substantial period of time prior to the issuanceof a Presidential proclamation. He also requested that the Swedish Governmentexplain the purpose of a provision in the law permitting reproduction ofsingle copies of mask works for private use. Mr. Cray expressed SIA's pleasurewith the progress made in Finland toward the development of mask work legislationduring the short period since interim U.S. protection was granted to Finnishworks.Praising the Canadian Government's plans to introduce legislation protectingintegrated circuits by July 1988, Mr. Cray voiced SIA's concern that thecurrent draft does not adequately protect the discrete class of semiconductorproducts. He suggested statutory language to ensure coverage of ``discreets.''Noting that draft legislation has yet to be prepared in Australia, Mr.Cray nonetheless cited the Australian Government's active participationin the WIPO negotiations for a multilateral treaty as evidence of its goodfaith intent to provide adequate legal protection for mask works. He restatedan SIA concern that Australia's current copyright law does not adequatelyprotect mask works, since it does not provide for reverse engineering,innocent infringement, or registration and notice of mask works. Mr. Crayurged the Australian government to proceed expeditiously with the preparationof specific legislation to protect mask works.As to Japan, Mr. Cray noted the record of success under the Japanese lawprotecting integrated circuits since it became effective in January 1986,but voiced SIA's opposition to the issuance of a Presidential proclamationin favor of Japanese mask works at this time. Restating SIA's objectionsto Presidential proclamations in general, he cited two concerns specificto the Japanese law. First, SIA claimed that the quasi-governmental agencyresponsible for registering claims to mask work protection, the IndustrialProperty Cooperation Center (IPCC), has strong ties to the Japanese semiconductorindustry. Second, the Japanese law requires the inclusion of trade secretmaterial in applications for mask work registration; because the IPCC issponsored by Japanese companies, SIA feared that the confidentiality ofproprietary information contained in the IPCC registry may not be maintained.<ITAG tagnum="84">Supplemental Comments</ITAG>To allow the parties to address issues raised in written comments or intestimony at the March 16 hearing, the record in this proceeding remainedopen until April 4, 1988. Supplemental comments were received from theSwedish Ministry of Justice on behalf of the Government of Sweden, fromthe EIAJ, and from SIA.The Swedish Ministry of Justice addressed SIA's concern regarding a private-useexemption in the new Swedish law, explaining that the exemption was includedfor two reasons. First, since protection under the law extends to bothtwo- and three-dimensional expressions of layout designs, a private-useexemption was included to permit private copying of two-dimensional representationsof mask works, such as magazine photographs. The provision does not permitmanufacture of semiconductor products for private use. Second, a private-useexemption is included in the Swedish Copyright Act, under which mask workswere arguably protected before the new integrated-circuits law took effect.It seemed reasonable, according to the Ministry, to include in the newlaw a similar exemption for private copying of two-dimensional expressionsof semiconductor layout designs.The EIAJ addressed SIA's concerns regarding the quasi-governmental natureof IPCC and the confidentiality of trade-secret information in the registrationprocess. Concerning the nature of IPCC, EIAJ stated that IPCC exists onlyby statute and regulation, and that it may be dissolved in the event ofany violation of law. Moreover, as the Government of Japan confirmed atthe most recent session of the WIPO committee of experts on integratedcircuits, IPCC enjoys the legal status of a ``national public authority.''EIAJ also pointed out that no specific allegation of impropriety has everbeen made with respect to the composition of IPCC.Concerning the confidentiality of trade secret material, EIAJ stated thatthe registration officers at IPCC are former Japanese Patent Office employeesappointed by the Minister of Trade and Industry, and that they have nolinks to the semiconductor industry. EIAJ cited Article 38 of the Japaneselaw, which makes it a crime for any IPCC officer or staff member to leaktrade secret information. EIAJ also provided evidence that practice inJapan allows the obliteration of proprietary material from photographsor drawings of mask works deposited with registration applications.SIA's additional comments reaffirmed its position concerning the importanceof continued interim protection for foreign mask works under section 914of the SCPA, its view that issuance of Presidential proclamations willcompromise the multilateral treaty negotiations within WIPO, and its objectionto the issuance of a Presidential proclamation in favor of Japanese maskworks at this time. SIA expressed particular concern that an opportunityfor review be provided as part of the Presidential proclamation processto ensure that U.S. mask works continue to receive reciprocal protectionin particular foreign countries.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings of the Commissioner</ITAG>Based on the record in this proceeding, consisting of the written submissionsof the parties and the oral testimony received at the hearing on March16, 1988, the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks has decided to extendall of the interim orders previously issued under section 914 of the SCPAuntil May 31, 1989, one year from the date on which they are now scheduledto expire. No recommendations concerning the issuance of a Presidentialproclamation under section 902(a)(2) of the SCPA will be made in this proceeding.The Commissioner finds that substantial progress toward the enactment oflegislation protecting mask works has been made in all eighteen (18) countriessubject to interim protection orders. Indeed, legislation is now in placein seven countries_Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Japan,the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Mask works of U.S. nationalsand domiciliaries, and mask works first commercialized in the United States,are entitled to protection under all of these laws on the same basis asthe laws protect domestic works, and on substantially the same basis asmask works are protected under the SCPA.Moreover, the other eleven (11) countries are making good faith effortstoward the enactment of legislation that will protect U.S. mask works onthe same basis as domestic works, or at a level similar to that providedunder the SCPA. It is also noteworthy that these countries are activelysupporting the work of WIPO in developing a new multilateral agreementthat would establish a regime of international protection for mask works.The record reveals no evidence that nationals, domiciliaries or sovereignauthorities of any country subject to an interim protection order are engagedin the misappropriation, unauthorized distribution, or unauthorized commercialexploitation of mask works. The Commissioner also finds that a one-yearextenstion of the previously-issued interim protection orders will promotethe purposes of the SCPA and international comity with respect to the protectionof mask works. While some of the parties requested extensions for a longerperiod, a one-year extension will permit further review of progress towardenactment of legislation in all countries now subject to interim orders,if such review is appropriate at the time.Concerning the issuance of Presidential proclamations under section 902(a)(2)of the SCPA to those countries that provide permanent, reciprocal protectionto U.S. mask works, it is commendable that legislation providing such protectionis in place in seven (7) foreign countries and in varying degrees of preparationin eleven (11) others. However, no party in this proceeding requested theissuance of a Presidential proclamation at this time. The Commission ofthe European Communities noted that legislation protecting U.S. mask worksis in effect in five Member States, but stated that it would request aPresidential proclamation conferring permanent protection under the SCPAonly when laws have been enacted in all twelve (12) Members States. Similarly,the Government of Sweden stated its readiness to begin negotiations onthe question of permanent U.S. protection for Swedish mask works, but didnot formally request a Presidential proclamation. The EIAJ, while avowingthat the first proclamation issued under section 902(a)(2) should be infavor of Japanese mask works, stated that no request would be made untilthe Patent and Trademark Office has promulgated final rules for the submissionof such requests.In a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking published at 53 FR 5588-90 on February25, 1988, the Patent and Trademark Office proposed regulations under section902(a)(2) that specify the content and procedures for submission of requestsfor Presidential proclamations to the Secretary of Commerce. The proposedrules provide that an evaluation concerning the issuance of a Presidentialproclamation will be initiated by the Commissioner upon request of a foreigngovernment, or upon the Commissioner's own motion. The proposed rules alsoprovide that the record in proceedings under section 914 will form thebasis for determining whether a recommendation should be made that thePresident issue a proclamation.The Commissioner does not agree with SIA that issuance of Presidentialproclamations will jeopardize the ongoing work within WIPO to negotiatea multilateral agreement for the protection of semiconductor layout designs.The evidence adduced in this proceeding demonstrates that the semiconductorindustry is increasingly international in scope. While the United Statesis a large market for semiconductor products, other markets are strongand growing. It is axiomatic that protection for foreign mask works inthe United States under a Presidential proclamation is no substitute forprotection in other countries under a widely-ratified multilateral agreement.It strains reason to suggest, as SIA does, that protection of foreign maskworks in the United States under a Presidential proclamation may compromisesuccessful completion of the draft integrated-circuits treaty, which isclearly in the best interest of all countries where semiconductor productsare manufactured. The Commissioner sees no valid reason, in the meantime,to withhold permanent U.S. protection for mask works produced in thosecountries that clearly meet the statutory criteria of eligibility in section902(a)(2)(A) and (B) of the SCPA.Issuance of final rules implementing the Presidential proclamation provisionsof section 902 is forthcoming. Once issued, the Commissioner will takeappropriate steps to assure that U.S. protection is made available to eligibleforeign mask works. Interim protection under section 914 will continuein force for one additional year, that is, until May 31, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="85">Order Extending the Expiration Date for Interim Protection OrdersIssued Under Chapter 9 of Title 17, United States Code</ITAG>In accordance with the authority vested in me by Amendment 2 to DepartmentOrganization Order 10-14 regarding 17 U.S.C. 914, and based upon the recordof this proceeding commenced on November 18, 1987, I find that Australia,Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, the Federal Republic of Germany,Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain,Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom are making good faith effortstoward providing protection for U.S. mask works in conformity with 17 U.S.C.902(a)(2). I find further that nationals, domiciliaries and sovereign authoritiesof those countries, and persons controlled by them, are not engaged inthe misappropriation, unauthorized distrubution or unauthorized commercialexploitation of mask works. I find further that the extension of the expirationdate for interim orders for those countries will promote the purposes ofthe Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984 and international comitywith respect to the protection of mask works.Accordingly, the existing interim orders for Australia, Belgium, Canada,Denmark, Finland, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Ireland,Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerlandand the United Kingdom are hereby extended and shall terminate on May 31,1989.<ITAG tagnum="6">Donald J. Quigg</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary and Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: April 29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-10091 Filed 5-5-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-16-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>