<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88708-0104 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-08-88.f2.A1103</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-454 and STN 50-455]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Commonwealth Edison Co.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendment toFacility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License Nos. NPF-37 andNPF-66, issued to Commonwealth Edison Company, for operation of Byron Station,Units 1 and 2 located in Ogle County, Illinois.The amendment would revise an action statement concerning the ultimateheat sink to state that the provisions to specification 3.0.4 do not applyin accordance with the licensee's application dated June 22, 1988.Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability of consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety.The Rock River is one of two makeup sources for the ultimate heat sinkat Byron Station. This proposed amendment revises a Technical Specificationaction requirement concerning Rock River water level and flow. The actionrequirement is being revised to state that the provisions of TechnicalSpecification 3.0.4 are not applicable. This will have the effect of permittingchanges in operations modes while the action requirement is still effective.Water level and flow in the Rock River have no effect on the probabilityof previously evaluated accidents. Therefore, the probability of previouslyevaluated accidents will not be increased.The affected action requirement permits reactor operation to continue aslong as river flow and level stay above minimum requirements. The minimumflow and level limits that assure adequate suction for the essential servicewater makeup pumps are not being changed by this amendment. As a result,the consequences of previously evaluated accidents will not be increased.This proposed amendment does not allow any new mode of operation beyondwhat is already permitted of the action requirement. In addition, thisamendment does not allow any modification to the plant. Therefore, operationof the facility in accordance with the proposed amendment will not createthe possibility of a new or different kind of accident from any accidentpreviously evaluated.Since the Technical Specification minimum flow and level limits for theRock River are not being changed, this amendment does not involve a significantreduction in a margin of safety.For the reasons stated above, the staff believes this proposed amendmentinvolves no significant hazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Rules and Procedures Branch,Division of Rules and Records, Office of Administration, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, D.C. 20555, and should cite the publication dateand page number of the <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room 4000, Maryland National Bank Building, 7735 Old Georgetown Road,Bethesda, Maryland from 8:15 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Copies of written commentsreceived may be examined at the NRC Public Document Room, 1717 H Street,NW., Washington, D.C. The filing of requests for hearing and petitionsfor leave to intervene is discussed below.By August 8, 1988, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryof the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceedings as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 1717 H Street NW.,Washington, DC., by the above date. Where petitions are filed during thelast ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitionerpromptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to WesternUnion at 1-800-325-6000 (in Missouri 1-800-342-6700). The Western Unionoperator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the followingmessage addressed to Daniel R. Muller: Petitioner's name and telephonenumber; date petition was mailed; plant number; and publication date andpage number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel_Rockville, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, and to Michael Miller, Esquire; Sidleyand Austin, One First National Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60603, attorneyfor the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or request shouldbe granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.174(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment which is available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 1717 H Street NW., Washington, DC, and at the RockfordPublic Library, 215 N. Wyman Street, Rockford, Illinois 61101.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 1st day of July 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Leonard N. Olshan, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate III-2, Division of Reactor Projects-III,IV, V and Special Projects.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-15373 Filed 7-7-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>