<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88218-0074 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-18-88.f2.A1073</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of the Secretary</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Office of the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration; Statementof Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority</ITAG>Part A (Office of the Secretary) of the Statement of Organization, Functions,and Delegations of Authority for the Department of Health and Human Services(DHHS) is amended to reflect a realignment of functions in the Office ofthe Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration. These changes consolidateall personnel and payroll systems and support functions within the Officeof Human Resource Information Management; streamline and integrate Departmentaland local personnel servicing functions in a new Office of Personnel Services;and establish a focus for human resources management improvement activitieswithin the Office of Special Initiatives.Specifically, Chapter AH, Office of the Assistant Secretary for PersonnelAdministration, as last published at 50 FR 20850, May 20, 1985, is revisedas follows:1. In Chapter AH, Section AH.10 Organization, change ``Office of PersonnelOperations'' to ``Office of Personnel Services''.2. In Chapter AH, Section AH.20 Functions, paragraph B ``The Office ofHuman Resource Information Management'', delete entire paragraph and insertnew paragraph B to read as follows:B. The Office of Human Resource Information Management (OHRIM). Responsiblefor: maintenance and enhancement of the existing personnel/payroll system;the design, development, and implementation of new automated systems necesssaryto support Departmental human resource information and personnel/payrollneeds; administering the Department's centralized payroll system, includingthe payroll accounting function; serving as the Departmental data administratorfor human resource information; identification and analysis of Departmentalhuman resource data; establishing policy for retention and access to resourcedata; and liaison with both internal and external sources for human resourceinformation systems.3. Chapter AH, Section AH.20 Functions, paragraph B.2 ``Program Managementand Reports Staff'' is retitled ``Program Management Staff''.4. Chapter AH, Section AH.20 Functions, paragraph B.6 ``Commissioned OfficerSystems Division'' is retitled ``Commissioned Officer and Field SystemDivision''.5. In Chapter AH, Section AH.20 Functions, add new paragraph B.8 ``Personneland Pay Systems Division'', to read as follows:8. Personnel and Pay Systems Division. Administers the Department's centralizedpayroll system, responsible for the propriety of civilian payroll recordsfor approximately 140,000 employees assigned to some 800 regional and fieldoffices in all 50 states. Schedules, produces, and distributes recurringand one time reports relating to the payroll; processes civilian personnel/payrollland payroll accounting computer files, resulting in payrollling of allemployees; maintains automated personnel files and updates the files forthe Department's automated payroll accounting system; develops new systemschanges required for personnel and payroll production; reviews test resultsto assure correct operation of new systems and changes. Manages and conductspayroll accounting, reconciliation and pay adjustments processing; producesaccounting reports; and carries out the Department's debt collection program.Processes all actions relative to separated employees, including retirementand other separation actions; maintains retirement records; processes deathbenefit claims. Audits leave accounts and processes unemployment compensationactions. Performs the quality control function for all areas of payrollprocessing.6. In Chapter AH, Section AH.20 Functions, add new paragraph B.9 ``TechnicalServices Center'', to read as follows:9. Technical Services Center. Provides direction, technical assistance,standard operating procedures, manuals and training to persons who areusers or customers of the personnel and payroll computer systems in useDepartment-wide. Diagnoses problems encountered in the processing of personneland payroll transactions. Prepares management reports on personnel andpayroll caseloads, error rates, unit costs, production interruptions, etc.Devises solutions to systemic problems and inefficiencies by modifyingoperating procedures, by requesting specific design and programming changesto the automated systems, or by other means. Contributes to the developmentof user requirements for system changes by evaluating the impact of proposedchanges on systems' users and customers. Maintains up-to-date instructionsand manuals for TDCS operators, timekeepers, designated agents, payrollliaison persons and other persons who input data or who use output fromthe personnel and payroll systems.7. In Chapter AH, Section AH.20 Functions, delete paragraphs C and C.1through C.5 in their entirety and insert new paragraph C ``Office of PersonnelServices''; C1 ``Personnel and Information Security Group''; C.2 ``ExecutiveServices Support Division''; C.3 ``Organization and Employee DevelopmentDivision''; and C.4 ``Personnel Operations Division'', to read as follows:C. The Office of Personnel Services. Directs and manages the personneloperations and services which are performed centrally at the Departmentlevel and those which are performed at the Operating Division level forthe Office of the Secretary, the Office of Human Development Services,and the Family Support Administration. Formulates and oversees the implementationof Department-wide policies, regulations, and procedures concerning theCommittee Management program, the Senior Executive Service program, andSchedule C and other executive personnel activities. Administers the Departmentalincentive awards and employee counseling service programs. Responsiblefor the functional management of training and development in the Department.Manages the HHS personnel and information security programs. Serves asHHS liaison to central management agencies for all programs and activitieswithin the Office's functional jurisdiction. Provides the full range ofoperations personnel services for the Office of the Secretary, Office ofHuman Development Services, and Family Support Administration headquarters,as well as for selected field positions in the Office of the InspectorGeneral.1. Personnel and Information Security Group. Responsible for establishingand maintaining a Department-wide personnel security program in accordancewith the provisions of Executive Order (E.O.) 10450, Security Requirementsfor Government Employment and U.S. Office of Personnel Management FederalPersonnel Manual Basic Installment 311. Responsible for establishing andmaintaining a Department-wide Information Security Program in accordancewith the provisions of E.O. 12356, National Security Information and theGeneral Services Administration Information Security Oversight Office DirectorNumber 1, National Security Information. Formulates and oversees the implementationof Department-wide policies, regulations, and procedures governing theestablishment and maintennce of an effective program to insure that theemployment and retention in employment of any Department officer or employeeis clearly consistent with the efficiency of the service and the interestsof the national security. Initiates requests to and receives completedreports of personnel security investigations from the U.S. OPM; reviewsand evaluates the results of reports of investigation for any unfavorableinformation that could have an adverse impact on the efficiency of theservice and/or risks to the national security; authorizes employees tooccupy certain sensitive positions based upon establishment guidelines;grants access to classified (national security) information based uponan identifiable need; maintains records relating to personnel suitabilityand security matters, levels of position sensitivity and access to classifiedinformation, and personnel security forms furnished by employees, and maintainsliaison with HHS personnel security officials and officials in other Federalagencies on matters relating to the Department's personnel security program.Formulates and oversees the implementation of Department-wide policies,regulations, and procedures relating to the safeguarding, classification,declassification, accountability, control, reproduction, storage, transmission,and destruction of classified information; establishment of an effectivesecurity education program; conduct of security evaluations, inspectionsand reviews to ascertain the effectiveness of the Department's program,and maintains liaison with certain Department officials and other Federalagencies on matters relating to the overall Information Security Program.2. Executive Services Support Division. Formulates and oversees the implementationof Department-wide policies, regulations, and procedures governing theestablishment, management, continuation or termination of all HHS Federaladvisory committees and the appointment of members thereto; provides experttechnical advise and assistance to OPDIV, STAFFDIV, agency and bureau CommitteeManagement Officers and program staff on all facets of committee managementactivities, insures compliance with laws, regulations and procedures governingcommittee management and serves as liaison with other Federal agencies,the Congress or other outside organizations on advisory committee matters.Formulates and oversees the implementation of Department-wide policies,regulations and procedures concerning all aspects of Senior Executive Service,and SES equivalent recruitment, staffing, position establishment, compensation,award, performance management and other related personnel areas. Providesfull range of service on these same areas as well as provides policy formulationand procedures development specifically in support of SES and SES equivalentneeds in the Office of the Secretary, the Office of Human Development Servicesand the Family Support Administration. Oversees and facilities implementationof HHS-wide policies, regulations and procedures relating to Schedule Cand other executive personnel activity. For all areas of responsibility,serves as liaison with central management agencies (OPM, GAO). Providestechnical advise and assistance on policy, legal and regulatory matters.Is the focal point for data, reports, and analyses relating to SES, SESequivalent and Schedule C and other executive personnel, such as thosein Executive Level positions. Administers the Department awards program,including coordination of nominations for honor awards, serving as ExecutiveSecretary to the Department Awards Board, and managing the suggestion program.3. Organization and Employee Development Division. Responsible for thefunctional management of training and development in the Department, includingpolicy development and guidance and technical assistance and evaluationof all aspects of career, employee, supervisory, management, executive,and organization development. Administers Department-wide training anddevelopment programs, including the Secretary's Executive Forum, the PresidentialManagement Intern Program, the Women's Management Training Initiative,Department level training for members of the SES, the Cooperative EducationProgram and the SES Candidate Development Program. Provides OPDIV leveltraining management support for the Office of the Secretary, the Officeof Human Development Services, and the Family Support Administration. Operatesthe Southwest Training Center, offering common needs training to employeesbased in Southwest Washington, DC Provides consulting services to HHS managersto promote organization development and productivity improvement efforts.Responsible for the functional management of the Department's EmployeeCounseling Services (ECS) program. Provides leadership and direction toOPDIV and regional staffs in the development and maintenance of ECS programs,and develops Department-wide policies and procedures for ECS program operation.Serves as HHS liaison to central management agencies on training and developmentand ECS programs and activities.4. Personnel Operations Division. Provides secondary personnel policy forthe Office of the Secretary, the Office of Human Development Services,and the Family Support Administration. Also provides to managers in thoseorganizations advice and assistance in their personnel management activitiesincluding workforce planning, recruitment, selection, position management,performance management, incentive awards, employee relations and labormanagement relations. Provides a variety of services to employees in thoseorganizations, including provision of employee counseling services; andcareer, retirement and benefits counseling. Provides personnel administrativeservices for selected components of the Office of the Secretary, the Officeof Human Development Services, and the Family Support Administration, aswell as for selected staff of the Office of the Inspector General in thefield. Personnel administrative services include the exercise of appointingauthority, position classification, awards authorization, and personnelaction processing and recordkeeping.8. In Chapter AH, Section AH.20 Functions, delete paragraph F, ``The Officeof Special Initiatives'' in its entirety and replace with new paragraphsF, F.1, and F.2 to read as follows:F. The Office of Special Initiatives. Provides leadership and directionto research and demonstration projects and programs falling within theASPER's functional scope. Provides resource management and administrativesupport services to the ASPER. Assists the Assistant Secretary in the formulationof plans and objectives and the control and evaluation of ASPER's organizationalperformance at the Headquarters and in the field. Responsible for the functionalmanagement of the Department's regional personnel offices.1. Resource Management Staff. Provides resource management services tothe ASPER in all budgetary, financial, and ceiling control matters to ensurethe most effective use of OS headquarters and field personnel administrationresources. Also provides the full range of administrative support servicesto ASPER, including such areas as procurement, property management, spaceallocation, internal controls, and organizational staffing.2. Center for Management Excellence. Within the framework of the Department'sproductivity improvement program, provides leadership and direction toagency and interagency research efforts, demonstration projects, and specialprograms, testing innovative approaches to improving human resource management.Conducts statistical analyses of factors affecting workforce productivityand utilization, and applies the results of such analyses in the designand development of experimental programs. Synthesizes current managementtheories and private sector methodologies for adaptation to Federal applications.Monitors developments in such areas as gainsharing, employee benefits,organizational performance, and employee health and wellness to ensureeffective coordination of cross-cutting initiatives.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: February 8, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Elizabeth M. James,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-3325 Filed 2-16-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4150-04-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>