<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88212-0062 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-12-88.f2.A1061</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Alternative Cooling Water Systems, Savannah River Plant, Aiken, SC;Record of Decision </ITAG>The Department of Energy (DOE) has prepared this Record of Decision pursuantto regulations of the Council on Environmental Quality (40 CFR Part 1505)and Implementing Procedures of the Department of Energy (52 FR 47662, December15, 1987). This Record of Decision is also based on DOE's issuing a <T3>Draft Environmental Impact Statement, Alternative Cooling Water Systems,Savannah River Plant, Aiken, South Carolina </T3>(DOE/EIS-0121D), holdingpublic hearings on the Draft EIS, completing the Final EIS (DOE/EIS-0121),and distributing approximately 750 copies to Congress, state and Federalagencies, and concerned individuals. In addition, DOE has considered allpublic and regulatory comments received on the final EIS in the preparationof this Record of Decision. DOE originally supported the once-through alternative. However, commentsreceived from the Environemental Protection Agency (EPA) in a letter toDOE dated December 3, 1987, stated that the once-through alternative doesnot assure the ``protection and propagation of a balanced indigenous populationof shellfish, fish and wildlife.'' The State of South Carolina reinforcedthe EPA's opinion in a letter to DOE dated December 4, 1987. Both the Stateof South Carolina, as well as EPA, feel that the recirculating coolingalternative is the only Permittable (and, therefore, environmentally preferable)alternative. However, both the State of South Carolina and EPA feel thatthe environmentally preferred alternative for the D Area powerhouse isthe DOE preferred alternative of increased flow with mixing. <ITAG tagnum="84">Decision </ITAG>DOE has decided to construct and operate (subject to the authorizationand appropriation of funds by Congress) recirculating cooling towers forboth K-and C-Reactors and to implement increased flow with mixing for theD-Area powerhouse at the Savannah River Plant (SRP). The implementationof cooling water systems for major sources of thermal effluents at theSRP will enable compliance with the thermal provisions of the Federal andState water quality standards and with a Consent Order (84-4-W) dated January3, 1984, and amended on August 27, 1985, August 31, 1987, January 4, 1988,and January 29, 1988, between DOE and the South Carolina Department ofHealth and Environmental Control (SCDHEC). In accordance with the amendedConsent Order, DOE will construct the cooling water system for K-Reactorfirst because C-Reactor is shut down for an extended period. DOE will notifySCDHEC immediately if it determines that C-Reactor is to restart and willpropose a timely schedule for construction of its cooling water system.Because the implementation of the increased-flow-with-mixing alternativefor D-Area would not require any construction activities, DOE will implementit immediately. Cooling water discharges from the recirculating cooling towers at K- andC-Reactors will be required to comply with two water temperature conditionsspecified in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)permit issued by the State of South Carolina: (1) a maximum instream temperatureof 32.2anddegrees; C (90anddegrees; F at all times and (2) a maximum allowablerise in the stream temperature of 2.8anddegrees; C (5anddegrees; F). Coolingwater discharges would comply with the first condition (i.e., maximum instreamtemperature of 32.2anddegrees; C) at all times. Because the effluent dischargeoccasionally would raise the ambient stream temperatures by more than 2.8anddegrees;C, DOE would perform Section 316(a) Demonstration studies to verify thata balanced biological community would be maintained in the affected streamsystem and, would support the request for a variance of this conditionfrom SCDHEC. Cooling water discharges associated with the increased flow with mixingalternative for the D-Area powerhouse also would comply with the NPDESpermit for a maximum instream temperature of 32.2andmin172; C. At times thedischarge from the powerhouse would affect the ambient stream temperatureby more than the maximum allowable 2.8anddegrees; C rise. Therefore, DOEwill perform a section 316(a) Demonstration study to verify that a balancedbiological community would be maintained in the stream system and, thuswould also request a variance of this condition from SCDHEC. <ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>The Savannah River Plant is located in southwestern South Carolina. ThePlant occupies an area of approximately 780 square kilometers (192,741acres), bounded on its southwestern side by the Savannah River, which isalso the border between the States of South Carolina and Georgia. The SRPis a controlled-access, major DOE installation established in the early1950s for the production of nuclear materials for national defense. Plantfacilities, which can be characterized as heavy industry, consist of fiveproduction reactors (K-, L-, and P-Reactors are operational, R-Reactoris in standby condition, and C-Reactor is in an extended shutdown), twochemical separations areas, a fuel and target fabrication facility, andvarious supporting facilities.The major sources of thermal effluents at the SRP are the cooling waterdischarges from the production reactors and an onsite coal-fired powerhouse.K- and C-Reactors discharge their cooling water directly to Pen Branchand Four Mile Creek, respectively. The coal-fired powerhouse in D-Areadischarges cooling water from cooling-system condensers into an excavatedcanal that flows into Beaver Dam Creek.An onsite 2700-acre cooling lake, Par Pond, cools the thermal effluentfrom P-Reactor. DOE has conducted section 316(a) and 316(b) studies, asrequired by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C.1326), and submitted the results of these studies to SCDHEC. On May 14,1987, SCDHEC concurred with DOE's conclusions that balanced indigenouspopulations of fish, shellfish, and wildlife exist in Par Pond and thatthe present operations of P-Reactor pose no threat to the continued existenceof a balanced indigenous biological community. L-Reactor discharges itsthermal effluent to a 1000-acre cooling lake. DOE has submitted Predictivesection 316(a) studies that indicate the probable exhistence of balancedbiolgoical communities on and in the cooling lake to SCDHEC, which hasapproved them. DOE has described the restart of L-Reactor and the use ofthe cooling lake extensively in the <T3>Environmental Impact Statement, L-Reactor Operation, Savannah RiverPlant</T3> (DOE/EIS-0108).SCDHEC issued a renewed NPDES permit (number SC0000175) for SRP operations,which became effective on January 1, 1984. The purpose of this permit isto regulate the Plant's discharges of wastewater_including cooling water_tosurface streams and other water bodies. As stated in the permit, coolingwater discharge temperature limits for K- and C-Reactors and the D-Areapowerhouse are not to exceed an instream temperature after mixing of 32.2anddegrees;C;in addition, the effluents must not raise the temperatures of the affectedstreams more than 2.8anddegrees;C above their ambient temperatures, unlessa section 316(a) Demonstration study can determine the maintenance of abalanced biological community.To achieve compliance with these temperature limitations, on January 3,1984, DOE and SCDHEC entered into a mutually agreed-on Consent Order (84-4-W).This order temporarily superseded the temperature requirements in the NPDESpermit and established a process for attaining compliance. Key elementsof this process required DOE to: (1) Complete a ``Comprehensive Cooling-WaterStudy'' of the thermal effects of operations at the Savannah River Plant,(2) complete and submit a Thermal Mitigation Study to SCDHEC, (3) submitand actively support funding requests to accomplish any actions resultingfrom the Thermal Mitigation Study, and (4) undertake work on the alternativesapproved by SCDHEC, under a schedule to be established in an amendmentto the Consent Order, subject to the appropriation of funds by Congress.In compliance with the Consent Order, DOE submitted the <T3>Thermal Mitigation Study </T3>(DOE-SR-5003) to SCDHEC on October 3,1984, the <T3>Comprehensive Cooling-Water Study, Annual Report </T3>(DP-1697) inJuly 1985, and the <T3>Comprehensive Cooling-Water Study, Final Report </T3>(DP-1739) in November1987.On August 27, 1985, DOE and SCDHEC agreed on an amendment to Consent Order84-4-W that established a compliance schedule for the completion of NationalEnvironmental Policy Act (NEPA) documentation by December 31, 1986. Thisamendment also established an implementation schedule for the start ofconstruction of a selected cooling water system for C-Reactor on or beforeSeptember 30, 1987, and completion of construction on or March 31, 1989.The amendment established the date for the start of construction of a systemfor K-Reactor on or before before September 30, 1987, and completion ofconstruction on or before July 31, 1989. The Consent Order also establishedMarch 31, 1987, as the date by which DOE must submit a plan of study andan approvable schedule for the implementation of a cooling water systemfor the D-Area powerhouse. In compliance with the amended Consent Order,DOE published a Notice of Availability (51 FR 10652, March 27, 1986) andsubmitted a copy of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DOE/EIS-0121D)to SCDHEC on March 28, 1986.On October 29, 1986, DOE and SCDHEC agreed that it would be necessary tochange the schedule in the amended Consent Order. DOE requested this changeto respond to significant comments on the Draft EIS received from SCDHECand the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). On August 31, 1987,DOE and SCDHEC agreed on a second amendment to the Consent Order, whichestablishes a compliance schedule for the completion of NEPA documentationby October 31, 1987, which was done accordingly. This amendment also specifiesthat DOE must submit plans and specifications to SCDHEC for the K-Reactormitigation alternative on or before September 30, 1988, subject to theauthorization of and appropriation of funds by Congress. In addition, thisamendment establishes an implementation schedule for the start of constructionof a selected cooling water system for K-Reactor on or before February28, 1990, and completion of construction on or before December 31, 1992.The amended Consent Order also establishes March 31, 1988, as the dateby which DOE must submit a plan for a section 316(a) Demonstration studyand an approvable schedule for the implementation of a cooling water systemfor the D-Area powerhouse. Finally, the amended Consent Order states thatDOE shall notify SCDHEC immediately if it determines that C-Reactor isto restart, and shall propose a timely schedule for the construction ofits thermal mitigation alternative. However, DOE recognizes that the changein the preferred alternative from a once-through system to a recirculatingsystem will not allow DOE to meet the compliance schedule in the presentConsent Order. Therefore, it will be necessary to renegotiate the ConsentOrder with SCDHEC.DOE must implement cooling water system alternatives at K-Reactor and theD-Area powerhouse to comply with both South Carolina water classificationstandards [as contained in the NPDES permit (number SC0000175)] and ConsentOrder 84-4-W.<ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Alternatives</ITAG>As described in the <T3>Final Environmental Impact Statement, Alternative Cooling Water Systems,Savannah River Plant, Aiken, South Carolina </T3>(DOE/EIS-0121), October1987, DOE's proposed action is to construct and operate cooling towersfor K- and C-Reactors and to implement increased flow with mixing for theD-Area powerhouse. The alternatives that DOE considered in this FEIS toreach its decision include once-through and recirculating cooling towersfor K- and C-Reactors and increased flow with mixing and direct dischargeto the Savannah River for the D-Area powerhouse.Initially, DOE identified 22 possible cooling water systems that couldpotentially meet the South Carolina Class B water classification standardsfor K- and C-Reactors and the D-Area coal-fired powerhouse, and documentedthem in the <T3>Thermal Mitigation Study </T3>(DOE-SR-5003). Based on a structuredscreening process and comments received on its Notice of Intent to preparean environmental impact statement, and through the EIS scoping process,DOE decided to consider once-through and recirculating cooling towers forK- and C-Reactors, and increased-flow with mixing and direct dischargeto the Savannah River for the D-Area powerhouse. In addition, DOE has consideredthe No-Action alternative in accordance with the Council on EnvironmentalQuality's regulations for implementing the procedural provisions of theNational Environmental Policy Act.DOE has selected the environmentally preferred alternative, which is toconstruct and operate a recirculating system using cooling towers. Thissystem would discharge only blowdown water to the stream.<ITAG tagnum="84">Basis for Decision </ITAG>In compliance with NEPA, DOE has analyzed the environmental impacts ofmany mitigation alternatives associated with the proposed constructionand operation of modified cooling water systems for K- and C-Reactors andthe D-Area powerhouse, as described in the FEIS. DOE considered all thecomments it received on the Draft EIS in the preparation of the FEIS, whichcontains DOE's responses to those comments. In addition to these considerations and in accordance with the amendedConsent Order, DOE will construct the cooling water system for K-Reactorfirst because C-Reactor is in an extended shutdown. DOE will notify SCDHECimmediately if it determines that C-Reactor is to restart and will proposea timely schedule for the implementation of its cooling water system. Thefollowing discussion of mitigation alternatives and considerations in implementationdeals only with K-Reactor and the D-Area powerhouse. For each of the three facilities, the selection of the No-Action alternativewould result in a continuation of present cooling water discharges thatdo not comply with the State of South Carolina's Class B water classificationstandard of a maximum instream temperature of 32.2 anddegrees;C. The constructionand operation of either once-through or recirculating towers for K-Reactor,and the implementation of either increased flow with mixing or the constructionand operation of a direct-discharge system to the Savannah River for theD-Area powerhouse, would result in discharges that would comply with thisstandard. However, the construction and operation of recirculating coolingtowers for K-Reactor and the implementation of increased flow with mixingfor the D-Area powerhouse also would require the performance of section316(a) Demonstration studies to verify that balanced biological communitieswould be maintained in the affected streams, because discharges from thesealternatives would exceed the Class B water classification standard ofa maximum instream ambient temperature rise of 2.8 anddegrees;C. The present-worth cost estimate presented in the FEIS for once-throughcooling tower systems for K-Reactor ($41.4 million) would be approximately$16.6 million less than that for recirculating cooling towers ($58 million).These estimates do not include the loss of production associated with reducedreactor power. The implementation of the once-through cooling-tower systemwould cause a 0.2-percent annual average loss of reactor power, which wouldresult in a present-worth cost estimate of $43 million; the implementationof the recirculating system would cause a 3.7-percent power loss, whichwould result in a present-worth cost estimate of $90 million. Therefore,including production losses, the once-through cooling-tower system forK-Reactor would cost approximately $47 million less than the recirculatingsystem. However, recirculating cooling towers would cost about $2 millionless to operated each year than once-through systems because they woulduse less electricity to pump water from the Savannah River. Therefore,in 15 years this cost savings would result in a net savings of approximately$30 million, which would then make the once-through cooling-tower systemabout $17 million less to construct and operate than the recirculatingsystem. The recirculating system would never have to reduce power duringthe summer in order to meet the NPDES maximum allowable discharge temperatureas may occur with the once-through system. In addition to these costs andoperating mode, the construction of the recirculating system would takeapproximately 6 months longer than the once-through system. The principal environment benefit of once-through cooling towers wouldbe the maintenance of existing flow levels in the creeks and deltas, whichwould provide more potential aquatic habitat for fish and other organisms.The principal benefits of constructing and operating recirculating coolingtowers would be the reestablishment of a greater amount of wetlands (about1500 acres), the reduction in entrainment and impingement losses by 85percent each, and the establishment of a potentially greater amount offoraging habitat for the wood stork (an endangered species). In view ofthese facts and the concerns expressed by the regulators, the once-throughalternative does not balance favorably against the recirculating alternative;therefore, DOE has not selected it.For the D-Area powerhouse, the analysis in the FEIS indicates that boththe environmentally preferred alternative and DOE's preferred alternativeare increased flow with mixing. The principal environmental benefit ofthis alternative over the direct-discharge alternative would be the maintenanceof existing water levels in Beaver Dam Creek, which would provide morehabitat for the endangered wood stork and other aquatic organisms. Thisalternative also would avoid adverse impacts to about 1 acre of wetlandsand 5 acres of uplands that would result from the construction of the direct-dischargepipeline. There would also be an initial cost savings of about $14 million,and savings of about $20,000 per year in operational costs thereafter.In addition, the preferred alternative could be implemented immediately,while the direct-discharge alternative would require about 22 months forconstruction. Because of its higher construction and operating costs, thelonger schedule for implementation, adverse impacts to wetlands, and thepotential reduction in habitat for the endangered wood stork caused bythe reduced flow, DOE has not selected the direct-discharge alternative.<ITAG tagnum="84">Considerations in the Implementation of the Decision </ITAG>DOE will design, build, and operate the recirculating cooling-tower systemfor K-Reactor in compliance with its standards. DOE will design and operatethe cooling tower such that it meets the maximum weekly average temperaturecriteria established by EPA \1\<NOTE/> to minimize thermal shock to fish, which could occur duringa reactor shutdown. Measures to minimize potential environmental impactsinclude sound engineering design, proper construction practices (e.g.,erosion and storm runoff control to minimize aquatic impacts), and an effectivequality assurance program. Construction activities at K-Reactor would disturbapproximately 50 acres of uplands, and cannot be avoided. After constructionof the cooling tower, DOE will replant areas that will not be used withnative grasses, shrubs, or trees. The final site layout and design of thecooling towers, effluent canal, service roads, and parking areas will includeall practicable methods of mitigating environmental impacts. The implementationof the preferred alternative for the D-Area powerhouse would not involveconstruction activities. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Environmental Protection Agency, 1977. Temperature Criteriafor Freshwater Fish; Protocol and Procedures, EPA-600/3-77-061, Duluth,Minnesota. <ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion </ITAG>DOE has weighed the costs, benefits, schedule, and environmanetal impactsin its decision to implement a cooling-water system that will comply withthe thermal provisions of the State of South Carolina's Class B water Classificationstandards (as contained in the NPDES permit) and with Consent Order 84-4-Wbetween DOE and SCDHEC. Through this analysis, DOE has selected the constructionand operation of a recirculating cooling tower system for K-Reactor, andthe implementation of the increased flow with mixing alternative for theD-Area powerhouse. These are the environmentally preferred alternatives.DOE will proceed with this decision subject to the authorization and appropriationof funds by Congress.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: February 10, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Troy E. Wade II, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary for Defense Programs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-3234 Filed 2-11-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6450-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>