<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88201-0001 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-01-88.f2.A1000</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4700"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 21 / Tuesday, February 2, 1988/ Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 53, No. 21 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Tuesday, February 2, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Food and Nutrition Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Part 272</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Amdt. No. 301]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Food Stamp Program; Targeting for Income and Eligibility VerificationSystems</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Food and Nutrition Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Interim rule with request for comments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Section 9101 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Actof 1986 (Pub. L. 99-509) amends section 1137(a)(4)(c) of the Social SecurityAct. The amendment prohibits State agencies from being required to useinformation obtained through their income and eligibility verificationsystems (IEVS) to determine the eligibility of all recipients. This ruleimplements section 9101 by allowing State agencies to identify (target)which information items obtained through IEVS they will use to determineif actions adverse to household eligibility are warranted. The rule alsospecifies the elements which State agencies must include in their Plansof Operation concerning targeting action on IEVS information, it sets timelinessstandards for such action, and specifies an annual reporting requirement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Effective March 18, 1988, except for paragraphs 272.8(i)(3) and (4) and 272.8(j)(1) which will be effective upon publication inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4> of the approval of the information collectionrequirements by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), as discussedfurther in the paragraph concerning the Paperwork Reduction Act in thispreamble. Comments on this rule must be received by April 4, 1988, to beassured of consideration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments should be submitted to Thomas J. O'Connor, Chief,Administration and Design Branch, Program Development Division, Food andNutrition Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, Room 716, Alexandria,Virginia 22302. All written comments will be open to public inspectionat this same address during regular business hours (8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,Monday through Friday).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mr. O'Connor at the above address,telephone (703) 756-3383.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Justification for Interim Rule</ITAG>Anna Kondratas, Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) hasdetermined pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 533, that for the reasons discussed belowprior public comment on this rulemaking is unnecessary and contrary tothe public interest.This rule primarily affects State agencies. In general correspondence,in conferences, and in justifications for waiver requests, State agencieshave indicated a desire to be allowed to target information items for followup and to be given more than 30 days to complete follow-up action. In particular,State agencies have expressed concern that the requirement that they acton all information items causes them to devote staff and other resourcesto activities which frequently do not help determine the correctness ofeligibility and benefits. Consequently, prompt implementation of this rulewill enhance the efficiency of program administration by eliminating therequirement that all information items be followed up on. Also, accordingto State agencies, following up on all information items within 30 daysadversely affects the quality and timeliness of application processingand ongoing case action. Consequently, prompt implementation of this rulewill also enhance the effectiveness of the program with respect to thedelivery of benefits. Since both program efficiency and effectiveness areimportant to the public interest in the Food Stamp Program (FSP), delayof this rule for prior public comment is contrary to that public interest.As discussed in section C of this preamble, State agencies have broad discretionin the design of targeting methods and will be required to review and modifythose methods periodically as their experience and capability develop.State agencies are required to provide FNS certain information about targetingmethods so that FNS can determine if State agencies are conforming to thelegislative requirement that IEVS information be used to the extent usefulin determining eligibility and benefits. State agencies should have mostof this information available or should be able to develop it within the90-day timeframe provided for implementation. Consequently, given the flexibilitythat State agencies have in the design of actual procedures and the minimumrequirements for information, delay in the implementation of this rulefor prior public comment is unnecessary.Notwithstanding these factors, public comment may enable the Departmentto improve the rule after it is published and implemented on an interimbasis. Therefore, we are soliciting comments for 60 days. We will analyzethe comments we timely receive, make any appropriate change in this ruleand publish a final rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Executive Order 12291</ITAG>This action has been reviewed under Executive Order 12291 and the Secretaryof Agriculture's Memorandum No. 1512-1. The Department has classified thisaction as non-major. The effect of this action on the economy will be lessthan $100 million and it will have an insignificant effect on costs orprices. Competition, employment, investment, productivity and innovationwill remain unaffected. There will be no effect on the competition of UnitedStates-based enterprises with foreign-based enterprises.<ITAG tagnum="84">Executive Order 12372</ITAG>The Food Stamp Program is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistanceunder No. 10.551. For the reasons set forth in the Final Rule and relatedNotice to 7 CFR Part 3015, Subpart V (48 FR 29115, June 24, 1983), thisprogram is excluded from the scope of Executive Order 12372 which requiresintergovernmental consultation with State and local officials.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>This action has been reviewed with regard to the requirements of the RegulatoryFlexibility Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-354, Stat. 1164, September 19, 1980).Anna Kondratas, Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service has certifiedthat this rule does not have a significant economic impact on a substantialnumber of small entities. State and local welfare agencies will be affectedto the extent that they administer the Food Stamp Program.<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3507) requires that OMBapprove information collection requirements before they become effective.Paragraphs 272.8(i) (3) and (4) and 272.8(j) of this rule contain thoserequirements. The information collection burden associated with the currentIEVS rule has been approved under OMB No. 0584-0350. Comments on the newprovisions should be sent to Mr. O'Connor at the above address and to Ms.Pamela Barr, Office of Management and Budget, Room 3228, NEOB, 726 JacksonPlace NW., Washington, DC 20503. The Department plans to publish a finalrule in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> when OMB approves the information collectionburden.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background_Discussion of Regulatory Provisions</ITAG>A. Current IEVS Legislation and RegulationSection 2651 of the Deficit Reduction Act (DEFRA) of 1984 (Pub. L. 98-369)established requirements for the income and eligibility verification system(IEVS) by adding section 1137 to the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-7). The legislation affected several Federal public assistance programs,all of which simultaneously published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> proposed rules on March 14, 1985 (50 FR 10450)and final rules on February 28, 1986 (51 FR 7178). With certain exceptions,the final rules required State agency implementation by May 29, 1986. Athorough review of those regulations is essential to a complete understandingof the action taken in this rulemaking. Accordingly, the reader is referedto 51 FR 7178.B. Language of the Amending Statute<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Data Sources Involved</ITAG>Section 1137(a)(2) of the Social Security Act requires matching betweenpublic assistance programs and such data sources as the Internal RevenueService (IRS) and the Social Security Administration (SSA). Section 1137(a)(4),among other things, discusses the exchange of information among the publicassistance programs and between them and the unemployment compensation(UC) program. The amending language of section 9101 of Pub. L. 99-509 isinserted into the latter provision only. Nonetheless, since the October21, 1986 amendment does not prohibit a general application of the targetingallowance and because a general application would significantly benefitState agencies, this rule allows State agencies to target follow-up actionon results from all data sources.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Recipients/Applicants</ITAG>Current rules treat follow-up action on applicants and recipients differently.At 7 CFR 272.8(e)(1), current rules provide that IEVS-obtained informationregarding applicants received within the 30-day application period shallbe used to determine household eligibility and benefits if the informationis received timely enough for these determinations. At 7 CFR 272.8(g) therules discuss the several components of follow-up action on recipientsand the timeframe for those actions. The October 21, 1986 amendment appliesits limitation to recipients, and this rule applies targeting to recipienthouseholds only. Targeting is not usefully applied to applicants for severalreasons. First, in cases where IEVS information is received timely enoughto be used for eligibility determinations, State agencies should be ableto resolve any discrepancies as part of those determinations and the costof the action should therefore be extremely small. Secondly, current rulesprovide that information requested on applicants and received after suchhouseholds are recipients will be used according to the guidelines forrecipients. The targeting provisions of this rule apply to such information.C. Targeting and Timeframes<ITAG tagnum="81">1. General</ITAG>Current IEVS rules at 7 CFR 272.8(g)(1) specify three actions which Stateagencies must take on all information items received by means of IEVS.The three actions are: (1) Review of the information and comparison ofit with the case record; (2) contact with the household and/or collateralcontacts to resolve discrepancies with new or previously unverified information;and (3) issuance of adverse action when warranted. The rule requires thatthese actions be initiated and pursued so that the actions will be completedwithin 30 days of receipt of the information items. Action on a maximumof 20 percent of the information items may be completed after the 30-dayperiod if two conditions are present. One condition is that action couldnot be completed only because requested verification from a collateralcontact was not received. The second condition is that action is completedaccording to established timeliness standards for State agency action onreported changes or with the next case action, whichever is earlier.Except for a technical revision, this rule makes no change in the follow-upactions which State agencies must take on information items. The secondsentence of 7 CFR 272.8(g)(1)(iii) serves to remind State agencies thatthe treatment of adverse actions for periodic reporting households andfor households under retrospective budgeting differs. This reminder isunnecessary, and so the sentence is deleted. The rule changes the timeframefor completing follow-up actions from 30 to 45 days and adds a requirementthat for particular data sources State agencies develop methods for targeting,depending on State agency cost-benefit analyses.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">State agencies are required to describe these targeting methods inattachments to Plans of Operations.  <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Targeting In General  </ITAG>A mentioned at the beginning of this preamble, the amending legislationprohibits State agencies from being required to use information obtainedthrough IEVS to determine the eligibility of all recipients. As also mentionedthere, this rule implements that legislation by allowing State agenciesto target the information items which they follow up on. Targeting is usedto implement the legislation because, while the legislation sets no minimumlevel for follow-up action, the Department believes that State agenciesshould follow up on as many information items as possible. As discussedin the following parts of this preamble, targeting in the seletion of asmany information items for follow up as a State agency's cost-benefit analysisindicates should be followed up on.  <T3>a. Targeting by data source. </T3>This rule requires at 7 CFR 272.8(i)(3)that in their attachments to their Plans of Operation, State agencies separatelydescribe for each data source the targeting methods which they will usefor follow-up action. This is required so that FNS can review and approvethe methods and ensure that IEVS information is used to the maximum extentuseful in verifying recipient eligibility and benefits.  This rule requires that State agencies develop targeting methods separatelyfor each data base because the differences in the data warrant such considerationin planning overall follow-up strategy. For example, data from the annualIRS match covers a calendar year and is available approximately nine totwelve months after that year; verification of the data is always requiredwith the household and/or a financial institution before any decision aboutan adverse action is made; and there are a relatively large number of matchesto process. Consequently, State agencies may want to target only the relativelylarger dollar value matches. In some situations, a different approach maybe desirable. For example, State agencies may want to target all UnemploymentInsurance Benefit (UIB) matches for follow up. UIB data is relatively currentwhen received, it covers discrete and limited time periods (weeks), andit has such a high degree of reliability that under IEVS rules it is consideredverified upon receipt.  <T3>b. Recipients participating in other IEVS programs. </T3>Current rulesat 7 CFR 272.8(f) require that State agencies request information on allmembers of recipient households. At 7 CFR 272.8(g)(1) the rules requirethat State agencies initiate and pursue action on information about recipienthouseholds which is received from IEVS sources. If four conditions aremet, this rule allows State agencies either to exclude from their matchingrequests members of households who are participating in one of the otherIEVS programs, or to exclude from follow-up action information items aboutsuch household members. These other IEVS programs are listed at 7 CFR 272.8(a)(2).For the most part, food stamp recipients would be excluded from matchingor follow-up action because of participation in the Aid to Families withDependent Children (AFDC) program. As explained just below in the discussionof the conditions for these exclusions, appropriate action would be takenon the excluded information items by the AFDC program and appropriate informationcommunicated to the FSP-State agency. Consequently, this charge will avoidduplicate efforts and the related waste of administrative resources. TheDepartment is providing State agencies the option of either excluding householdmembers from matching or excluding information items in order to accommodatedifferent administrative structures and data processing situations. Thefour conditions are the same for either option.  The first condition is that the agency administering the other programmust be requesting and acting on information on food stamp recipients whoare participating in that program as required by IEVS and any other pertinentrules for that program, including any provisons for selecting (targeting)information items for follow-up action. This will assure that informationabout food stamp household members participating in the other program isbeing appropriately requested and acted on. The second condition requiresthat the agency administering the other program agree to inform the FSP-Stateagency of the information obtained from its follow-up action on informationitems when that action discovers a discrepancy between actual circumstancesof food stamp recipients and circumstances known by the other program agency.This communication is necessary so that the FSP-State agency can take actionwith respect to food stamp eligibility and benefits. The requirement shouldimpose no burden on the State agencies since current rules at 7 CFR 273.12provide that the results of AFDC-State agency follow up, insofar as itaffects food stamp housholds, must be communicated to the FSP-State agency.The third condition is that the other program agency agrees to make available,upon the request of the FSP-State agency, any information items on foodstamp recipients which the other program agency did not follow up on. Thiswill enable the FSP-State agency to provide such information items to itsQC reviewers. For further discussion of this matter, see section D of thispreamble. The fourth condition is that the State agency must assure itselfand FNS that the action taken by the other program agency is at least asbeneficial as similar action by the ESP-State agency. This matter is discussedin detail in section 5 of this preamble.This rule also makes an editorial revision to the name of paragraph 272.8(f).The reference to using information is deleted since using information isthe subject of paragraph 272.8(g).<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Targeting Methods</ITAG>This rule at 7 CFR 272.8(i)(3)(i) requires that State agencies describethe targeting method which will be used for each data source, includingsuch details as: what selective criteria (thresholds) are used, including(when feasible) assurances that the most cost-beneficial data are targetedin instances of redundancy across data sources; what program standardsand information about households are used, if any; whether the criteriaare applied on the basis of individual information items, or groups ofinformation items about either individual household members or households;and whether the criteria are applied before any follow-up action is initiatedor are applied as part of the comparison of match results to casefile information.The Department needs this kind of detailed description so it can understandwhat the targeting criteria are and how they are used.One example of a selective criterion or threshold is, for quarterly wagedata, to follow up on information items of $750 or more. The State agencywould need to state whether the criterion would be applied to individualor to groups of information items and for individual household membersor for entire households. As stated here, the criterion would be appliedbefore any follow-up action. In this example, all this information wouldconstitute the description of the targeting method. Another example ofa targeting method would be comparing wage reports to income standardsfor particular households and acting on wage reports at or above the incomestandards. This method would use program standards, which would be theincome levels for various sizes of households. It would also use informationabout particular households, that is, the number of household members.Finally, because the method would use information about particular households,it would involve some comparison of match results to casefile information.Another targeting method would incorporate patterns of problems with respectto household reporting of the type of information obtained from the datasource. For example, larger households with several wage earners mightwarrant closer attention with respect to quarterly wage data than a flatdollar discrepancy might indicate is appropriate. Finally, State agenciesmight flag particular households with a history of reporting problems orclaims in order to give them special attention.In developing targeting methods, State agencies are encouraged to be imaginativein their use of computer technology and other resources. For example, acomputer system could identify wage data obtained from SSA which is alreadyknow from SWICA matching. State agencies could then follow up on such SSAinformation as wages from out-of-state employers and pensions. If a Stateagency uses such a procedure, this rule requires that a description ofit be included as part of the description of the pertinent targeting method.With respect to such procedures, however, the Department would reiterateand expand a point made in the preamble to the final IEVS rule (51 FR 7182,February 28, 1986). Current rules at 7 CFR 273.18(a) require State agenciesto establish claims against households which receive overissuances. Thisrule does not modify that requirement. State agencies are required to pursueclaims and related actions such as administrative disqualification hearingswhich IEVS-obtained information may indicate is appropriate with respectto overissuances to both participating and nonparticipating households.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Number of Matches Targeted for Follow Up</ITAG>The Department is providing State agencies the maximum amount of flexibilityin developing targeting methods so that they can make use of present capabilitiesand follow up on as many match results as possible. As discussed in thenext section of this preamble, the sole requirement that targeting methodsmust meet is to be cost beneficial. This rule does require, at 7 CFR 272.8(i)(3)(ii),that State agencies estimate for each data source the number of informationitems which will be followed up on after targeting and to estimate thepercentage that that number is of the number of information items received.These numbers should be produced as part of the development of targetingmethods and of cost/benefit analyses.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Cost-Benefit Justification</ITAG>The rule requires that State agencies include in their attachments to theirPlans of Operation separate cost-benefit analyses to justify the targetingmethods for each data source. Separate justifications are required becausebenefits and perhaps some cost elements will vary by data source as willtargeting methods. With respect to the justifications in general, the rulerequires that the analyses be sufficiently comprehensive and detailed tojustify the targeting methods. While the Department does not want to restrictState agencies to any particular method of cost-benefit analysis, it doeswant analyses to be well developed and well presented so that the reasonsfor targeting methods can be understood and evaluated.There are two general provisions related to cost-benefit justifications.First, if all information items received from matches from a particulardata source will be followed up on, the State agency must certify thatit has performed an analysis which showed that this 100 percent targetingis cost-beneficial. Second, if the targeting method will select matchesfor follow up, the cost-benefit justification must show that follow-upaction on more matches than the targeting method selects would not be costbeneficial. Such statements are required because, as already mentioned,the Department wants State agencies to follow up on as many match resultsas possible considering the cost and the benefit of doing so. For targetingmethods which select less than 100 percent of information items, the Departmentrecognizes that State agencies would have difficulty in identifying a precisebreak point in the spectrum of information items at which following upon one more item would make the overall activity more costly than the expectedbenefits. The Department expects that State agencies will be able to determinewhen adding another group of items would have that result. For example,a State agency might show that following up on a quarterly wage data of$750 or more is cost-beneficial and that adding follow up on the $700-$749group makes follow up no longer cost-beneficial for that data source. TheDepartment encourages State agencies to define this group as narrowly aspossible.While State agencies have wide flexibility in developing cost-benefit justifications,the rule requires that the justifications demonstrate that the targetingmethod is cost-beneficial overall. To this end the rule does specifiescertain factors which the justifications must and must not include. Withrespect to costs, the rule requires that the total costs include the totalof State and Federal administrative costs. The total of Federal and ofState costs must be included to reflect the actual total costs involved.The rule limits the elements of costs to the costs of targeting and follow-up.The rule sets these limits because the legislation requires that matchesbe used to the extent useful for eligibility determinations. So, for example,cost considerations of accessing data sources are not a factor. The rulealso requires that the justification include the State agency's estimatedcost per follow-up action for each particular data source. The Departmentbelieves that this figure will be a factor in any cost-benefit calculation.Providing the figure should impose no workload on the State agency, andthe figure will be useful in updating to Congress and for other purposesdiscussed in section E of this preamble.The rule specifies two types of costs which cannot be included in cost-benefitjustifications. The first such type is developmental, start-up and otherone-time costs. These cannot be included since they would be one-time costsand not factors in the day-to-day expenses. The second type is indirectcosts. Cost factors of targeting and follow up cannot include elementsattributed to them because of indirect costs because such elements tendto be difficult to document and in this situation should be marginal andinsignificant.With respect to the benefit part of the cost-benefit justification, therule requires that total benefits include certain factors. One factor whichmust be included is the amount of claims established because of IEVS-obtainedinformation. Two other factors are: Overissuances avoided and the totalof Federal and State administrative costs avoided because of terminatedcases. State agencies may include other factors if they can be quantified.In calculating overissuances and administrative costs avoided, State agenciesshould use the benefit levels and the number of months remaining in thecertification periods of actual households whenever possible. Some componentsof the benefit part of the justification, for example a monthly administrativecost per case, may already be known to State agencies. The Department certainlyencourages the use of such already established measures of benefits. However,such measures should not be used without adjustment when there is somelikelihood that they would be misleading. For example, an established averageclaim collection figure might misstate claims in cases of data from IRSsince that data source is relatively new.As discussed in section 2(b) above, this rule allows the exclusion of householdmembers from matching or the exclusion of information items about themfrom follow-up action if the household members or information items aredealt with by other agencies. Three of the four conditions which must bemet for such exclusions to be allowed are discussed in section 2(b). Thefourth condition is that such exclusions must result in follow-up actionwhich is at least as beneficial as action the State agency would conduct.Section 2(b) explains that the general purpose for allowing State agenciesto exclude household members and information items about them is to avoidduplicate effort and waste of resources. The fourth condition is to assurethe overall effectiveness of matching and follow-up action with respectto food stamp household members. The condition has several parts whichrequire that State agencies review certain materials and provide certaininformation to FNS. The actual work required is minimal relative to therelief that the exclusions provide State agencies.First, the rule requires that if the State agency wants to exclude householdmembers or information items about them it must identify in its cost-benefitjustification the other program which is matching and following up on informationitems and otherwise meeting the first three conditions. This informationis required so that it is understood what program is being discussed andso that FNS is assured that the first three conditions are met.The second part of the condition requires that the State agency summarizethe methods for targeting, or for otherwise selecting information itemsfor follow-up action, used by the other program agency. In that summarythe State agency must explain why those methods are at least as beneficialas the action which the State agency would take. That explanation is requiredso that the Department will be sure that IEVS-obtained information is beingused effectively for food stamp households.The Department expects that such explanation will be relatively simple.For example, the AFDC program generally provides greater benefits thandoes the FSP. Assuming equal costs for each program, it would be cost-beneficialfor the AFDC program to follow up on more discrepant information itemsrelating to food stamp recipients receiving AFDC than the FSP State agency.An explanation covering these points would generally be a sufficient demonstrationthat this part of the fourth condition is being met. The condition is statedin terms of benefits without reference to costs because it is assumed thatit would cost the FSP State agency the same to follow up on a food stamponly recipient as one also receiving benefits from the other program. So,if the gross benefits by themselves are at least what they would be ifthe FSP State agency itself conducted the follow up, subtracting out anequal amount for costs from both gross benefit figures would not changetheir relative values. Consequently, costs do not have to be considered.The rule further specifies that the summary and explanation must be basedon the State agency's review of the description of the targeting or otherselection methods as provided by the other program agency. A review ofsuch materials is sufficient for the purposes of this rule since the otherprogram agency would have attested that it is complying with its pertinentprogram rules. This approach also avoids involving the FSP State agencyin inappropriate and costly operational reviews of the other program.Finally with respect to the attachment to the Plan of Operation, the rulerequires that State agency submit revisions to their attachments as warrantedby information in their annual reports. This is being required so thatthe attachments accurately reflect State agency operations.<ITAG tagnum="81">6. Timeframe for Action on Match Results</ITAG>Current rules provide for a 30-day follow-up period on match results. Thisrule specifies a 45 day follow-up period. As already discussed, Congresssupports this timeframe as more reasonable than 30 days, and the Departmentagrees. This is a maximum time period and does not preclude a State agencyfrom setting shorter timeframes for action on match results from a particulardata base or for prioritizing action on match results. For example, matchesshowing unreported UIB may warrant a relatively high priority. The 20 percentallowance for action on match results when third party information is lateremains. This rule makes an editorial change to clarify that both of thetwo conditions related to the 20 percent allowance must be met when follow-upaction is taken after the 45-day timeframe. (See 7 CFR 272.8(g)(3).)D. Quality ControlCurrent rules state at 7 CFR 272.8(h) that the IEVS requirements do notrelieve State agencies of the responsibility of determining erroneous paymentsor of the responsibility for any liability for such payments as determinedby QC reviews. IEVS information which caseworkers have not resolved canbe used by QC reviewers as leads to information about cases. The IEVS rulepublished February 28, 1986, added a sentence to 7 CFR 275.15(c) to specifythat full field investigations of active cases must include a review ofany information pertinent to a particular case which is available throughIEVS. This rule allows State agencies to target IEVS-obtained informationfor follow-up action and so screen out some information items from anyfurther action. In addition, other program agencies which are followingup on information items about food stamp household members under the conditionsof this rule may screen out information items. The Department believesthat all such screened-out information items should be available for QCreviewers as leads to information about cases. Consequently, this rulerevises 7 CFR 272.8(h) by adding a sentence which requires that State agenciesmake available to QC reviewers information items not selected for follow-upaction because of the use of targeting methods, including any such methodsused by another program agency under an attachment to the State agency'sPlan of Operation for IEVS.E. ReportingCurrent IEVS rules at 7 CFR 272.8(j) require that State agencies reportas the Secretary prescribes for determining compliance with the IEVS rulesand evaluating the effectiveness of the IEVS. The preamble to the finalIEVS rules (51 FR 7197, February 28, 1986) stated the intention of theFederal programs to limit reporting to (a) the number of agency recordssubmitted to each IEVS source agency and (b) the number of positive matchresults received from each source agency. This rule requires that Stateagencies report annually on targeting-related aspects of IEVS. The reportsmust cover particular Federal Fiscal Years (October 1 through September30). This reporting requirement supercedes the reporting requirement inthe current rules. It is being established now because the anticipatedvariety of targeting methods will not allow the Department to estimatematching activity based on general information such as State participationlevels and information from data sources such as the IRS and SSA. The Departmentbelieves that annual reporting is the longest cycle compatible with theneed to monitor IEVS policy and operations, and to report about those mattersto Congress. The three months from the end of the Fiscal Year to December31 should give State agencies adequate time to prepare and submit reports.In the reports State agencies must assess their targeting activities separatelyfor each data source. For this purpose, the reports must include the actualnumber of information items acted on and the percentage that that numberis of the number of items received. The Department needs this informationto report on the level of matching activities, and the State agencies needit for other aspects of the reporting requirement. The information shouldbe readily available to State agencies. The rule also requires that thereports include a summary of any significant operational events and patternsin targeting, and any consequent changes made or planned in such areasas automated data processing and targeting methods. This is being requiredbecause the Department expects that State agency experience, new computertechnology and other developments will warrant changes in State agencyIEVS operations. A third requirement is that the report include any changesto the cost-benefit justification. This information is required becausechanges in operations will probably result in changes to the cost-benefitfigures.F. ImplementationParagraph 272.1(g)(96) states that this rule is effective March 18, 1988,except for paragraphs 272.8(i) (3) and (4) and 272.8(j)(1) which will beeffective upon publication in the<T4> Federal Register</T4> of the approval of the information collectionburden by OMB. As mentioned in the paragraph in this preamble concerningthe Paperwork Reduction Act, after that approval the Department plans topublish a final rule. In that rule it intends to require the submissionof the attachments to State Plans of Operations 90 days after publicationof that final rule. The first reports required by that rule would be dueDecember 31, 1988.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 272</ITAG>Alaska, Civil rights, Food stamps, Grant programs_social programs, Reportsand recordkeeping requirements.Therefore, 7 CFR Part 272 is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 272_REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICIPATING STATE AGENCIES</ITAG>1. The authority for Part 272 continues to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>(7 U.S.C. 2011-2099).</ITAG>2. In andSection; 272.1, paragraph (g)(96) is added in numerical order toread as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General terms and conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) <T3>Implementation. * * *</T3>(96) Amendment 301. This rule pertains to the Income and Eligibility VerificationSystem (IEVS). It is effective March 18, 1988, except for paragraphs 272.8(i)(3) and (4) and 272.8(j)(1) which will be effective upon publication inthe<T4> Federal Register</T4> of the approval of the information collectionburden by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).3. In andSection; 272.8, the name of paragraph (f) and the introductory clauseof paragraph (f) are revised, and a new paragraph (f)(7) is added; paragraph(g) is revised; a new sentence is added to the end of paragraph (h); andparagraphs (i) and (j)(1) are revised. The revisions and the new sentenceread as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;272.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">State income and eligibility verification system.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) <T3>Requesting information about recipients.</T3> Except as provided inparagraph (f)(7) of this section, with respect to all members of recipienthouseholds State agencies shall:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(7) Under certain conditions State agencies may exclude from the requestsfor information specified in this paragraph those members of recipienthouseholds who are participating in one of the other programs listed inparagraph (a)(2) of this section. The conditions for such exclusion arethat: (i) The agency responsible for administering such other program is requestingand acting on information on food stamp recipients who are participatingin that program as required by the pertinent regulations for that program,including any concerning selective criteria for information items for follow-upaction; (ii) The other program agency agrees to inform the State agency of theinformation obtained from its follow-up action when that action discoversdiscrepancies between actual circumstances of food stamp recipients andcircumstances known by the other program agency; (iii) The other program agency agrees to make available, upon the requestof the State agency, information items about food stamp recipients whichit did not follow up on; and (iv) The follow-up action taken by the other program agency is at leastas beneficial as such action by the State agency. (g) <T3>Actions on recipient households.</T3> With respect to information itemsreceived as a result of requests made according to paragraph (f) of thissection, State agencies shall initiate and pursue action according to theattachment to the Plan of Operation specified in paragraph (i) of thissection. (1) State agency action on information items about recipient householdsshall include:(i) Review of the information and comparison of it to case record information;(ii) For all new or previously unverified information received, contactwith the households and/or collateral contacts to resolve discrepanciesas specified in andSection;andSection;273.2(f)(4)(iv) and 273.2(f)(9)(iii)and (iv); and (iii) If discrepancies warrant reducing benefits or terminating eligibility,notices of adverse action. (2) State agencies shall initiate and pursue the actions specified in paragraph(g)(1) of this section so that the actions are completed within 45 daysof receipt of the information items. Actions may be completed later than45 days from the receipt of information items on no more than 20 percentof the information items if:(i) The only reason that the actions cannot be completed is the nonreceiptof verification requested from collateral contacts; and (ii) The actions are completed as specified in andSection;273.12 when verificationfrom a collateral contact is received or in conjunction with the next caseaction when such verification is not received, whichever is earlier. (3) When the actions specified in paragraph (g)(1) of this section substantiatean overissuance, State agencies shall establish and take actions on claimsas specified in andSection;273.18. (4) State agencies shall use appropriate procedures to monitor the timelinessrequirements in paragraph (g)(2) of this section. (5) Except for the claims actions specified in paragraph (g)(3) of thissection, under the conditions of paragraph (f)(7) of this section, Stateagencies may exclude from the actions required in paragraph (g) of thissection information items pertaining to household members who are participatingin one of the other programs listed in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.(h) <T3>IEVS information and quality control</T3>. * * * State agencies shallmake available to quality control reviewers information items which arenot selected for follow-up action because of the use of targeting methodsspecified in paragraph (i)(3) of this section including any informationitems not selected by other program agencies as provided in paragraph (i)(3)(iii)(C).(i) <T3>Plan of Operations.</T3> The requirements for the IEVS specified inthis section shall be included in an attachment to the State agency's Planof Operations as required in andSection;272.2(d). This document shall include:(1) A description of procedures used, and agreements with the other agenciesand programs specified in paragraph (a) of this section, including stepstaken to meet requirements of limiting disclosure and safeguarding of informationobtained from food stamp households and third parties as specified in andSection;272.1;(2) Any of the material concerning alternate data sources as specifiedin paragraph (c) of this section; (3) For each of the data sources specified in paragraphs (c) and (f) ofthis section, a separate description of how the State agency will select(target) information items for the actions specified in paragraph (g)(1)of this section. The description shall:(i) Describe the targeting method which will be used including such detailsas: What selective criteria (thresholds) are used, including (when feasible)assurances that the most cost-beneficial data are targeted in instancesof redundancy across data sources; what program standards and/or informationabout households are used, if any; whether the criteria are applied onthe basis of individual or groups of information items, and about individualhousehold members or households; and whether the criteria are applied beforeany follow-up action specified in paragraph (g) of this section are initiatedor are applied as part of the comparison of match results to casefile information;(ii) State the approximate number of information items which will be actedon and the approximate percentage that that number is of the number ofinformation items received;(iii) Include a sufficiently comprehensive and detailed cost-benefit analysisto justify the targeting method. If the State agency will follow-up onall information items received, it shall certify in its Plan of Operationthat it performed an analysis which showed that 100 percent follow up iscost beneficial. If the targeting method will select certain informationitems for follow up, the justification shall show that following up onmore information items than selected would not be cost-beneficial.(A) Total costs shall include both the Federal and State share of administrativecosts. The elements of the total costs shall be limited to the costs oftargeting and follow-up action. The justification shall include an estimateof the cost per follow-up action. No costs for any developmental, start-upand other one-time costs or indirect ongoing costs shall be included.(B) Total benefits shall include such quantifiable factors as the amountsof collections on claims established because of IEVS-obtained information,and the amounts of overissuances and the total of Federal and State administrativecosts avoided due to terminating participation and reducing benefits.(C) As provided in paragraphs (f)(7) and (g)(5) of this section, the Stateagency may exclude household members from match requests or exclude informationitems about them from follow up. If the State agency wants to make eitherof such exclusions, in its cost-benefit justification it shall providecertain information. First, the State agency shall identify the programinvolved and state that the agency responsible for administering the programmeets the conditions of paragraphs (f)(7)(i), (ii) and (iii) of this section.Second, the State agency shall summarize the methods for targeting, orfor otherwise selecting information items for follow-up action, used bythe other program agency as required in paragraph (f)(7)(i) of this section.In that summary, the State agency shall explain why those actions are atleast as beneficial as the action which the State agency would take tocomply with paragraph (g) of this section. The summary shall be based onthe State agency's review of the description of the targeting or otherselection methods as provided by the other program agency; and(4) The State agency shall submit revisions to the attachment as warrantedby information in the annual report required in paragraph (j)(l) of thissection.(j) <T3>Reports and documentation. </T3>(1) The State agency shall annuallyassess the targeting aspects of its IEVS specified in paragraph (i)(3)of this section and shall report that assessment to FNS. Such reports shallcover a Federal Fiscal Year (October 1 through September 30) and are dueto the appropriate FNS Regional Office by December 31 following the particularFiscal Year. In the reports the State agency shall provide the followinginformation about its targeting activities separately for each data source:(i) The actual number of information items acted on and the percentagethat that number is of the number of items received; (ii) A summary of any significant operational events and patterns in targeting,and any consequent changes made or planned in such areas as automated dataprocessing and targeting methods; and (iii) Any change to the cost-benefit justification which is required byparagraph (i)(3) of this section.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: January 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Thomas W. Mitchell,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-2079 Filed 2-1-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-30-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>