<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88729-0100 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-29-88.f2.A1099</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-6837]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; Real Estate for American Labor A Balcor GroupTrust (the Trust) et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5669, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-4677, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issued exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issue solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="75">Real Estate for American Labor a Balcor Group Trust (the Trust), Locatedin Chicago, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-6837]</ITAG>Proposed Exemption<ITAG tagnum="81">Section I. Exemption for Certain Transactions Involving the Trust</ITAG>(a) The restrictions of sections 406(a), 406(b)(2), and 407(a) of the Actand the sanctions resulting from the application of section 4975 of theCode, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (D) of the Code, shallnot apply to the transactions described below if the applicable conditionsset forth in Section IV are met.(1) <T3>Transactions Between Parties-In-Interest and the Trust: General.</T3>Any transaction between a party-in-interest with respect to a plan whichhas an interest in the Trust (a Participating Plan) and the Trust, or anyacquisition or holding by the Trust of employer securities or employerreal property, if the party in interest is not Balcor Institutional RealtyAdvisors, Inc. (Balcor) or one of its affiliates, any other trust maintainedby Balcor or one of its affiliates, and if, at the time of the transaction,acquisition or holding, the interest of the Participating Plan, togetherwith the interest of any other Participating Plans maintained by the sameemployer or employee organization in the Trust, does not exceed 10 percentof the total of all assets in the Trust.(2) <T3>Special Transaction Not Meeting the Criteria of Section I(a)(1) BetweenEmployers of Employees Covered by a Multiemployer Plan and the Trust.</T3>Any transaction between an employer (or an affiliate of an employer) ofemployees covered by a multiemployer plan (as defined in section 3(37)(A)of the Act and section 414(f)(1) of the Code) that is a Participating Plan,and the Trust, or any acquisition or holding by the Trust of employer securitiesor employer real property, if at the time of the transaction, acquisitionor holding_The interest of the multiemployer plan in the Trust exceeds 10 percentof the total assets in the Trust, but the employer is not a ``substantialemployer'' with respect to the plan and would not be a ``substantial employer''if ``5 percent'' were substituted for ``10 percent'' in the definitionof ``substantial employer.''(3) <T3>Acquisitions, Sales, or Holdings of Employer Securities and EmployerReal Property.</T3> (A) Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section(3), any acquisition, sale or holding of employer securities or employerreal property by the Trust which does not meet the requirement of paragraphs(a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section I, if no commission is paid to Balcoror to the employer, or any affiliate of Balcor or the employer in connectionwith the acquisition or sale of employer securities or the acquisition,sale or lease or employer real property; and (i) In the case of employer real property_(aa) Each parcel of employer real property and the improvements thereonheld by the Trust are suitable (or adaptable without excessive cost) foruse by different tenants, and(bb) The property of the Trust that is leased or held for lease to others,in the aggregate, is dispersed geographically.(ii) In the case of employer securities_(aa) Neither Balcor nor any of its affiliates is an affiliate of the issuerof the security, and (bb) If the security is an obligation of the issuer, either:1. The Trust owns the obligation at the time the plan acquires an interestin the Trust, and interests in the Trust are offered and redeemed in accordancewith valuation procedures of the Trust applied on a uniform or consistentbasis, or2. Immediately after acquisition of the obligation by the Trust not morethan 25 percent of the aggregate amount of obligations issued in the issueand outstanding at the time of acquisition is held by such plan, and atleast 50 percent of the aggregate amount of obligations issued in the issueand outstanding at the time of acquisition is held by persons independentof the issuer. Balcor, its affiliates, and any collective investment fundmaintained by Balcor or its affiliates, shall be considered to be personsindependent of the issuer if Balcor is not an affiliate of the issuer.(B) In the case of a Participating Plan that is not an eligible individualaccount plan (as defined in section 407(d)(3) of the Act), the exemptionprovided in subsection (A) of this section (3) shall be available onlyif, immediately after the acquisition of the securities or real property,the aggregate fair market value of employer securities and employer realproperty with respect to which Balcor or its affiliate has investment discretiondoes not exceed 10 percent of the fair market value of all the assets ofthe Participating Plan with respect to which Balcor or its affiliate hassuch investment discretion.(C) For purposes of the exemption contained in subsection (A) of this section(3), the term ``employer securities'' shall include securities issued by,and the term ``employer real property'' shall include real property leasedto, a person who is a party-in-interest with respect to a ParticipatingPlan by reason of a relationship to the employer described in section 3(14)(E), (G), or (I) of the Act.(b) The restrictions of section 406(a)(1) (A) through (D) and section 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(E) of the Code shall not apply to the transactions described below, ifthe conditions of Section IV are met.(1) <T3>Certain Leases and Goods.</T3> The furnishing of goods to the Trustby a party-in-interest with respect to a Participating Plan or the leasingof real property owned by the Trust to such party-in-interest and the incidentalfurnishing of goods to such party-in-interest by the Trust, if_(A) In the case of goods, they are furnished to or by the Trust in connectionwith real property owned by the Trust; (B) The party-in-interest is not Balcor, any affiliate of Balcor, or oneof the other trusts and;(C) The amount involved in the furnishing of goods or leasing of real propertyin any calendar year (including the amount under any other lease or arrangementfor the furnishing of goods in connection with the real property investmentsof the Trust with the same party-in-interest, or any affiliate thereof)does not exceed the greater of $25,000 or 0.5 percent of the fair marketvalue of the assets of the Trust on the most recent valuation date of theTrust prior to the transaction.   (2) <T3>Transactions Involving Places of Public Accommodation. </T3>The furnishingof services, facilities and any goods incidental to such services and facilitiesby a place of public accommodation owned by the Trust to a party-in-interestwith respect to a Participating Plan, if the services, facilities and incidentalgoods are furnished on a comparable basis to the general public.   (c) The restrictions of section 406(a)(1)(A) through (D) of the Act andthe sanctions resulting from the application of section 4975 of the Codeby reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (D) of the Code shall not applyto the following transactions if the conditions of section IV are met:  Any transaction betwen the Trust and a person who is a party in interestwith respect to a Participating Plan, if_   (1) The person is a party in interest (including a fiduciary) solely byreason of providing services to the Participating Plan, or solely by reasonof a relationship to a service provider described in section 3(14)(F),(G), (H) or (I) of the Act, or both, and the person neither exercised norhas any discretionary authority, control, responsibility or influence withrespect to the investment of the Participating Plan's assets in, or heldby, the Trust;   (2) At the time of the transaction, the interest of the Participating Plan,together with the interests of any other Participating Plan maintainedby the same employer or employee organization in the Trust, does not exceed20 percent of the total of all assets in the Trust; and   (3) The person is not Balcor or an affiliate of Balcor.   (d) The restrictions of section 406(a)(1)(A) through (D) of the Act andthe sanctions resulting from the application of section 4975 of the Codeby reasons of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (D) of the Code shall not applyto the purchase and sale of units of beneficial interest (Units) in theTrust if no more than reasonable compensation is paid therefor and (a)each purchase and sale is authorized in writing by a fiduciary of the ParticipatingPlan who is independent of Balcor and any of its affiliates or (b) thepurchase or sale is a mandatory redemption required by the Trust Agreement,including the failure of the Participating Plan to remain a plan whichcan invest in a group trust described in section 401(a)(24) of the Code,and the applicable conditions of section IV are met.<ITAG tagnum="81">Section II. Excess Holdings Exemption for Employee Benefit Plans  </ITAG>(a) The restrictions of section 406(a) and 407(a) of the Act and the sanctionsresulting from the application of section 4975 of the Code by reason ofsection 4975(c)(1)(A) through (D) of the Code shall not apply to any acquisitionor holding of qualifying employer securities or qualifying employer realproperty (other than through the Trust) by a Participating Plan if: (1)the acquisition of holding constitutes a prohibited transaction solelyby reason of being aggregated with employer securities or employer realproperty held by the Trust; (2) the requirements of either paragraph (a)(1)or paragraph (a)(2) of section I of this exemption are met; and (3) theapplicable conditions set forth in section IV of this exemption are met.  <T3>Section III. Transfers of Real Property From Balcor to the Trust  </T3>(a) The restrictions of section 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (2) of the Act andthe taxes imposed by section 4975 of the Code by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A)through (E) of the Code shall not apply to any sale to the Trust of realproperty acquired by Balcor or an affiliate during the offering periodif the following conditions are met:   (a) The price paid by the Trust for the property will be no greater thanthe lesser of the sum of the amount paid and the holding costs incurredby Balcor or an affiliate or the fair market value of the property, asdetermined by an independent appraiser, as of the date of sale to the Trust;  (b) The offering memorandum (Memorandum) is supplemented during the offeringperiod with a description of the proposed investment;   (c) All documents relating to such an investment by Balcor indicate specificallythat the investment is being made on behalf of the Trust and all documentsrelating to the calling of funds from investors specify the investmentfor which such funds will be used;   (d) All such transfers are completed within 120 days of purchase by Balcoror an affiliate; and   (e) The conditions set forth in section IV of this exemption are met.  <ITAG tagnum="81">Section IV. General Conditions</ITAG>(a) At the time the transaction is entered into, and at the time of anysubsequent renewal thereof that requires the consent of Balcor or its affilitate,the terms of the transaction are not less favorable to the Trust than theterms generally available in arm's-length transactions between unrelatedparties.(b) Balcor or its affiliates maintain for a period of six years from thedate of the transaction the records necessary to enable the persons describedin paragraph (c) of this section IV to determine whether the conditionsof this exemption have been met, except that: (1) A prohibited transactionwill not be considered to have occurred if, due to circumstances beyondthe control of Balcor or its affiliates, the records are lost or destroyedprior to the end of the six-year period, and (2) no party in interest shallbe subject to the civil penalty that may be assessed under section 502(a) and (b) of the Code, if the records are not maintained, or are notavailable for examination as required by paragraph (c) below.(c)(1) Except as provided in section 2 of this paragraph (c) and notwithstandingany provisions of subsections (a)(2) and (b) of section 504 of the Act,the records referred to in paragraph (b) of this section IV are unconditionallyavailable at their customary location for examination during normal businesshours by:(A) Any duly authorized employee or representative of the Department orthe Internal Revenue Service,(B) Any fiduciary of a Participating Plan who has authority to acquireor dispose of the interests in the Trust of the Participating Plan or anyduly authorized employee or representative of such fiduciary,(C) Any contributing employer to any Participating Plan or any duly authorizedemployee or representative of such employer, and(D) Any participant or beneficiary of any Participating Plan, or any dulyauthorized employee or representative of such participant or beneficiary.(2) None of the persons described in subparagraphs (B) through (D) of thisparagraph (c) shall be authorized to examine trade secrets of Balcor orits affiliate, or commercial or financial information which is privilegedor confidential.<ITAG tagnum="81">Section V. Definitions and General Rules</ITAG>For the purposes of this exemption,(a) The term ``the Trust'' shall include any collective investment fundthat may hereafter be established, operated and managed by Balcor or itsaffiliate in essentially the same manner as the Real Estate for AmericanLabor A Balcor Group Trust.(b) An ``affiliate'' of a person includes_(1) Any person directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries,controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the person,(2) Any officer, director, employee, relative of, or partner in any suchperson, and (3) Any corporation or partnership of which such person is an officer,director, partner or employee. (c) The term ``control'' means the power to exercise a controlling influenceover the management of policies of a person other than an individual. (d) The term ``relative'' means a ``relative'' as that term is definedin section 3(15) of the Act (or a ``member of the family'' as that termis defined in section 4975(e)(6) of the Code), or a brother, a sister,or a spouse of a brother or sister.(e) The term ``substantial employer'' means for any plan year an employer(treating employers who are members of the same affiliated group, withinthe meaning of section 1563(a) of the Code, determined without regard tosection 1563(a)(4) and (e)(3)(c) of the Code, as one employer) who hasmade contributions to or under a multiemployer plan for each of_ (1) The two immediately preceding plan years, or (2) The second and third preceding plan years, equaling or exceeding 10percent of all employer contributions paid to or under that plan for eachsuch year. (f) The time as of which any transaction, acquisition or holding occursis the date upon which the transaction is entered into, the acquisitionis made or the holding commences. In addition, in the case of a transactionthat is continuing, the transaction shall be deemed to occur until it isterminated. If any transaction is entered into, or an acquisition is made,on or after the effective date of this exemption, or a renewal that requiresthe consent of the Trust occurs on or after the effective date of thisexemption, and the requirments of this exemption are satisfied at the timethe transaction is entered into or renewed, respectively, or at the timethe acquisition is made, the requirements will continue to be satisfiedthereafter with respect to the transaction or acquisition and the exemptionshall apply thereafter to the continued holding of the property so acquired.Notwithstanding the foregoing, this exemption shall cease to apply to transactionsexempt by virtue of subsections I(a)(1) and I(c) at such time as the interestof the Participating Plan exceeds the percentage interest limitations setforth in those subsections, unless no portion of such excess results froman increase in the assets allocated to the Trust by the Participating Plan.For this purpose, assets allocated do not include the investment of Trustearnings. Nothing in this paragraph (f) shall be construed as exemptinga transaction described in section 406 of the Act of section 4975 of theCode while the transaction is continuing, unless the conditions or theexemption were met either at the time the transaction was entered intoor at the time the transaction would have become prohibited but for thisexemption. (g) Each Participating Plan shall be considered to own the same proportionateundivided interest in each asset of the Trust as its proportionate interestin the total assets of the Trust as calculated on the most recent precedingvaluation date of the Trust. The availability of this exemption is subject to the express conditionthat the material facts and representations contained in the applicationare true and complete, and that the application accurately describes allmaterial terms of the transactions to be consummated pursuant to this proposedexemption.PreambleOn July 25, 1980, the Department published a class exemption, ProhibitedTransaction Exemption 80-51 (PTE 80-51, 45 FR 49709), which permits collectiveinvestment funds that are maintained by banks and in which employee benefitplans participate to engage in certain transactions provided that specifiedconditions are met. The transactions for which the applicants have requestedrelief are those which, in part, are the subject of PTE 80-51. The Department stated in PTE 80-51 that a comment had been received tothe proposed class exemption requesting that it be amended to apply tocollective investment funds that are not maintained by banks. Relief wasgranted for bank collective investment funds because, among other reasons,such funds are regulated by other governmental agencies and constitutea well-defined class of funds. In the case of collective investment fundsthat are not maintained by banks, the Department found that the recordwas insufficient to determine the nature of the funds and the entitiesmanaging the funds that would comprise the class covered by such broadrelief. As a result, the Department stated that it could not make the requiredstatutory findings for such relief, and that relief for non-bank maintainedcollective investment funds should be dealt with on an individual ratherthan a class basis. To date the Department has proposed and granted various individual exemptionson behalf of collective investment funds which have not qualified for reliefunder PTE 80-51 or Prohibited Transaction Exemption 78-19 (PTE 78-19, 43FR 59915, December 22, 1978; class relief on behalf of pooled separateaccounts sponsored by insurance companies). Such individual exemptionshave provided relief for similar transactions subject to, in most instances,similar terms and conditions as those contained in the class exemptions.Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Trust is intended to be a group trust described in section 401(a)(24)of the Code and Rev. Rul. 81-100, 1981-1 C.B.326, to provide multiemployerplans (as defined in section 3(37)(A) of the Act and section 414(f)(1)of the Code) a vehicle for pooling a portion of their funds for the purposeof making investments in real estate and mortgage loans. The Trust is intendedto be qualified under section 401(a) of the Code and exempt from tax undersection 501(a) of the Code.2. Pursuant to a written investment management agreement entered into withthe trustees (the Trustees) of the Trust, Balcor will serve as the investmentmanager for the Trust. Prior to the offering of Units, Balcor, a newlyformed corporation, will acquire all of the partnership interests of andbecome successor to Balcor Real Estate Investment Advisors, a registeredinvestment advisor. Thereafter, Balcor will become an investment advisorregistered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940. The Balcor Company(Balcor Co.) owns all of the outstanding shares of Balcor and will unconditionallyguarantee payment of all of the liabilities of Balcor. Balcor Co. and itssubsidiaries have shareholder's equity in excess of $163,000,000 and manageproperty valued at more than $5,000,000,000. Balcor Co. is a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of Shearson Lehman Brothers, Inc. (Shearson), an investmentbanking and brokerage firm and an investment advisor to, among other entities,multiemployer pension plans. Shearson is wholly-owned by American ExpressCompany, which is primarily in the business of providing travel relatedservices, insurance services, and international banking services. Affiliatesof Balcor Co. have formed numerous public and private real estate entities.In addition, Balcor Co. and its affiliates manage or advise additionalpublic and private real estate entities, as well as entities not engagedin the real estate business. They also engage in other business activities.Any successor investment manager will be chosen by a majority of the Trustees.Balcor expects to manage additional trusts in the future which will bestructured similarly to the Trust. Pursuant to the investment managementagreement, Balcor will be vested with the exclusive authority to acquire,manage and dispose of the Trust's investments in real property. Balcorwill be responsible for performing the day-to-day administrative and investmentoperations of the Trust. Balcor will, directly or through an affiliate,provide property acquisition, maintenance and repair, rent collection,bookkeeping, lease negotiation, mortgage brokerage and servicing and otherrelated management services. Balcor is not currently a qualified professionalasset manager as defined in Prohibited Transaction Exemption 84-14 (PTE84-14, 49 FR 9494) since it does not yet have $50 million of assets undermanagement. Messrs. Jerry M. Reinsdorf, Stephen H. Silverstein, John L.West, Barry R. Jackson, Van L. Pell and Thomas E. Meador serve as the Trustees.The Trustees are officers of Balcor or an affiliate. The Trustees willreceive no compensation for serving as Trustee. They will be solely responsiblefor accepting or rejecting participation in the Trust by a prospectiveParticipating Plan, determining the fair market value of the Trust's assetsfor the purpose of valuing Units, and determining the time and amount ofdistributions to Participating Plans. 3. Interests in the Trust will be offered pursuant to the Memorandum, whichdescribes the management, operation, investment objectives and income taxconsequences of the Trust and compensation to be paid to Balcor as investmentmanager. The initial offering price of each Unit is $100,000, with a minimumsubscription by an investor of 10 Units. The offering price per Unit willbe adjusted to reflect quarterly re-evaluations of the Units. There isno minimum or maximum total offering of Units, although the Trust willonly accept payment for Units for which it has received investor commitmentsor subscriptions when subscriptions for at least 200 Units ($20,000,0000)have been accepted by the Trustees. In order to avoid making short-terminvestments for the Trust, Balcor will not call commitments to invest inthe Trust until it has made appropriate investments on behalf of the Trustequal to the amount of the commitments. If such investments are not madewithin 15 months after obtaining the initial $20,000,000 of commitments,each investor will be offered the right to rescind its commitment. Afterward,the process will be repeated for each $10,000,000 in commitments and investments.The Trust provides that Balcor or an affiliate may, for the purpose offacilitating the acquisition of an investment by the Trust, make or acquirean investment in its own name and within 120 days transfer such investmentto the Trust. The price will be no greater than the lesser of the sum ofthe amount paid and the holding costs incurred by Balcor or an affiliateor the fair market value of the investment, as determined by an independentappraiser, as of the date of sale to the Trust. It is contemplated thatUnits will be offered for an indefinite period which is not expected toexceed ten years. After that time, Units will only be offered to currentParticipating Plans and no new investors will be permitted unless suchinvestor is purchasing Units which are being redeemed. The Units will beprivately offered commencing on or about September 15, 1986 and will notbe registered under the Securities Act of 1933. Neither the Units nor anyinterest therein may be resold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise disposedof or encumbered by Participating Plans, as required by Rev. Rul. 81-100.4. The decision of any plan to invest in the Trust will be made by fiduciariesof that plan. The Trustees may reject a subscription for any reason. Theapplicant states that none of the individual Trustees of the Trust, norany of the employees, officers, directors or shareholders of Balcor orits affiliates will exercise any discretionary authority over or otherwiseparticipate in the decision of any plan to invest in the Trust. In connectionwith the proposed exemption for the purchase and sale of Units in the Trust,the applicant represents that Balcor or its affiliates may act as an investmentadviser or investment manager with respect to portions of the assets ofplans that may become Participating Plans and may on occasion be retainedby such plans to provide services with respect to specific real estateinvestments made by the plans. However, the applicant represents furtherthat assets of plans for which Balcor or any of its affiliates acts asinvestment adviser or investment manager or otherwise subject to the investmentdiscretion of Balcor or any of its affiliates will not be eligible forinvestment in the Trust. In addition, Balcor expects to engage in normalmarketing and promotional activity in connection with the Trust, but itwill not recommend investment therein of plan assets with respect to whichit acts as an investment adviser or investment manager.\1\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\To the extent that, in the ordinary course of business,Balcor or any of its affiliates provides ``investment advice'' to a ParticipatingPlan within the meaning of regulation 29 CFR 2510.3-21(c)(1)(ii)(B) andrecommends an investment of the plan's assets in the Trust, the presenceof an unrelated second fiduciary acting on the consultant/investment adviser'srecommendations on behalf of the plan is not sufficient to insulate theadvisers from fiduciary liability under section 406(b) of the Act. (SeeAdvisory Opinions 84-03A and 84-04A, issued by the Department on January4, 1984). The Department is unable to conclude that fiduciary self dealingof this type (if present) is in the interests or protective of plans andtheir participants and beneficiaries and, accordingly, has limited exemptiverelief for the acquisition or sales of Units in the Trust to section 406(a)violations only. 5. The Trustees, in their sole discretion, may terminate the Trust at anytime. Upon termination, the Trustees are required to liquidate the Trust'sproperties and distribute its assets to Participating Plans, pro rata,subject to appropriate reserves for existing liabilities and contingencies.6. A Participating Plan may request that the Trust redeem all or any portionof its Units. Furthermore, under certain circumstances described below,the Units of a Participating Plan may be involuntarily redeemed. The Trustees will make redemption payments out of available funds and willbe under no obligation to sell any properties to satisfy redemption requests.However, the Trust may not enter into any new commitments to purchase propertiesor make new mortgage loans if any redemption requests are outstanding unlessthe Trustees determine that a redemption at that time will violate theconditions of the Trust Agreement. Upon receipt of the redemption requestthe Trustees may, in their discretion, notify all remaining ParticipatingPlans of the availability of additional Units that may be purchased atthe existing Unit asset value as of the date of redemption. If the remainingParticipating Plans do not purchase all the Units being redeemed, the Trusteesmay, in their discretion, offer the remaining Units to other eligible investors.Upon the redemption date, the Trustees will distribute to the redeemingParticipating Plan the existing Unit asset value as of the date the Unitsare redeemed. The redemption price will be decreased by any estimates ofthe costs of disposition of assets the proceeds of which are used to redeemUnits, which costs are not reflected in such Unit asset value. Upon termination of the status of a Participating Plan as a qualified trustunder section 401(a) of the Code or upon amendment of the ParticipatingPlan so that it is no longer authorized to invest in the Trust, the Unitsheld by such Participating Plan shall be deemed to have been redeemed asof the coincident or preceding Valuation Date. As funds are made available,the Trustees will distribute to such Participating Plan 90% of the Unitasset value of the Units which were redeemed, decreased by any costs ofredemption. Ten percent of the value of the Units being redeemed will beplaced in an interest bearing escrow account and treated as a contingentliability of the Trust for seven years. At the end of seven years, theTrustees will compare the Unit value at that time with 90% of the Unitvalue at the time of the redemption (the Settlement Value). If the Unitvalue is less than the Settlement Value, the contingent liability willbe eliminated, with no additional payment to the Participating Plan whichhad Units which were subject to a mandatory redemption. If the Unit valueis greater than the Settlement Value, the former Participating Plan willbe refunded some or all of the retained ten percent, including intereston that amount, up to the current Unit value. The applicant represents that in the event of such a mandatory redemption,the Trust will be obligated to repurchase the Units held by such ParticipatingPlan in order to maintain its tax-exempt status. The need to repurchasesuch Units could disrupt the investment portfolio and Balcor's strategyand adversely affect the return on the investments of the other ParticipatingPlans. The Trust therefore requires that the Participating Plan which causesa mandatory redemption to bear a greater share of the risk of loss causedby the redemption. If there are no adverse consequences to the Trust, the10% retained interest will be paid out to such Participating Plan afterseven years, which is the expected turnover time of the Trust's portfolio.Upon the Trustees' determination that the Trust will be engaged in a non-exemptprohibited transaction because of a Participating Plan's acquisitioin orownership of Units, such Units will be subject to a mandatory redemptionas described in the preceding paragraph, except that there will be no tenpercent retention. 7. The purposes of the Trust are preserving and protecting capital, generatingincome on investments, providing for capital appreciation and providingjobs for union labor. Consistent with these purposes, funds of the Trustwill be invested in direct or indirect ownership, contract, or leaseholdinterests in (1) Realty currently or soon to be under construction or rehabilitation,(2) land underlying realty described in (1) above, and (3) realty the investmentof which is incidental to investments described in (1) and (2) above. Fundsof the Trust will also be invested in direct or indirect interests in loansor commitments to make loans related to the types of realty described above.8. All investments will be evaluated by Balcor in accordance with Balcor'sinvestment criteria and must offer a commercially competitive rate of return.A requirement for all investments by the Trust in realty or in loans thereonis that the construction or rehabilitation by the developers must be providedby contractors and sub-contractors who employ union labor, defined as laborerswho are members of United States labor unions and registered with the Departmentof Labor or who are covered by collective bargaining agreements. Wheresome laborers are required on a project but cannot satisfy the foregoingcondition, work will be deemed to be performed by union labor if the buildingtrades council or other body representing union trades in the locale ofthe realty being developed approves or endorses the plan of constructionby a mix of union and non-union labor. The seller or borrower must provide,as a condition to receiving assets of the Trust, a commitment of the developeror general contractor that all labor will be provided by union labor or,where that condition cannot be satisfied, in accordance with such planof construction approved by the local building trades council or otherbody.\2\<NOTE/> Financing applications will be individually considered andaccepted by Balcor after it is determined that they satisfy the investmentcriteria. The applicant represents that Balcor or its affiliates seek similartypes of investments (i.e., forward-commitment first mortgage loans oncommercial properties) without regard for whether union labor will be usedfor several funds or client accounts managed by Balcor and its affiliates.Balcor therefore seeks such investments generally, and will allocate thosethat first meet its financial investment standards among the funds andaccounts on the basis of which fund or account committed money first. Whethera project uses union labor will be a factor only to determine if the investmentshould be allocated to the Trust. Balcor will consider financing applicationswithout regard to the identity of the general contractors or the subcontractorswho may potentially be selected (or who may already have been selectedif such selection was made prior to submission of the financing application).Neither Balcor nor any affiliate thereof will develop, rehabilitate orcontract or subcontract to develop or rehabilitate the realty in whichthe Trust has an interest. Balcor will not be directly involved in theprocess of selecting contractors, subcontractors or providers of goods,services or facilities, as selection will be made by the developer or generalcontractor, neither of which will be affiliated with the Trustees or Balcor.However, Balcor may establish and administer guidelines regarding the termsof such selection process to ensure prudent selection and compliance withthe investment objectives, policies and limitations of the Trust. Balcor'sdecisions on the issuance of loans are final.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The Department notes that to the extent the fiduciariesof the Participating Plans restrict their consideration of investment opportunitiesfor non-economic reasons, such conduct may involve certain violations ofPart 4 of Title I of the Act which violations if present would not be providedrelief by this exemption.<ITAG tagnum="28">In this regard, section 404(a)(1) of the Act requires, among otherthings, that a fiduciary of a plan act prudently, solely in the interestof the plan's participants and beneficiaries, and for the exclusive purposeof providing benefits to participants and beneficiaries. To act prudently,a plan fiduciary must consider, among other factors, the availability,riskiness, and potential return of alternative investments for his plan.Because the investments made by the Trust are investments which would beselected, if at all, in preference to alternative investments, such aninvestment would not be prudent if it provided the Participating Planswith less return, in comparison to risk, than comparable investments availableto the Plans, or if it involved a greater risk to the security of Planassests than other investments offering a similar return.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">The Department has construed the requirements that a fiduciary actsolely in the interest of, and for the exclusive purpose of providing benefitsto, participants and beneficiaries as prohibiting a fiduciary from subordinatingthe interests of participants and beneficiaries in their retirement incometo unrelated objectives. Thus, in deciding whether and to what extent toinvest in a particular investment, a fiduciary must ordinarily consideronly factors relating to the interests of plan participants and beneficiariesin their retirement income. A decision to make an investment may not beinfluenced by desire to stimulate the real estate industry and generateemployment, unless the investment, when judged solely on the basis of itseconomic value to the plan, would be equal or superior to alternative investmentsavailable to the plan. (See Advisory Opinion 81-12A, January 13, 1981).</ITAG>9. Balcor's investment criteria will contain no requirement that the realestate underlying investments be within any specific locales, and it isexpected that the investments will be geographically dispersed. Therefore,there will be no obligation on the part of Balcor to invest in areas whereemployers whose employees are covered by the Participating Plans are located.Similarly, there is no obligation on the part of Balcor to invest fundsof the Trust in realty which is under construction or to be rehabilitatedby employers whose employees are covered by a Participating Plan. The requirementthat the developer have construction provided by contractors or subcontractorswho employ union laborers is a general requirement and not tied to laborersrepresented by unions whose members are covered by a Participating Plan.10. Balcor as investment manager will receive a single fee for its managementservices, including property management, equal to 1.45% per annum of thenet value of investments in real property or loans. No additional fees,commissions or compensation will be paid by the Trust to Balcor or anyof its affiliates. However, Balcor or its affiliates will be reimbursedby the Trust for certain costs and expenses, including travel, appraisaland other out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with administrationof the Trust and property evaluation, negotiation, operation or disposition.The Trust will also pay costs of on-site building management personneland office space, leasing fees paid to third parties and other fees forprofessional and technical services. Balcor will pay all fees and expensesin connection with the organization of the Trust and the offering of Units.The fee arrangement will be fully disclosed in the Trust Agreement andMemorandum and will be known to the fiduciaries of each of the ParticipatingPlans at the time of their decision to invest in the Trust.11. The books and records of the Trust will be audited by an independentcertified public accountant each fiscal year. Copies of such reports andother pertinent information, including a summary of fees and expenses,report of acquisitions and appraisals and schedules of net asset and unitvalues, will be forwarded to each Participating Plan. Trust assets willbe valued by the Trustees quarterly based on valuations by independentevaluators or appraisers. Each real property owned by the Trust will beappraised annually by an independent appraiser.12. Because each Participating Plan will incorporate as part of such planthe terms, provisions, and conditions of the Trust agreement, the Trustwill occupy a position equivalent to the trust created under such ParticipatingPlan. Accordingly, pursuant to Revenue Ruling 81-100, it is the positionof the Department that a ``party in interest'' as defined in the Act, ora ``disqualified person'' as defined in the Code, with respect to a ParticipatingPlan may be viewed as a party in interest or disqualified person with respectto the Trust. Thus, a transaction between such party and the Trust maybe viewed as a prohibited transaction as described in section 406(a) ofthe Act, section 4975(c) of the Code, or both. The applicant representsthat if the Trust is unable to enter into transactions with certain personsbecause such persons are parties in interest with respect to a ParticipatingPlan, the Trust's ability to prudently make its investments and conductits operations solely for the benefit of the Participating Plans will beunduly restricted. In addition, the purchase and sale of Units in the Trustmay be considered a prohibited sale or transfer or assets between a ParticipatingPlan and the Trustees that is not exempted by operation of the statutoryexemption provided in section 408(b)(8) of the Act because the Trust isnot maintained by a bank or an insurance company.13. The applicant requests prospective exemptive relief for many of thoseclasses of transactions between the Trust and certain parties in interestwhich were afforded exemptive relief in PTE 80-51. The applicant proposesthat such classes of transactions be subject to similar conditions, limitations,and restrictions as those delineated with respect to those transactionsafforded exemptive relief in PTE 80-51.14. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed exemption forcertain transactions between the Trust and certain parties in interestsatisfies the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) The proposedexemption would allow the Trust to enter into transactions which, althoughprohibited, are necessary for the Trust to prudently make its investmentsand conduct its operations solely for the benefit of its ParticipatingPlans and their participants and beneficiaries; (b) the proposed exemptionwould primarily apply to various classes of prohibited transactions whichwere afforded relief in PTE 80-51 and would be subject to similar conditions,limitations and restrictions as those delineated with respect to thosetransactions afforded exemptive relief in PTE 80-51; and (c) independentfiduciaries, unrelated to the Trust, the Trustees, Balcor or any otherrelated party, will maintain complete discretion with respect to investmentof the Participating Plan's assets in the Trust.For Forther Information Contact: David Lurie of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8671. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="75">Mandamp;W Pump Corporation Employees Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan),Located in Deerfield Beach, Florida</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-6922]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedcash sale (the Sale) of certain improved property located in DeerfieldBeach, Florida (the Property) by the Plan to the Plan sponsor at the greaterof $283,000 or the appraised fair market value as of the date of the Sale;provided the terms and conditions of the transaction are similar to thoseobtainable in an arm's-length transaction between unrelated parties.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan with 78 participants and total assetsof $1,671,512 as of June 30, 1987. The trustee of the Plan is J. DavidEller, who is also President of the Plan sponsor.2. The Employer was incorporated in 1950 and manufactures water pumps foragricultural, municipal and construction industries.3.On December 7, 1984, the Plan was formally terminated. The Plan has chosena five-year liquidation program in which all Plan assets will be liquidatedand distribution of proceeds made to Plan participants.To facilitate the distribution, the applicant requests an exemption whichwould permit the Plan to sell the improved Property to the Employer forcash in amount of the greater of $283,000 or the Property's appraised fairmarket value as of the date of the Sale.4. The Property is located at 208 N.W. 1st Street, Deerfield Beach, Florida,which, the applicant represents, is closely proximate to the Employer'smain manufacturing plant. The Property consists of an office building,a warehouse, a concrete tank above ground, three sheds and four undergroundmetal tanks.5. The Plan acquired the Property from the city of Deerfield Beach (theCity) in 1980 by means of an exchange of land purchased by the Plan in1974 and 1975 for $56,250. In addition to the Property, the City also grantedthe Plan another parcel of realty valued at $42,000 as part of the exchange.6. The Plan has leased the Property to the Employer under a long-term triplenet lease, effective July 1, 1980 (the Lease). The Lease requires the paymentof $1,600 per month, totalling $19,200 in annual rental. In addition tothe base rental, the Employer is responsible for all costs of maintainingthe Property, including taxes, insurance, and repairs, which average $5,000per year.\3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The applicant represents that Form 5330, Return of InitialExcise Tax Relating to Pension and Profit Sharing Plans, will be filedwith the Internal Revenue Service and that all applicable excise taxesin connection with the continuation of the Lease beyond June 30, 1984 willbe paid by the Employer within 60 days of the granting of this exemption.7. Mahlon J. Saxon, a qualified independent appraiser, A.S.A., of M.J.Saxon andamp; Associates, Plantation, Florida, has determined the fair marketvalue of the improved Property. Mr. Saxon considered and incorporated thespecial value of the Property to the Employer under the Lease and appraisedthe Property at $283,000 as of April 15, 1988.8. D. Douglas Hill, a certified public accountant, has reviewed the transactionand found it to be in the best interests of the Plan and its participants.In Mr. Hill's opinion, the Sale will result in a substantial gain to thePlan over the Plan's acquisition cost of the Property.9. In summary, the applicant represents that the transaction meets thestatutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) The Plan willreceive fair market value for its asset but in no event will it receiveless than $283,000; (b) a qualified independent appraiser will determinethe Property's fair market value as of the date of the Sale; (c) the Salewill be a one-time transaction consummated for cash; (d) the Employer willpay the applicable excise tax and file Form 5330, Return of Initial ExciseTax Relating to Pension and Profit Sharing Plan, within 60 days of thegranting of this proposed exemption; and (e) a certified public accountanthas determined that the transaction is in the best interests and protectiveof the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries.For Further Information Contact: Mrs. Betsy Scott of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="75">The Boston Company Real Estate Counsel, Inc. (TBCREC), Located inBoston, Massachusetts </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7511] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordancewith the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, TBCREC shall not be precluded fromfunctioning as a ``qualified professional asset manager'' pursuant to ProhibitedTransaction Exemption 84-14 (PTE 84-14, 49 FR 9494, March 13, 1984) solelybecause of TBCREC's failure to satisfy Section I(g) of PTE 84-14 as a resultof its affiliation with E.F. Hutton andamp; Company (Hutton), Effective Date: If granted, this exemption will be effective as of thedate on which TBREC became an affiliate of Hutton. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. (Shearson), which is incorporated in Delaware,is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.(Shearson Holdings) which in turn is a majority-owned subsidiary of AmericanExpress Compnay (American Express). Both Shearson Holdings and AmericanExpress are publicly-owned companies whose stock is traded on the New YorkStock Exchange. American Express and its subsidiaries form a diversifiedfinancial and travel services company. On January 13, 1988, over 90 percent of the stock of E.F. Hutton GroupInc. (Hutton Group), the parent company of Hutton, was tendered to SLBPAcquisition Corp. (SLBP), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Shearson Holdings,pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger (Merger Agreement) dated December2, 1987, as amended on December 28, 1987, entered into among Shearson Holdings,SLBP, and the Hutton Group. On January 21, 1988, as permitted by the termsof the Merger Agreement, SLBP assigned its right to purchase those sharesso accepted to Shearson, and Shearson purchased the shares. As a resultof the acquisition of the Hutton Group stock, Shearson controls the HuttonGroup and indirectly controls Hutton. 2. On May 2, 1985, Hutton entered a plea of quilty (the Guilty Plea) toan Information filed in the United States District Court for the MiddleDistrict of Pennsylvania. The Information charged that Hutton had violatedthe federal mail and wire fraud statutes in connection with its handlingof certain checking accounts it maintained for the deposit of its own fundsduring the period from July 1, 1980 to February 28, 1982. As a result ofthe Guilty Plea, Hutton agreed to pay, and has paid, a criminal fine of$2,000,000 plus $750,000 to defray the costs of the government investigation.Hutton further agreed to establish, and has established, a restitutionprogram for the benefit of commercial banks that may have been damagedby its actions. None of the acts alleged in the Information, however, involvedfunds or securities owned by any investment advisory or brokerage clientsof Hutton or any employee benefit plan for which Hutton or any affiliateis a party in interest. 3. On May 16, 1988, Hutton entered a plea of guilty (the Providence Plea)in the United States District Court for the District of Rhode Island ontwo counts of violating the Bank Secrecy Act and one count of conspiracyto violate that Act. Hutton agreed to pay, and has paid, an aggregate fineof $1,010,000 as a result of the Providence Plea. The Information filedby the government in connection with the Providence Plea alleges that theconduct of the two brokers, formerly employed at Hutton-Providence, wasin violation of the Bank Secrecy Act. The Bank Secrecy Act requires thefiling of a Currency Transaction Report, under certain, circumstances,if more than $10,000 in cash is deposited with a financial institution.The brokers' unlawful conduct occurred primarily in the period from 1982to 1983, and no such conduct transpired later than October 1984_more thanthree years before Shearson acquired its majority interest in Hutton. 4. The applicant represents that although none of the unlawful conductthat occurred at Hutton-Providence involved Hutton's investment managementactivities or any ERISA plans, Hutton's Guilty Pleas preclude Hutton andits affiliates from serving as a ``qualified professional asset manager''(QPAM) pursuant to sections I(g) and V(d) of PTE 84-14. Section I(g) ofPTE 84-14 precludes a person who otherwise qualifies as a QPAM from servingas a QPAM if such person or an affiliate thereof has within the 10 yearsimmediately preceding the transaction been either convicted or releasedfrom imprisonment as a result of certain criminal activity. For purposesof section I(g) of PTE 84-14, an ``affiliate'' of a person is defined inrelevant part as ``any person directly or indirectly, through one or moreintermediaries, controlling, controlled by, or under common control withthe person * * *'' (PTE 84-14, section V(d)). As such, under this definitionAmerican Express, Shearson Holdings and all of their majority-owned subsidiaries,including TBCREC, would be considered affiliates of Hutton as a resultof Shearson's acquisition of a controlling interest in the Hutton Group.5. TBCREC, a registered investment advisor and pension fund manager, isa Massachusetts corporation established in 1968 which specializes in large,sophisticated real estate transactions. Throughout its existence, TBCREChas been a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Boston Company, Inc. (TBC). TBCis a Massachusetts corporation which was established in 1964. In additionto TBCREC, TBC owns Boston Safe Deposit and Trust Company and several otherinvestment subsidiaries. In 1981, TBC, which had theretofore been an independently-ownedpublic company, was acquired by Shearson. TBC has been an indirect, wholly-ownedsubsidiary of Shearson since 1981. The applicant represnets that TBC is a separate unit within the Shearsongroup managed by a 14-person Board of Directors of whom 2 are employeesof Shearson, 2 are employees of TBC, and 10 are outside directors unaffiliatedwith Shearson. TBC maintains its own separate corporate headquarters inBoston, Massachusetts, and is essentially operated independently of Shearson.The applicant represents further that TBCREC, also headquartered in Boston,is managed by a team of executive officers none or whom is, in any otherrespect, affiliated with Shearson. In particular, no TBCREC officer isan officer or an employee of Shearson or any non-TBC Shearson subsidiary.None of the TBCREC officers is an officer or employee of Hutton. In addition,Hutton is part of a completely separate operating unit within the Shearsongroup and none of TBCREC's operations involve Shearson or any of its non-TBCsubsidiaries, including Hutton. 6. TBCREC is retained by 15 institutional clients, of which 10 are largeERISA plans. Each of these ERISA plan clients has aggregate assets in excessof $500 million. Real estate assets held by these institutional clientshave a value of $2.23 billion. The applicant asserts that failure to grant the requested exemption willprohibit such plans for which TBCREC acts as investment manager from engagingin transactions with parties in interest that would otherwise be permittedunder PTE 84-14 and will cause plans to forego attractive investment opportunities.TBCREC typically engages in real estate transactions which may be structuredin a variety of different ways, including participating mortgages, jointventures or other partnership interests, or outright fee ownership. Inall of these contexts, there is a significant risk that the party withwhich the plan is dealing will be a party in interest. Given the size ofthe plans which TBCREC represents, the large number of service providers(particularly financial institutions) which such plans engage and the breadthof the ERISA definition of ``party in interest'', it is not uncommon fora proposed transaction in the private real estate market to involve a partyin interest. 7. Accordingly, the applicant proposes that for the purposes of sectionV(d) of PTE 84-14, Hutton not be considered an affiliate of TBCREC, inorder that TBCREC may continue to avail itself of the provisions of PTE84-14, notwithstanding the acquisition of Hutton by Shearson and the resultantfailure to comply with section I(g) of PTE 84-14. 8. The applicant represents that the following safeguards will be presentto assure that the flexibility which PTE 84-14 provides will be utilizedby TBCREC in a manner protective of and beneficial to both ERISA plansand their participants: (a) PTE 84-14 includes numerous other conditions all of which would continueto apply and to assure that the best interests of ERISA plans are served;(b) All of TBCREC's ERISA plan clients are large plans, and hence haveaccess to the resources and sophistication needed to properly monitor TBCREC'sperformance as investment manager; (c) All of the Hutton criminal activity in question occurred to its acquisitionby Shearson. Shearson is fully cooperating with all ongoing governmentinvestigations, and Shearson is actively working to install various safeguardsand procedures designed to protect against such violations in the future;and (d) As an investment adviser registered under the Investment Advisers Actof 1940 (the Advisers Act), TBCREC is subject to the jurisdiction of theSecurities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and to the substantive requirementsof the Advisers Act. TBCREC must make annual filings with the SEC and issubject to unannounced audits by the SEC to assure compliance with therequirements of the Advisers Act. 9. In addition, the applicant represents that Hutton and Shearson havetaken a number of steps to ensure that conduct such as that leading tothe Guilty Plea and the Providence Plea will not recur. In connection withthe Guilty Plea, Hutton acted to recompense its depository banks for anyharm that may have been caused by the illegal acts. Hutton offered to makefull restitution (including interest to date of payment) to any bank withwhich it maintained a deposit relationship during the period July 1, 1980to December 31, 1982 for any net uncompensated interest losses incurredby the bank as a result of Hutton's having drawn on uncollected funds withoutprior written agreement. Hutton's offer to reimburse its banks includedunreimbursed service fees, unreimbursed charges in respect of uses of uncollectedfunds, and interest on the foregoing amounts. The applicant represents that Hutton also initiated changes in its organizationalstructure and management practices as follows: (a) Nearly all of Hutton's financial operations were realigned and subjectedto centralized control. (b) Hutton also installed a computerized Branch Information ProcessingSystem to expedite and improve communications between its New York headquartersand its more than 400 branches, which allows Hutton's headquarters in NewYork to monitor drawdown activity at the branch and regional levels. (c) Hutton also held instructional meetings for its employees in 18 citiesfrom coast to coast with respect to the nature of the activities that werefound unlawful and/or now are enjoined, and explained the revised internalcontrols and auditing procedures that Hutton was putting in place withrespect to its cash concentration system. 10. Subsequent to the Guilty Plea, Hutton Group retained the HonorableGriffin Bell, former Attorney General of the United Staes and a one timeJudge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, to conductan independent inquiry into the cash management practices to which Huttonpleaded guilty. Judge Bell found that ultimate management responsibility for the practicesin question rested with Thomas P. Lynch, then Executive Vice Presidentand Chief Financial Officer of Hutton, and with Thomas P. Morley, thenSenior Vice President and Money Mobilizer of Hutton. Judge Bell determinedthat the practices were developed and carried out by middle managementemployees who generally believed they were operating within the law, andthat Messrs. Lynch and Morley, though not bearing any criminal responsibilityfor the practices, should have detected and/or prevented them. Followingthe release of the Bell Report, both Mr. Lynch and Mr. Morley relinquishedtheir positions. The Bell Report also recommended substantial monetary and other sanctionsagainst other Hutton employees. All of the culpable Hutton employees involvedin the activities which led to the Guilty Plea resigned or were dismissedprior to Shearson's acquisition of Hutton Group. In addition, Judge Bellrecommended a number of procedural and structural reforms designed to ensurethat the practices in question did not recur. These changes included: (a) Restructuring the financing, financial control, operations and generalcounsel functions; (b) Establishing a separate audit committee for Hutton to specificiallyreview Hutton's activities to supplement the existing audit committee ofHutton Group, with full access to the chief executive officer and the boardof directors; and  (c) Working in conjunction with the Ethics Resource Center in Washington,DC to develop a corporate code of ethics, supplemented by educational andmonitoring programs.  11. In late December 1987, following the announcement of Shearson's acquisitionof Hutton, Shearson retained outside counsel to conduct an internal investigationand provide legal advice concerning compliance by Hutton, prior to itsacquisition by Shearson, with the reporting requirements of the Bank SecrecyAct.  The investigation revealed unreported currency transactions (over halfinvolved under $20,000 and 90% involved under $50,000) at Hutton branchoffices, prior to Shearson's acquisition of Hutton. A majority of potentialnon-reporting occurred in two New York retail offices. Isolated instancesof possible non-reporting were found in seven additional Hutton branchoffices in the New York metropolitan area. No such instances were foundin the offices reviewed outside the New York area. The persons potentiallyinvolved in the possible violations were exclusively branch office personnel.Outside counsel is in the process of evaluating the possible involvementof any individuals in these branches and will provide Shearson with a reportas to such involvement. Shearson has advised the United States Attorneyfor the Southern District of New York of Shearson's internal investigationand is cooperating with the United States Attorney in his inquiry.  12. The applicant states that in connection with its request for an exemptionfrom the Securities and Exchange Commission from the provisions of section9(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940,\4\<NOTE/> Shearson at its expense has agreed to retain independentauditors:<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\Section 9(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 states,in part, that it shall be unlawful for a person to serve as or act in thecapacity of employee, officer, director, member of an advisory board, investmentadvisor, or depositor of any registered investment company, or principalunderwriter for any registered open-end company, registered unit investmenttrust, or registered face amount certificate company if such person, oran affiliate of such person, has engaged in certain criminal activity (asspecified in section 9(a)(1)).  (a) To confirm that the Shearson currency reporting procedures are in place,and that the computer software program used in connection with the proceduresis operational, with respect to each former Hutton branch office;  (b) To review the procedures: (i) To determine whether the procedures arereasonably designed to ensure compliance with the currency transactionreporting provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act, (ii) to detect non-compliancewith the procedures, and (iii) to make recommendations, if appropriate,for changes in the procedures and staffing necessary reasonably to ensurecompliance with applicable law relating to currency transaction reporting;and   (c) To report to Shearson the results of its review.  The auditors' review will be completed within 180 days of the filing ofthe request for exemption. Shearson will, within 60 days of delivery toit of the auditors' report and recommendations, if any, submit the reportand recommendations to the Commission together with a report of Shearsonsetting forth the action it has taken or proposes to take concerning theimplementation of the recommendations.  13. The applicant states that as of February 8, 1988, as part of the consolidationof the Hutton branch offices into the Shearson branch office system, eachHutton branch has been made subject to the same internal procedures forprocessing currency transactions as those to which Shearson is subject.Shearson's procedures with respect to currency transaction reporting wereadopted as a means of avoiding the type of situation that occurred at Hutton-Providence.The procedures prohibit the deposit or payment in currency at any Shearsonor Hutton branch office. The procedures also mandate that any Shearsonor Hutton employee who is asked by a customer to deposit currency in anyaccount, inform the customer that Shearson and Hutton will only accepta non-cash instrument and will not accept cash. The procedures furtherprotect against the kind of irregularities that occurred at Hutton-Providenceby requiring Shearson and Hutton employees to notify immediately not onlytheir branch manager, but also Shearson's Compliance Department, if anycustomer, during a limited period of time, deposits a series of cashier'schecks, traveler's checks, money order or checks in bearer form (<T3>i.e.,</T3> checks made payable to cash or endorsed in blank) that areeach under $10,000 but collectively exceed $10,000.  The applicant also notes that as an additional safeguard against irregularitiesin currency transaction reporting, the procedures expressly forbid Shearsonand Hutton brokers and all other Shearson and Hutton employees from engagingin any of the following activities:  (a) Taking procession of currency for a customer;  (b) Escorting a customer to a financial institution to convert currencyto an acceptable means of payment; and/or  (c) Advising a customer as to how to ``structure'' his transaction witha financial institution in order to avoid the financial institution's reportingrequirements under the Currency Transaction Reporting Act.  Shearson and Hutton employees are also informed that failure to complywith these procedures will subject the offender to internal disciplinaryaction and possibly to civil and criminal liability for violating FederalLaw.  14. In summary, the applicant represents that this proposed exemption satisfiesthe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because, among other things:(a) TBCREC is to a very significant respect operated independently of Shearsonand is operated independently of Hutton; (b) none of TBCREC's officersis an officer or employee of Hutton; (c) Hutton's criminal activity inevery case took place before its acquisition by Shearson; (d) both Huttonand Shearson have undertaken substantial reforms and put in place proceduresdesigned to prevent any recurrence of the criminal activity; (e) the otherprovisions of PTE 84-14 taken together with Shearson's independent auditprocedures established pursuant to its exemption request under section9(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, are sufficient to assure thatthe best interests of the ERISA plans and their participants are served;and (f) TBCREC will be able to take advantage of a broader variety of attractiveinvestment opportunities on behalf of the participants and beneficiariesof its clients' plans.  For Further Information Contact: Joseph L. Roberts III of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="75">Puckett Machinery Company Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan), Locatedin Jackson, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7576]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) and 407(a) of the Act and the sanctionsresulting from the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason ofsection 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the continuedleasing (the Extended Lease) of certain improved real property (the RealProperty) by the Plan to Puckett Machinery Company (the Employer), a partyin interest with respect to the Plan, provided the terms of the ExtendedLease are at least as favorable to the Plan as those obtainable in an arm'slength transaction with an unrelated party.Effective Date: If granted, this proposed exemption will be effective April1, 1985.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan having 194 participants andnet assets of approximately $2,480,522 as of December 31, 1986. The trusteeof the Plan is Deposit Guaranty National Bank (the Trustee), a nationalbanking association with its principal office located in Jackson, Mississippi.The Trustee makes investment decisions for the Plan.2. The Employer, which maintains its principal place of business in Natchez,Mississippi, is engaged in the business of selling and leasing heavy equipmentand machinery. The Employer is a dealer for Caterpillar, Inc. equipmentand machinery which it sells to the public.3. Among the assets of the Plan is an unencumbered parcel of land locatedat Highway 61 North, Natchez, Mississippi. The Real Property consists of6.5 acres of land and two buildings situated thereon. A predecessor ofthe Plan acquired the Real Property in 1970 for $250,000 from a party ininterest. At that time of the purchase, the Real Property was leased toa related party. Since 1970, the Plan and its predecessor entities haveleased the Real Property to the Employer and the Employer's predecessorcorporations under the terms of a formal written lease (the Original Lease).4. The Original Lease had an initial term beginning April 1, 1970 and endingMarch 31, 1985. It also contained a renewal option for another ten yearperiod. The Original Lease required the Employer to pay the Plan a totalannual rental of $24,000 for the Real Property or $2,000 monthly. The OriginalLease also required the Employer to repair and maintain the demised premiseswith the exception of the roof and foundation which remained the responsibilityof the Plan. The Original Lease further obligated the Employer to insurethe premises against casualty loss and to pay all state, county and municipalad valorem taxes and special improvement assessments levied against thereal Property. The applicant represents that the Original Lease satisfiedthe requirements of section 414(c)(2) of the Act and, therefore, was exemptstatutorily from the prohibitions of sections 406 and 407 of the Act throughJune 30, 1984.\5\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ The Department expresses no opinion on whether the OriginalLease satisfied the requirements of section 414(c)(2) of the Act.5. On March 25, 1985, the Plan and the Employer agreed to continue theirleasing arrangement for a period of five years commencing April 1, 1985and ending March 31, 1990. Although the Extended Lease was based primarilyon the same terms and conditions as the Original Lease, the rental wasincreased from $2,000 to $4,000 per month to reflect the fair market rentalvalue of the Real Property. According to the applicant, the Employer haspaid all rental amounts under the Extended Lease in a timely manner. Inaddition, the applicant represents that the Trustee has represented theinterests of the Plan as the independent fiduciary under the Extended Leaseand has agreed with the decision to extend such lease.6. On August 12, 1987, the Employer was notified by the Department of violationsof sections 406 and 407 of the Act stemming from its continued leasingarrangement with the Plan. In this connection, the Trustee has requestedan administrative exemption that will permit the continuation of the ExtendedLease as well as the holding of the Real Property by the Plan. The Employerrepresents that for the period July 1, 1984 through April 1, 1985 it willpay the Internal Revenue Service (the Service) all applicable excise taxesthat may be due by reason of the continuing nature of the Extended Leasewithin 90 days of the publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of the grant of the notice of proposed exemption.In addition, the Employer represents that it will pay the Plan the differencebetween the fair market rental value of the Real Property and the rentalactually paid plus reasonable interest on the rental deficiency for thesame period. Appropriate determinations of deficient rent and interestwill be made by the Trustee.7. As stated previously, the Extended Lease requires an annual rental of$48,000 which is payable in equal monthly installments until its expirationon March 31, 1990. The Extended Lease also obligates the Employer to payall ad valorem taxes assessed against the Real Property, all insurancepremiums as well as certain repair and maintenance costs incurred on theReal Property. In the event the Employer defaults on its lease obligations,the Trustee is empowered to sell the Real Property to an unrelated party.The Trustee proposes to supplement the Extended Lease with a written addendum(the Addendum). The Addendum lengthens the terms of the Extended Leasefor two successive five year periods (from April 1, 1990 until March 31,1995 and from April 1, 1995 until March 31, 2000). Such option to extendthe Extended Lease may be exercised by the Employer by giving written noticeto the Plan not more than twelve months nor less than six months priorto the then existing term. Each extended term of the Extended Lease willbe pursuant to the terms and conditions described above, but at an increasedrental. No extension of the Extended Lease beyond its initial term willbe permitted unless the Trustee determines before each proposed extension,that such extension is in the best interests of the Plan and its participantsand beneficiaries. The Addendum further provides that the annual rentalof the leased premises for the initial and subsequent Extended Lease termwill be an amount equal to the greater of the annual rental being chargedfor the preceding lease term or comparable market rentals in Natchez, Mississippias determined by an independent appraiser. Such reappraisals will be performedat the direction of the Trustee.8. The Real Property was appraised by Mr. Gary H. Krize (Mr. Krize), ASA,CRPA, CRA, an independent appraiser affiliated with Krize Appraisal Companyof Natchez, Mississippi. On May 9, 1985, Mr. Krize placed the fair marketvalue and annual fair market rental value of the Real Property at $321,000and $43,000, respectively. In an updated appraisal report dated September14, 1987, Mr. Krize determined that the Real Property had a fair marketvalue of $349,000 and a fair market rental value of $45,000, annually.\6\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ The Employer represents that to the extent the annualrental amount of $48,000 exceeds the fair market rental value of the RealProperty, it will treat the amount of excess rent as a contribution tothe Plan. The Employer also states that the amount of excess rental whenadded to the annual additions to the Plan will not exceed the limitationprescribed by section 415 of the Code.9. As noted above, the Trustee will continue serving as the independentfiduciary for the Plan with respect to the continuation of the ExtendedLease. The Trustee represents that it maintains retirement plans with totalassets that are in excess of $300 million and it says it has been administeringplans for over 30 years. The Trustee also asserts, that it has had experienceunder the Act through its involvement in audits initiated by the Departmentand the Service. Moreover, the Trustee represents that it recognizes itsduties, responsibilities and liabilities under the Act as a Plan fiduciary.In describing its pre-existing relationship with the Employer, the Trusteestates that no shareholders of the Employer serve on its board of directorsor vice versa. The Trustee represents that it has given the Employer aline of credit totaling $7.5 million. The Trustee asserts that the Employer'sdraw against this line of credit is $5 million or .003 percent of the Trustee'sloans and lines of credit. The Trustee also states that it has total depositsexceeding $2 billion and that it holds deposits of the Employer of lessthan $10,000.10. The Trustee states that it has reviewed all documentation associatedwith the transaction and certifies that the terms contained therein arecomparable with the terms of similar transactions in Mississippi. The Trusteealso believes the Extended Lease provision requiring the Plan to repairthe roof and the foundation of the demised premises is an appropriate conditionand a common practice in the leasing of commercial buildings within Mississippi.Based upon its review of transaction documents, the Trustee believes thetransaction is in the best interests of the Plan and its participants andbeneficiaries.In conjunction with the transaction, the Trustee has reviewed the overallinvestment portfolio of the Plan and considered the liquidity requirements.In addition, the Trustee has examined the diversification of the Plan'sassets in light of the transaction and it has determined that there existssufficient diversification to satisfy the Plan's liquidity needs. Basedupon its analysis of the Plan's portfolio, the Trustee concludes that thetransaction complies with the Plan's investment objectives and policies.The Trustee asserts that it has used due care in examining the safety ofthe Extended Lease as well as the probable income and gain to be derivedtherefrom by the Plan. In addition, the Trustee has determined that theExtended Lease will offer the Plan a fair return that is commensurate withprevailing lease rates. Finally, with respect to the diversification ofthe Plan's assets, the Trustee believes the transaction, which representsapproximately 14 percent of the Plan's assets, will not result in Planproperty being invested in whole, or in an unreasonably large proportion,in one type of investment vehicle or in various investment vehicles thatare dependent upon the success of a single enterprise or the conditionsof one locality.The Trustee has agreed to monitor the Extended Lease throughout its durationand to take actions that are necessary and proper to safeguard the interestsof the Plan. In this connection, the Trustee represents that it will receiveand review financial statements and other documents that are required tobe filed by the Plan. Moreover, the Trustee states that it will dischargeits duties in accordance with the documents and instruments governing thePlan insofar as they are consistent with the protection of employee benefitrights under the Act.11. In summary, it is represented that the transaction satisfies the termsand conditions of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) The Trustee, asthe independent fiduciary on behalf of the Plan, has determined that theExtended Lease with the proposed Addendum is an appropriate investmentfor the Plan and is in the best interests of the Plan and its participantsand beneficiaries; (b) the rights of the participants and beneficiariesof the Plan are being protected by the Trustee which has approved the termsof the Extended Lease and will continue monitoring such lease throughoutits duration; (c) the value of the Real Property is approximately 14 percentof the Plan's assets; (d) in the event the Employer defaults in paymentsdue under the Extended Lease, the Trustee will have the discretion to sellthe Real Property to an unrelated party; (e) the Employer will pay theService all applicable excise taxes which may be due by reason of the pastleasing of the Real Property within 90 days of the publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of the grant of the notice of proposed exemption;and (f) the Employer will pay the Plan the difference between the fairmarket rental value of the Real Property and the amount of rental actuallypaid together with interest on such excess for the period July 1, 1984until April 1, 1985 as such amounts are determined by the Trustee.Tax Consequences of TransactionThe Department of the Treasury has determined that if a transaction betweena qualified employee benefit plan and its sponsoring employer (or affiliatethereof) results in the plan either paying less than or receiving morethan fair market value such excess may be considered to be a contributionby the sponsoring employer to the plan and therefore must be examined underapplicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, including sections401(a)(4), 404 and 415.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemption will be provided to all interested personsby either mail or hand delivery within 30 days of the date of publicationof the notice of pendency in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment on and/or to request a hearing with respect to the proposedexemption. Comments are due within 60 days of the date of publication ofthe proposed exemption in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. For Further Information Contact: Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information</ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 26th day of July 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and WelfareBenefits Administration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-17175 Filed 7-28-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>