<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88201-0023 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-01-88.f2.A1022</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Bureau of Land Management</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Circular No. 2602; AA-220-88-4322-02]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">43 CFR Part 4100</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Grazing Administration; Exclusive of Alaska; Grazing Fees for 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Bureau of Land Management, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rulemaking and notice of Grazing Fee for 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This final rulemaking amends the regulations in 43 CFRPart 4100 Subpart 4130.7 concerning the determination of grazing fees forgrazing domestic livestock on public land administered by the Bureau ofLand Management (BLM). These regulations were issued by the Departmentof the Interior as proposed rulemaking and published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on October 7, 1987 (52 FR 37485) with a publiccomment period of 45 days.Four thousand seven hundred and thirty-eight responses were received duringthe comment period and considered during the development of this finalrulemaking. This final rulemaking amends the regulations in 43 CFR Part4100 Subpart 4130.7 by providing that fees for grazing domestic livestockon public land administered by the Bureau of Land Management for 1988 andsubsequent years will be determined by a formula that consists of a basevalue of grazing on public land adjusted by indexes reflecting currentyear land lease rates, cost of production, and beef cattle prices. Becausethe formula for establishing grazing fees is being incorporated into theregulations, hereafter only the fee, as established under the formula,will be published as a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>February 2, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Inquiries or suggestions should be sent to: AssistantDirector_Land andamp; Renewable Resources (220), Bureau of Land Management,Room 5626, Main Interior Building, 1800 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Billy R. Templeton or Donald Waite,(202) 653-9193, or Mark E. Lawrence (202) 343-8735.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This final rulemaking amends Subpart4130.7 of the existing regulations for the management of grazing on thepublic lands by providing that fees for grazing domestic livestock on publicland administered by the Bureau of Land Management for 1988 and subsequentyears will be determined by a formula that consists of a base value ofgrazing on public land adjusted by indexes reflecting current year landlease rates, cost of production, and beef cattle prices. Because the formulafor establishing grazing fees is being incorporated into the regulations,only the fees as established under the formula for years <T3>after 1988</T3> will be published as a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. The grazing fee for the 1988 grazingseason is established in accordance with this final rulemaking. Noticeof the grazing fee for 1988 is contained in this preamble to the rulemaking.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>Under section three of the Taylor Grazing Act, enacted in 1934, ``[t]heSecretary of the Interior is authorized to issue or cause to be issuedpermits to graze livestock * * * upon payment annually of reasonable feesin each case to be fixed or determined from time to time * * *.''. Thestatute's preamble declared that its operative provisions were intended``to stabilize the livestock industry dependent upon the public range ** *''.    The Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (FLPMA), did not alterthis concept. The policy statement in that law that ``the United Statesreceive fair market value of the use of the public lands and their resources''was not reflected in the provisions relating to grazing fees. Rather, thestatute simply directed the Secretary to study what was an ``equitable''grazing fee, taking into account ``the costs of production normally associatedwith domestic livestock grazing * * *, differences in forage values, andsuch other factors as may relate to the reasonableness of such fee.'' FLPMAleft intact the notion that grazing fees were premised on reasonableness. In 1978, however, with enactment of the Public Rangelands Improvement Act,(PRIA), the Secretary was provided with specific directions governing grazingfees. PRIA stated that ``to prevent economic disruption and harm to thewestern livestock industry, it is in the public interest to charge a feefor livestock grazing permits and leases on the public lands which is basedon a formula reflecting annual changes in the costs of production.'' Thestatute then established a policy ``to charge for public grazing use whichis equitable and reflects the concerns addressed * * * above.'' PRIA containeda grazing fee formula that takes into account the cost of livestock productionand the public land permittee's ability to pay.  House Report 1122 (1978) of the 95th Congress stated that PRIA's policydirection and formula were in direct response to the Secretary's attemptat that time to set a grazing fee reflecting the fair market value of thepublic lands for that activity. Congress was extremely concerned that increasinggrazing fees to fair market value would be injurious to the western livestockindustry, especially since it was just recovering from a depressed agriculturaleconomy. Moreover, as the House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairsreported, the formula produced a fee sensitive to the ranchers' costs ofproduction and beef prices. This was viewed as a stabilizing influenceon the western livestock industry. The Committee also pointed out thatthe fees generated by the formula, based upon ability to pay, would contributeto improving range conditions by encouraging private investment and discouragingtrespass. The Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources concurredin the findings made by the House of Representatives in Senate Report 1237(1978).  Congress, in considering the formula eventually codified in PRIA, acknowledgedthat many persons concerned with the public rangelands disagreed with pegginggrazing fees to a ranchers' costs and ability to pay. Accordingly, PRIAmade the grazing fee formula effective on a trial basis, from 1979 untilthe end of 1985. The law also called for a study to evaluate the performanceof the formula and to explore alternative fee systems by the end of 1985.That study was produced too late for deliberation by the Congress in 1985.Therefore, to establish a fee for the 1986 grazing season and to give theCongress adequate time to consider the fee issue, the President of theUnited States, acting on advice from the affected Federal agencies anda number of Members of Congress, issued Executive Order 12548 on February14, 1986.  Through Executive Order 12548, the President directed the Secretary ofthe Interior ``to exercise [his] authority, to the extent permitted bylaw * * *, to establish fees for domestic livestock grazing on the publicrangelands which annually equals [the fee under PRIA] * * * provided ** * that the fee shall not be less than $1.35 per animal unit month.'' On March 12, 1986, the Secretary announced a decision to continue usingthe PRIA formula to set grazing fees, with the qualification that the feewould not be less than $1.35 per animal unit month of forage permittedor leased. The decision was based on the Secretary's Final Grazing FeeReview and Evaluation that was also issued on March 12, 1986. The fee for1986 and 1987 was $1.35.  In the fall of 1987, the Secretary's decisions were judicially reviewedin <T3>Natural Resources Defense Council </T3>v. <T3>Lyng, et al., </T3>Civil Action No. S-86-0548 EJG (E.D. Cal. 1987). The Federal district court held that the grazing fee adopted, derived fromthe PRIA formula, was consistent with substantive statutory mandates andlegislative policy. In particular, the opinion stressed that despite thefact that the trial period for the fee formula established by PRIA hadexpired, PRIA's underlying policies governing grazing fees remain in effect.The court also pointed out that the Secretary's decision was unaffectedby FLPMA's policy favoring fair market value. That policy, while to beconsidered, was not required to be implemented in the case of grazing fees.FLPMA's specific direction was that the Secretary determine a grazing feethat is ``equitable to the United States and to the holders of grazingpermits and leases.'' The court also noted that the Secretary's adoptionof the lapsed PRIA formula was consistent with the Taylor Grazing Act'spurpose of stabilizing the western livestock industry.  However, the Secretary's procedure of adopting the grazing fee in a publishednotice alone was not upheld. The court ordered the Secretary to complywith the procedures for adopting rules specified in the AdministrativeProcedure Act.  Finally, the court remanded back to the Secretary the question of the formula'senvironmental consequence, and directed him to consider anew the formula'senvironmental impacts, if any, as specified by the National EnvironmentalPolicy Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Environmental Assessment  </ITAG>In compliance with the district court's opinion, the Department of theInterior informed the public by publishing in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on October 7, 1987, a notice of proposed rulemakingrelating to grazing fees, (52 FR 37485) with a 45 day comment period.Under the proposed rule, the fees for grazing domestic livestock on publiclands administered by the Bureau of Land Management for 1988 and subsequentyears would be determined by using the lapsed PRIA formula, as specifiedin Executive Order 12548. It consists of a base value of grazing on publiclands adjusted by indexes reflecting currrent year private land lease rates,cost of production and beef cattle prices. Because the formula for establishinggrazing fees would be incorporated into the agency's rules and regulations,after 1988 the grazing fees would simply be published as a notice in the<T4>Federal Register.</T4>The purposes of the proposed regulation were ``to meet the policy objectiveset forth in the Taylor Grazing Act, the Federal Land Policy and ManagementAct, and the Public Rangelands Improvements Act, which remain vital'',and achieve a ``fee level that is reasonable and promotes stability inthe western livestock industry.'' The proposed rulemaking stated that theseobjectives would be met, since ``[t]he fee is intended to reflect annualchanges in costs of production and to be equitable to both grazing permitholders and to the government.'' The proposed rulemaking also stated that``the formula is intended to have no negative environmental impacts.''The latter finding was based upon an environmental assessment. It consideredthe proposition that the amount of grazing fees influences the level ofgrazing, especially the premise that lower fees lead to overgrazing. Theenvironmental assessment observed on the basis of historical data thatthe conventional economic principle of inverse relationship between quantityavailable and its price in a competitive market did not apply under thelapsed PRIA formula. It followed, then, that continuing to use that formulawould not alter existing environmental conditions. The environmental assessmentalso pointed out that grazing on public lands is determined on the basisof multiple use and sustained yield principles, not on economic principlesof supply and demand. It also followed, then, that even if the proposedfees might encourage someone to seek the agency's approval to increasegrazing, in actuality increased grazing could only occur if the agencydecided that was consistent with its management principles. The fee itselfcould not be the proximate cause of the increased grazing.The public was invited to comment on the proposed rulemaking, the environmentalassessment and the finding of no significant impact. The environmentalassessment also was made available to the public.<ITAG tagnum="84">Public Comment on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking</ITAG>During the comment period, the public submitted 4,738 responses commentingon the notice of proposed rulemaking. Of this number 4,131 were from individuals,435 from businesses, 129 from associations, 14 from local governments,12 from state governments, 9 from universities and 8 from Congressmen orfrom other federal agencies. An additional 409 responses were postmarkedafter November 23, 1987. They were not considered.Most of the individuals and other respondents supported the proposal touse the lapsed PRIA grazing fee formula, as set out by the President inExecutive Order 12548. They pointed out that the formula, by accountingfor costs of production and ability to pay, produced a fee that avoidseconomic disruption to the western livestock industry that depends uponpublic lands. They considered this particularly important given the relativelyill health of the agricultural economy.Conservation groups and a minority of individuals opposed the proposal.The usual criticism was that the formula produces a fee below the fairmarket rental value of the public rangelands, and, by doing so, deniesthe government funds needed to manage rangelands and promotes overgrazing.Some concern was voiced that the proposal would give an inequitable advantageto public land permittees over ranchers without federal grazing permits.To avoid these consequences, they urged the Secretary to adopt a formulathat recovers the fair market value of federal grazing.<ITAG tagnum="84">Statement of Basis and Purpose</ITAG>The decision to continue using the PRIA formula contained in ExecutiveOrder 12548 in setting grazing fees is based on the judgment that it resultsin a fair, just and suitable charge.The formula produces a grazing fee that is equitable to the person whomust pay it. Under the PRIA formula grazing fees change annually accordingto the costs of producing livestock and the market for that commodity.As previously reported to Congress by the Secretary of Agriculture andthe Secretary of the Interior in the 1986 Grazing Fee Review and Evaluationstudy, under the PRIA formula, when the costs of production increased asmeasured by the prices paid index, the grazing fee decreased. Also reportedto Congress was that almost every year the market price for livestock,as measured by the beef cattle price index, decreased, so did the grazingfee. The PRIA formula has worked the way Congress intended_it producesgrazing fees corresponding to a rancher's cost of production and abilityto pay.Any inequity that might arise to a rancher who pays a higher price to grazelivestock on private property is beside the point. As Congress explainedin enacting PRIA, any benefit the fee might confer to public lands ranchersis acceptable because of the need to protect them from economic dislocationand to sustain dependent rural communities.The formula, by producing fees responsive to a public lands rancher's economicrealities, also is particularly appropriate, where, as here, any substantialincrease in fees is likely to cause hardship to many ranchers. The Secretary'sreport addresses this. ``When the grazing fee was increased from $2.00to $5.00 per AUM, net returns [for ranchers] above cash costs declined.''This increase would be significant for those permittees that are highlydependent on public lands. This becomes particularly important when measuredagainst the long-term costs persons must pay to stay in the livestock business.With an average debt to asset ratio of 20%, any increase in grazing feeswould aggravate and make quite difficult many ranchers' ability to payoff their long-term debt. Also, the size of livestock businesses may beadversely affected by a significant increase in grazing fees. ``An increasein the fee of $1.00 per AUM would increase total grazing fee costs to 26,700FS and BLM permittees by about $17.6 million.'' Finally, ``changes in thegrazing fee affect the permittee's asset position as a result of the changesin the value of the permit and thus affect the ability to borrow money.''The foregoing is corroborated by the numerous letters from ranchers andothers establishing that any substantial increase in grazing fees wouldhurt a substantial number of ranchers just as they are beginning to recoverfrom the plight of the agricultural economy over the past decade. Statesand localities also echoed the concern in the Secretary's report to Congressthat a jump in grazing fees could depress rural community economies.The formula also is equitable to the United States. It recovers a reasonableportion of the costs the BLM incurs in rangeland management. As the Secretary'sreport to Congress stated, the PRIA fee could generate revenues coveringfifty-four percent of those costs. Conversely, ``[a]s grazing fees increase,the amount of permittee contribution to range improvements is expectedto decline.'' Moreover, the establishment of a minimum fee at an amountwhich, in lean years for the western livestock industry, exceeds the formula'scalculated fee, represents a direct effort to make the fee more responsiveto the concept of cost recovery. While higher fees, assuming inelasticityof demand for federal forage, might provide for recovery of all the coststhe BLM incurs in rangeland management, full recovery of the range programbudget from ranchers is inappropriate because forty percent of the planning,inventory and management budget would be required to carry out basic rangeecological tasks even in the absence of livestock grazing. Also funds spenton range improvements produce multiple use benefits and it would not beappropriate to charge all of these costs to the livestock industry.The decision to continue using the PRIA formula, as stated in ExecutiveOrder 12548, to set grazing fees is also based on the finding that it posesno significant impact to the environment. By preserving the status quo,it should have no environmental consequence.Despite the public comment that the PRIA fee is the cause of overgrazing,there is no evidence of any correlation between the fee and livestock use.From 1980 to 1986, the grazing fee steadily decreased from $2.36 to $1.35.However, the amount of livestock grazing occurring on the public landsduring the same period fluctuated. Accordingly, if the PRIA fee dictateduse, the expectation would be that every year the fee decreased, an increasein use would have occurred. This was not the case. For example, from 1982to 1983, while the fee decreased by twenty-five percent, livestock usedid not increase at all, but instead decreased by three percent. Whilethe fee remained the same in 1985 and 1986, livestock use decreased bynearly seven percent.Moreover, from the years 1980 to 1986 the fee decreased by forty-threepercent while the amount of livestock use remained almost unaltered, increasingless than two percent. In short, the changes in the PRIA fee and livestockuse are unrelated and it is unreasonable to assume any correlation.Thus, the PRIA fee is highly unlikely to alter livestock use. By preservingthe status quo, it is equally unlikely that there will be any changes inenvironmental conditions.The absence of a correlation between the PRIA formula and livestock useis not reflected in other governmental documents. A document prepared bythe Office of Management and Budget, entitled Grazing Fee Presentation(1985), which is referred to in a few public comments, had only two statementsabout grazing fees and overgrazing. One states that ``[e]nvironmental groupssupport fee increases as [a] disincentive to overgraze.'' The other statementis found in a section named ``objectives of grazing fee system,'' and statesthat a grazing fee should ``discourage overgrazing.'' Neither are substantivestatements. The Council on Environmental Quality's report, <T3>Desertification of the United States </T3>(1981), another often citeddocument, reaches a similar conclusion. While the report infers that ``federalgrazing fees that are well below the free market price encourage overgrazingof the commons,'' the statement represents theory rather than empiricalevidence. No proof accompanies the statement. More important, the statementwas made seven years ago. Since then the evidence shows that there is nodiscernable relationship between the PRIA fee and livestock use.BLM's publication entitled <T3>Program Direction_Oregon and Washington 1986 </T3>and the EconomicResearch Service report, <T3>A Theoretical Evaluation of Fee Systems for Private Grazing on FederalLands </T3>have also been examined. While they also state a relationshipbetween fees and livestock use, the statements are unpersuasive, theoreticaland not supported by rigorous analysis of empirical data.Other public comments state that the PRIA fee causes overgrazing becauseranchers increase their use on the public lands because the price is artificiallylow. The statement, though, is only speculation. Ranchers may opt to, andin fact have, foregone increasing their livestock use despite the existenceof the PRIA fee. While the fee may affect a rancher's decision about howmany livestock to graze, it is only one consideration among many, and usually,is not the predominant factor. According to recognized experts in the field,and the livestock industry, costs of production, market conditions, andthe quality of the public lands from one year to another, among other considerationshave more bearing on the amount of grazing.A corollary public comment draws a connection between how the BLM manageslivestock grazing and the fee. These comments claim: (1) Ranchers are notgrazing as many livestock as the agency permits; (2) ranchers' actual use,however, causes environmental degradation, and therefore, (3) if the feeinduces the ranchers to make more use, up to permitted levels, then moreenvironmental harm will occur.These comments fail to recognize that even if the fee is an inducement,it has no bearing on how many livestock the rancher may graze. Agency approvalis required before ranchers may increase their livestock use up to themaximum level and any increase in grazing use is the prerogative of theagency. That decision is not based on economics, but on the agency's judgmentconcerning whether the range can withstand additional grazing. In makingthat judgment the agency's responsibility is to prevent unnecessary andundue environmental degradation.Even if the PRIA fee were to have the effect claimed by some public comments_thatincreased livestock use leads to overgrazing_the environmental impactsfrom any grazing are largely known on a site specific basis. One hundredthirty-seven impact statements have already been completed on grazing usecovering 169,809,000 acres of public rangelands. By the end of 1988, fivemore site specific statements will be completed, involving another 4,042,000acres. A review of the completed studies shows consideration of livestockgrazing at actual use and permitted levels, as well as grazing beyond permittedlevels. The documents also address ways to redress any overgrazing thatis or may occur under differing levels of use. Repeating that effort byproducing a programmatic impact statement that accounts for different levelsof use, upon the assumption that fees are the cause, is to place form oversubstance. It also is a questionable use of resources given the fact thatthe current fee has little effect in altering the status quo.The court and others commenting on the environmental assessment expressedconcern that the description of the ``affected environment'' did not specificallyrelate to lands administered by BLM and there is no reference to the currentrange condition of any site specific areas or aggregated areas. Descriptionof the ``affected environment'' comes directly from the programmatic EIS<T3>Livestock Grazing Management on National Resource Land (1974) </T3>andprovides a broad overview of the general nature of the western environmentof public lands. As stated previously BLM has completed site-specific environmentalimpact statements. In addition to describing the ``affected environment,''the EIS's discuss range condition, and the effects of livestock grazing,provide site-specific analysis, allotment or area specific objectives,and site-specific grazing proposals, and address site-specific issues,resource problems, conflicts, and management actions on public rangelands.Also, the environmental impacts of range improvements are analyzed.Even though the BLM has or will by the end of 1988 complete site specificEIS's on all public lands subject to livestock grazing and the grazingfee, this information is not necessary for analyzing the impact of thefee. As had been documented in the EA on this rulemaking, the grazing feehas no known, predictable, or measurable effect on the physical or biologicalenvironment.None of this discussion is meant to suggest that the consideration of fairmarket value has been ignored in this rulemaking. Rather, the argumentsfor fair market value are unpersuasive.First, raising grazing fees to ``fair market value'' will not necessarilyreduce grazing. Regardless of the fee, ranchers must make substantial useof the privilege to graze livestock. The regulations prohibit a rancherfrom ``failing to make substantial grazing use as authorized for two consecutiveyears.'' And while a higher fee may mean some ranchers cannot abide bythis regulation, and thus lose their permit, fair market value impliesthat someone else will be willing to take over at the new price.Second, no one knows with any confidence what will happen to the demandfor federal forage if its price is increased to fair market value. It allrests on the hypothesis that the demand will remain inelastic. At thispoint, the relationship is conjectural.Third, the perception that fair market value will reduce overgrazing restson chance. If a rancher can afford the new fee in an area where overgrazingmay be occurring, a reduction in grazing will not occur. Conversely, ifa rancher cannot afford the fee in an area of that is being properly grazed,the higher fee causes economic dislocation with no corresponding environmentalbenefit.Fourth, there are means available to deal with overgrazing other than thegrazing fee. They range from the BLM ordering reduced livestock numbers,changes in seasons of use or kinds of use, to new grazing patterns, andto projects to rehabilitate the range, including seeding or water development.The traditional means make it unnecessary to use pricing which is indiscriminateas a means of solving overgrazing problems.Fifth, it is somewhat uncertain that adopting a fair market value approachwould generate more monies to fund the range improvements necessary tocompensate for isolated cases of overgrazing. Beyond resting on the premiseof inelastic demand, the proposition appears to assume Congress will appropriatesufficient funds for needed range improvements. Recent experience wouldbring into question that assumption. In making appropriations for fiscalyear 1987, Congress did not choose to make up the difference between thegrazing fee receipts collected by the BLM and the ten million dollar rangeimprovement appropriation fund promised in FLPMA. Moreover, Congress hasnot funded any of the 360 million dollar authorization for range improvementsmade in 1978 under PRIA.Finally, the final rulemaking serves the additional purpose of being consistentwith legislative intent under PRIA, FLMPA and the Taylor Grazing Act. Theformula specified in PRIA has worked as intended and meets the policiesunderlying that formula. It is equally equitable to the rancher who mustpay the fee and to the United States. FLPMA, as a consequence, is servedwell by the rule. Finally, since the formula takes into account costs ofproduction, market conditions and ability to pay, little doubt can existthat the fee promotes stability in the western livestock industry. Thus,the final rulemaking meets the intent of Taylor Grazing Act. All of thisis confirmed by the decision in <T3>Natural Resources Defense Council v. Lyng, et al., </T3>supra.<ITAG tagnum="84">Response to Public Comment on Related Issues</ITAG>Comments on the proposed fee formula centered on eight basic issues: (1)Fee Formula Structure and Alternatives, (2) Fair Market Value and Comparability,(3) Livestock Grazing Use and Environmental Effects, (4) Availability ofRange Improvement Funds, (5) Subsidy and Stability of the Western LivestockIndustry, (6) Equity to Other Public Land Users and Non-Permittees, (7)Cost Recovery, and (8) The Local Economy, Rural Social Values, and Importanceof Public Forage. The following discussion supplements the presentationof these issues in the Statement of Basis and Purpose above.(1) <T3>Fee Formula Structure and Alternatives_</T3>Several comments opposingthe proposed grazing fee formula expressed concern that the PRIA fee formulatakes costs of production into account three times_in establishing the$1.23 per AUM base value, in the ``Forage Value Index'' (FVI), and in the``Prices Paid Index'' (PPI). Several other comments expressed the beliefthat the PRIA formula ``double counts'' Federal permittees' ability topay and that the $1.23 per AUM base value is too low. These comments suggestedthe alternative of not including beef cattle prices and cost of productionor other ``ability to pay'' indexes in the fee formula. Competitive biddingwas suggested several times as an alternative approach to establishinggrazing fees. Several comments expressed the belief that the Administrationhad abandoned its 1977 Grazing Fee Study position of supporting a formulathat attained fair market value.Most comments supporting the proposed fee formula either specifically mentionedor inferred support of all that is embodied in the PRIA formula. The commentsviewed the proposed formula as a judicious reflection of private land leaserates, produciton costs of operators, and beef cattle prices. Many commentsexpressed the view that the PRIA formula, with a minimum of $1.35, is workingwell and as intended and there is no reason to change it.In reviewing the comments regarding the number of times cost of productionis counted in the proposed fee formula, is became evident that there isa lack of understanding concerning the difference in establishing the basevalue of $1.23 per AUM and the functions of the Forage Value Index andPrices Paid Index indexes. The $1.23 base was established as the fair marketvalue of Federal forage through the 1966 Western Livestock Grazing Survey.Cost differences of using private leases as opposed to public leases wereused to adjust the private land lease rate so that it reflected a comparablepublic land lease rate. This is not an adjustment to reflect change in``ability to pay.'' The PPI adjusts for year-to-year changes in the costof production and does reflect ``ability to pay.'' The FVI adjusts foryear-to-year changes in the private land lease rate and, thus, keeps thebase value current in reflecting fair market value. A level of abilityto pay is probably reflected in the FVI but only to the extent it reflectsthe cost of private land leases. The extent to which the FVI and PPI arecombined to reflect ability to pay is not apparent because the cost componentsthat make up the PPI, which is a composite index, do not include the costof private land leases. Even if the PPI did include the private land leaserate, an increase in the lease rate and thus the PPI would drive the feedown, whereas an increase in the private land lease rate and thus in theFVI would drive the fee up. These two indexes drive the fee in oppositedirections.The Administration's proposal to include consideration of beef cattle pricesand cost of production in the fee forula and to reject all other alternativeformulas that do not include these factors is in direct response to theexpressed findings of Congress when it enacted the 1978 Public RangelandImprovement Act. The underlying policy of PRIA, which is still in effect,states thta ``* * * to prevent economic disruption and harm to the westernlivestock industry, it is in the public interest to charge a fee for livestockgrazing permits and leases on the public lands which is based on a formulareflecting annual changes in the costs of production.'' In response tothe concern that the Administration has changed its position since its1977 proposal <T3>(Study of Fee for Grazing on Federal Lands, October 21, 1977),</T3>the action of Congress since that time should be noted.In stating the policy that the grazing fee should include beef cattle pricesand cost of production. Congress specifically rejected the fair marketvalue policy expressed in the 1977 Fee Report. H.R. Rep. 1122, 95th Cong.,2d Sess., <T3>Improving the Range Conditions of the Public Lands</T3> (PRIA HouseReport) at pp. 16-20. As the House Committee reported, the formula wouldprevent ranchers who depend upon public lands for grazing livestock frombeing forced out of business by the combined pressures of high productioncosts and low beef prices. The Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resourcesconcurred in the findings made by the House of Representatives. S. Rep.1237, 95th Cong., 2d Sess., at 11 (September 23, 1978).To elaborate, the PRIA House report makes it clear that Congress rejectedthe Secretaries' formula primarily because it failed to incorporate factorsrecognizing ``the costs of production, beef prices, or the ranchers' abilityto pay.'' It believed these factors were important because the fee increasesproposed by the Secretaries' formula, ``when considered along with rapidlyescalating costs for other aspects of livestock production, would placean increasing, and perhaps crippling, burden on the many livestock operationswhich are heavily dependent on the use of the public grazing lands.'' Thisburden could contribute to what Congress saw as an alarming rate of farmand ranch closures occurring nationwide. Congress was equally concernedthat the Secretaries' proposed grazing fee increases would come ``at atime when the Western Livestock industry is just recovering from, verydepressed beef prices and severe drought conditions.''  (2) <T3>Fair Market Value and Comparability_</T3>Many of the comments opposingthe proposed fee formula expressed the view that the Government shouldcharge fair market value for Federal forage. The 1983 <T3>Mass Appraisal Report </T3>prepared by the Bureau of Land Managementand Forest Service (FS) was cited as the basis for the determination offair market value. Also cited in support of the determination of fair marketvalue was the report prepared by C. Kerry Gee and Albert G. Madsen, <T3>The Cost of Subleasing Federal Grazing Privileges. </T3>Comments relatedto this report suggested that subleasing is proof that lessees are willingto pay considerably more for public grazing than the Government charges.A few comments cited specific examples of private land leases where theleases were considered comparable to public land leases but the lease ratewas significantly higher than the Federal grazing fee. Also, cited weresituations where States and railroad companies charge higher grazing feesthan the BLM and FS.  A number of comments that supported incorporating in the proposed rulemakingthe formula in Executive Order 12548 expressed the belief that the publiclands are not comparable to private lands, and therefore, private landlease rates do not reflect the value of public land grazing. Numerous examplesof this situation were presented. Higher costs of using public lands arecompared to private lands were cited most often as the major differencebetween private and public leases. Cost differences cited most often werehigher fence and water facilities maintenance, trucking, herding, saltdistribution, vandalism, capital investments, male breeding stock, anddeath losses. Also some comments expressed the belief that land administeredby BLM, as compared to private lands, are of poorer grazing quality, haveless water, produce lighter calves and lower calving percentages, and aresubject to more restrictions and control. A few comments suggested thatthe high level of non-use of available AUM's on public land in some areasis proof that the current grazing fee exceeds the grazing benefits to theuser. A number of comments expressed the view that the PRIA formula aspresented in the proposed rulemaking represents the fair market value ofa Federal grazing permit or lease.  The fair market value issue was addressed in the case of <T3>Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Lyng, et al., supra. </T3>TheCourt held that ``although return of the fair market value of Federal forageis one goal in establishing the grazing fee, it is within the discretionof the Secretaries to consider other factors.'' This discretion is accordedto the Secretary of the Interior under PRIA, FLPMA and the Taylor GrazingAct.  Even though the Government is not required to charge fair market valuefor Federal grazing, that concept nevertheless is given consideration.Fair market value has been previously addressed in the statement of basisand purpose. In addition, what constitutes fair market value and how tomeasure it is disputed. As mentioned earlier, the base value of $1.23 perAUM used in the proposed fee formula was established as fair market valuein the 1966 Western Livestock Grazing Survey (WLGS). To arrive at thisvalue, the Survey used a scientifically and statistically sound processof explicitly accounting for the differences in the costs (e.g., fencemaintenance) of using public lands as compared to private lands. Congressdefined ``fair market value'' of Federal grazing as the fee that is generatedby the Public Rangeland Improvement Act formula. The 1983 mass appraisal,conducted by the BLM and FS, used the private land lease rates with adjustmentsto reflect the market rental value for Federal forage. Values were estimatedfor each of six pricing areas. The value estimates do not represent the``site specific'' fair market grazing rental value of any individual allotment.Rather, they are intended to represent a reasonable estimate of the meanaverage rental value of public grazing in each pricing area. It shouldbe noted that using these average values to set fees would result in overpricingone-half of the forage in each pricing area and underpricing the otherone-half. The 1983 mass appraisal has been heavily criticized principallyfor not being statistically valid and not making proper adjustments forcomparability between private and public land leases.       In reviewing the comments concerning subleasing of BLM grazing privileges,it becomes clear that confusion exists on this issue. First, the so-calledsubleases discovered in the 1983 mass appraisal and analyzed in the Geeand Madsen Report do not fit BLM's legal definition of a sublease. If theBLM land was any part of a ranching operation under lease, the appraisalcategorized this as a sublease even though the leasee of the ranching operationmay have had a separate valid lease from the BLM. It is legal to gain accessto BLM grazing privileges and thus lease BLM permits directly by leasingor otherwise controlling the private base property that is associated withthe public lands. Most of the so-called subleases in the appraisal werenot 100 percent BLM land but part of a larger operation which may haveincluded private deeded land, railroad land, or other types of ownership.Second, as indicated in the Gee and Madsen report, the lease rates werehigher where the percentage of BLM acreage was low and lower where BLMland made up a larger percentage of the lease. The Gee and Madsen Reportalso indicated that current Federal grazing fees do not reflect marketvalue of the resource but that lease market rates are highly variable andindividualized. Third, subleasing is illegal. The regulations makes thisvery clear. Whenever subleasing is discovered, actions are taken againstboth the permittee and the sublessee.(3) <T3>Livestock Use and Environmental Effects</T3>_A substantial number ofthe comments opposing the proposed grazing fee formula expressed concernthat the fee resulting from the formula would encourage overgrazing andhave harmful environmental effects. The comments stated that a low feewould cause permittees to graze excessive livestock resulting in degradationof wildlife habitat, riparian areas, and other environmentally sensitiveareas. A number of comments also suggested that if the Government is notgoing to charge fees above what they currently charge, all livestock shouldbe removed from public lands. A few comments suggested that a higher feewould induce permittees to take better care of their Federal grazing privileges.On the other hand, a large number of comments opposed the view that thereis a connection between the level of fees, livestock use, and environmentaleffects. Some comments observed that the level of livestock grazing useis established by Government agencies through land use plans and otherprocedures and that these levels are regulated and enforced. Several othercomments expressed the belief that permittees take as good of care of publiclands as they do their own, that financially strong permittees are betterable to maintain public land productivity and that much of the West neversupported vegetation or wildlife much above current levels. A number ofadditional comments directly opposed the view that livestock should beremoved from the public rangelands and suggested that livestock can beused as a tool to restore, protect, and enhance resource values. They statedthat livestock grazing may be the least environmentally harmful of allpublic land uses. Finally, a couple of comments suggested that the BLMshould continue a strong program of monitoring, enforcing, supervising,and implementing stocking rates and that the fee should not be tied directlyto these objectives.These comments were addressed in the Statement of Basis and Purpose. Tosupplement that discussion, land use plans (LUP) and environmental impactstatements (EIS) set forth the overall management objectives for managinglivestock grazing on public lands. The broad management objectives of theLUP determine the number of livestock and season of grazing, the typesof grazing prescriptions that can be used, and the range improvements thatmay be installed. Livestock grazing management on public land is closelymonitored to ensure that current management practices are meeting the managementobjectives of the LUP/EIS. If the objectives are not being met, adjustmentsin management are made to change the direction of management to reach theobjectives. Livestock grazing management on public lands is to be consistentwith the principles of multiple use and sustained yield.By both statute and regulation, the level of livestock permitted to grazeon public lands is based upon a determination of the carrying capacityof the land which in turn is based on monitoring range conditions and incorporatesenvironmental considerations. The grazing fee plays no part in the determinationof permitted grazing use. For various reasons, permittees may, with agencyapproval, elect not to graze up to the level of permitted use. The differencebetween actual use and full permitted use is referred to as ``approvednonuse.'' If a permittee decides to activate the approved nonuse, agencyapproval must be obtained. The only possible bearing that fees could haveon the level of grazing use is in the area of ``approved nonuse'' or ofunauthorized use.An analysis of the correlation between nonuse and grazing fees and activegrazing use levels and grazing fees for the past 7 years indicates thatthese factors do not correlate in accordance with economic theory. Thereis no clear evidence that lower fees have led to increased utilizationof BLM forage within the allowable limits or that higher grazing fees haveled to decreased utilization.Any assessment of the comments that lower fees would create an incentiveto illegally exceed levels of permitted use would be a speculative exercise.Grazing use above permitted use is considered trespass and is handled accordingly.Concerning the comments on removal of all livestock and the alternativeof using livestock as a management tool, it is important to recognize certainprinciples of range management. Controlled livestock grazing can be usedto selectively graze undesirable plant species. Controlled livestock grazingalso can be used to graze desirable species during phenological periodsof reduced susceptibility. In addition, grazing may be used to promotethe tillering of desirable species and to reduce plant residues which inhibitproductive growth. A further benefit of proper livestock grazing is theincreased vigor and production of desirable plants. Furthermore, removalof all livestock from public lands would not be in accordance with theprinciples of multiple use required by FLPMA.(4) <T3>Availability of Range Improvement Funds_</T3>A large number of thecomments opposed to the proposed rulemaking expressed the view that higherfees would generate more funds for improving Federal rangeland. Some commentssuggested specific projects identified in existing LUP/EIS's as areas thatneed funding.A large number of comments in support of the proposed rulemaking suggestedthat the range improvement funds may not increase with increased fees becausepermittees might use less forage. Other comments stated that Congress mightnot appropriate the additional funds and permittees might invest less oftheir own funds in public lands. A few comments suggested that incentivesand programs, such as Experimental Stewardship, be used to increase fundsfor improving public rangelands.It would be entirely speculative to project whether an increase in feeswould result in increased funds for on-the-ground range improvements. FLPMAprovides that 50 percent of all grazing fees are authorized to be appropriatedby Congress and that one-half of these receipts are available for use inthe district or region from where they were derived and the remaining one-halfas the Secretary concerned directs. All of these funds are to be used foron-the-ground range rehabilitation, protection, and improvements. Congresshas not always appropriated the full amount of difference between the fundsavailable from receipts and the $10 million specified by FLPMA. Whetherit will do so in the future is uncertain. Also, since Range Improvement(RI) funds cannot be used for range administration it is necessary forCongress to supplement the appropriation in order for RI funds to be expendedin a planned manner. Additionally, the level of increased revenue willdepend upon the amount of forage demanded at various fee levels. The elasticityof demand for Federal forage had not been empirically tested and demandstudies of the private forage market is a free market and does not havemany of the requirements placed on the public forage market (e.g., baseproperty requirements). Also, an increase in fees is likely to reduce thelevel of permittee investments in public lands. (5) <T3>Subsidy and Stability of the Western Livestock Industry_</T3>A largenumber of the comments that opposed the proposed rulemaking expressed thebelief that the fee generated by the formula results in an unwarrantedsubsidy to a small segment of the western livestock industry. Many commentsalso expressed the belief that the fee largely subsidizes ranching operationsowned by oil companies, out-of state investors, and large corporations.It was also suggested that since BLM and FS permittees represent only 7percent of the livestock producers in the 16 Western States, it is notpossible for the grazing fee to stabilize the industry. Finally, a fewcomments suggested that if the industry is to be subsidized, it shouldbe subsidized directly and not through grazing fees.Numerous comments supporting the proposed rulemaking described the financialdifficulties of the livestock industry, the large number of bankruptices,and economic troubles of family ranch operations and suggested that a feetied to economic conditions is justified. A few comments expressed theview that raising fees would only serve to negate the effect of other programsdesigned to assist agriculture.In response to these comments and as expressed earlier, the Secretary ofthe Interior is statutorily mandated by the Taylor Grazing Act ``to stabilizethe livestock industry dependent upon the public range.'' The underlyingpolicy of PRIA, which is still in effect, prescribes that the grazing feeformula reflect annual changes in the costs of production in order ``toprevent economic disruption and harm to the western livestock industry.''According to the findings of a recent General Accounting Office investigation,the typical BLM permittee is an individual, operating a family business,who owns the ranch that serves as base property, and also resides on thebase property or in a local community within 100 miles of the base property.Specifically, the report states that 84 percent are individuals or partnerships,91 percent own the base property, and 95 percent reside within 100 milesof base property. Only 11 percent of BLM permittees were found to be corporations,and many of these are family corporations. Additionally, BLM's grazingrecords indicate that about 90 percent of it permittees are family sizeoperations or smaller with less than 500 head of cattle. The level of dependencyof permittee ranch operations on Federal forage varies considerably fromState to State. In Arizona, permittees obtain an average of 60 percentof their annual feed supply from Federal rangelands. This is the highestaverage percentage of the 13 Western States. In Montana, the State withthe lowest percentage, permittees depend on Federal forage for 11 percentof their supply. It should be noted that the percentage do not always reflectthe extent of the dependency because use of public and private land isinterdependent and Federal forage often provides feed during critical periodsof the year. Regardless of what percent of the western livestock industryare permittees or the extent to which fees might held stabilize the industryor the percentage of forage that is provided to permittees by public lands,the Secretary of the Interior is still required to the extent possibleto consider and carry out the statutory obligation of stabilizing the dependentlivestock industry.(6) <T3>Equity to Other Public Land Users and Non Permittees_</T3>A large numberof comments opposing the proposed rulemaking raised the point that theFederal grazing fee is not equitable because only a part of the livestockindustry has federal grazing permits. The belief is that the fee structuregives permittees an unfair competitive advantage over non-permittees. Afew of the comments also expressed the belief that large numbers of permitteesexclude the public from Federal lands, and therefore, permittees shouldnot be given credit for sharing public lands.Numerous comments in support of the proposed rulemaking expressed the viewthat the proposed fee formula is equitable because Federal permittees providefeed and shelter on their private lands to wildlife that the public enjoyson public lands, and permittees invest in and maintain water facilities,roads, and other improvements on public lands that benefit wildlife, wildhorses, riparian areas, and recreational users. Also mentioned in severalcomments was the belief that livestock grazing reduces fire hazards. Manyother comments noted that a number of public land users such as huntersand general recreationists do not pay anything to use public lands. Finallya few comments raised the equity issue that in order to use federal grazingprivileges, it is necessary to invest in base property and because of theintermingled land pattern, Government restrictions are placed on permittees'private lands.Beyond the earlier consideration given this issue, the Economic ResearchService, U.S. Department of Agriculture, compared the ``receipts less cashcosts'' positions of public land permittees and all western livestock industryproducers and found them not to be statistically different. One of theexplanations is that any advantage that might result from the level ofthe PRIA fee is offset by the higher cost of using public lands or thelower return from less productive public lands. The proposed grazing feeformula provides no specific adjustment to compensate permittees for thebenefit they might provide to, or the added costs they might incur from,other public land users. At the same time it should be noted that somerecreationists pay to use BLM land for special recreational events andcamping but most do not pay for general recreation uses.(7) <T3>Cost Recovery</T3>_A large number of comments opposing the proposedrulemaking suggested that the grazing fee recover the costs of the grazingprogram. Most felt this was necessary in view of the large Federal deficitand the need to reduce taxes.A large number of comments supporting the rulemaking expressed the oppositeview and suggested that the fee should not recover all the costs. The beliefwas expressed that range program costs include non-range related itemssuch as salaries for other resource specialists, some basic range programcosts that would be incurred even in the absence of livestock grazing,and that the range program generates multiple-use benefits.In response to the comments concerning cost recovery, and in addition towhat has been said earlier, it is helpful to understand that the costsof the BLM range program include three broad categories: Allotment Planningand Inventory, Grazing Management, and Range Improvement. Congress appropriatesthe funds for the first two categories and in the past has appropriatedall the funds that are available from return of 50 percent of the grazingreceipts for range improvements. However, in recent years, Congress hasnot made up the difference between 50 percent of the fee receipts and the$10 million for range improvements specified in the Federal Land Policyand Management Act. Range program funds do not provide salaries for theresource specialists or their programs. It is true that there would stillbe some basic range resource tasks and, thus, costs in the absence of livestockgrazing. In a special budget analysis, the BLM determined that it wouldrequire about 40 percent of the current planning, inventory, and rangemanagement budget to carry out certain basic resource protection and rangelandecology tasks even in the absence of livestock grazing. Comments concerningmultiple use benefits are also valid. Range improvements are capital investmentsthat improve wildlife habitat, watersheds, and riparian areas, as wellas livestock forage. Water developments particularly benefit wildlife.In view of this, it is questionable whether the grazing fee should be requiredto recover annually all of capital investment RI costs that produce non-livestockbenefits as well as livestock benefits.(8) <T3>The Local Economy, Rural Social Values and Importance of Public Forage</T3>_Anumber of comments opposing the proposed rulemaking expressed the beliefthat since Federal land forage makes such an insignificant contributionto the nation's forage supply, it is not important enough to be given specialpricing consideration. A few comments expressed the view that livestockforage production should not be supported because it leads to the productionof red meat which is an unhealthy food. A few comments expressed oppositionto the proposed fee formula because it is believed to support a rural westernlifestyle and that support of this lifestyle is unnecessary. Some commentsstated that Federal grazing represents a very small portion of the localeconomy.A large number of comments in support of the proposed rulemaking expresseda different position on the socioeconomic aspect of grazing fees. Manystated that Federal grazing is very important to many local rural economiesand that an increase in grazing fees could have a significant impact onrural western communities that are already economically depressed. Manycomments stated that a healthy ranching community contributes to the diversityof the local economy, lifestyle, and social values and that this is a publicbenefit.Additionally, a large number of comments countered the view that productionof Federal forage is not significant and cited statistics on a number ofWestern States where a large percentage of the beef cattle graze at leastpart of the year on Federal rangeland. A few comments also expressed theopinion that the contribution of forage and livestock production from Federallands is important to providing food for the Nation.In response to the comments it should be recognized that State and communityinterests are affected in two basic ways by changes in the grazing fee.First, State and county governments are affected financially through thelevel of payments that are made from grazing fee receipts. Under the TaylorGrazing Act, BLM makes payments to the State and county governments of12.5 percent and 50 percent of the fees collected from section 3 and section15 lands, respectively. The 1986 Grazing Fee Report shows, for example,that payments to States in 1982, when fees were $1.86 per AUM, varied froma high of $946,600 to New Mexico to a low of $200 to Kansas. Second, theState and local economy is affected by the amount of fees that are paidout and the percentage of money that is returned to the area. Money isreturned through direct payment as well as through range improvement expendituresthat come from the return of 50 percent of the grazing receipts. Sincethe Federal Government retains a percentage of all fee receipts, any increasein grazing fees would have an adverse economic impact on the State andlocal areas. The significance of the impact varies depending upon how dependentthe State or local economy is on Federal grazing.Special studies prepared for the 1986 Grazing Fee Report also show thatthere is a wide range in economic dependency of rural western communitieson Federal forage. Areas that show higher dependency, for example, includeCatron County, New Mexico; Owyhee County, Idaho; Sublette County, Wyoming;and Harney County, Oregon. Raising the grazing fee from the current levelof $1.35 to $4 per AUM would reduce personal income in these four areasby about 7.1 percent, 6.0 percent, 3.5 percent and 3.5 percent, respectively.A study of the economic impact on Western States of increasing fees from$1.35 to $3 shows that personal income would be reduced by about $50.5million and employment by about 1,590 jobs.The importance of Federal forage from the production standpoint dependsupon the context in which it is being considered. Federal forage provides10 percent of the Nation's total rangeland forage and 2 percent of thetotal feed consumed by cattle in the United States. In many Western States,Federal grazing is a highly significant portion of total grazing. For example,88 percent of the cattle produced in Idaho, 64 percent in Wyoming, and63 percent in Arizona graze at least part of the year on public rangelands.The Secretary of the Interior cannot eliminate consideration of communitysocial or economic impacts or the importance of production of Federal foragein the decision on the grazing fee formula simply because a few westernstates do not have a significant level of dependency on Federal forage.<ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion</ITAG>For the foregoing reasons, the final rulemaking adopts the provisions ofthe proposed rulemaking without change. Implementation of the fee formulaset out by the President of the United States in Executive Order 12548and reestablished in this rulemaking will result in a grazing fee thatis reasonable and equitable to the United States, the holders of the grazingprivileges, State and local interests, and other interested parties. Also,administration of this fee system will be efficient and cost effective.The public is hereby notified that the grazing fee for 1988 is $1.54 peranimal unit month (AUM). This was arrived at by using the fee formula containedin this rulemaking which becomes effectived today.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>5,L1(0,0,0),b1,tp0,p8,8/1,g1,t1,s10,26,32,16,r10</C> <H1>  </H1><H1>CF (Calculated Fee)=$1.23</H1>andmultiply; <H1>234 (FVI)+272 (BCPI)-381 (PPI)</H1><H2>100</H2><H1>=$1.54 per AUM </H1><H1> </H1><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG></ITAG>This fee meets the requirements of andSection; 4130.7-1(a)(2) of the regulationsthat any annual increase be not more than 25 percent of the previous year'sfee. The fee in 1987 was $1.35 per AUM.Editorial changes have been made as necessary.The principal authors of this final rulemaking are Billy R. Templeton andDonald Waite, Division of Rangeland Resources, Bureau of Land Management,assisted by staff of the Division of Legislation and Regulatory Management,Bureau of Land Management.Based upon an environmental assessment and a finding of no signficant impact,it is hereby determined that the publication of this final rulemaking isnot a major Federal action significantly affecting the quality of the humanenvironment and that a detailed statement pursuant to section 102(2)(C)of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4322(2)(C)is not required.The Department of the Interior has determined that this document is nota major rule under Executive Order 12291 and no Regulatory Impact Analysisis required. The Department of the Interior has further determined thatthis proposed rulemaking will not have a negative impact on a substantialnumber of small entities under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C.60 <T3>et seq.</T3>). The provisions of this proposed rulemaking are applicableto anyone who possesses a grazing permit or lease on the public lands,without regard to the size of the operation.This rule does not contain information collection requirements which requireapproval by the Office of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>Under the authority of the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934, as amended (43 U.S.C.315 <T3>et seq.</T3>), the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976,as amended (43 U.S.C. 1701 <T3>et seq.</T3>), the Public Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978 (43 U.S.C.1901 <T3>et seq.</T3>), and Executive Order 12548 of February 1986, it is proposedto amend andSection;4130.7, Part 4100, Group 4100, Subchapter D, ChapterII of Title 43 of the Code of Federal Regulations as set forth below:<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 43 CFR Part 4100</ITAG>Administrative practice and procedure, Livestock, Penalties, Range management.<ITAG tagnum="6">J. Steven Griles,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary of the Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="34">January 27, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="50">PART 4100_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 43 CFR Part 4100 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>43 U.S.C. 315, 315a-315r, 1701 <T3>et seq., </T3>1181d, and 98 Stat. 1837.</ITAG>2. Section 4130.7-1 is amended by adding paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2) and(a)(3) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;4130.7-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payment of fees.</ITAG>(a) * * *(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section,the calculated fee or grazing fee shall be equal to the $1.23 base establishedby the 1966 Western Livestock Grazing Survey multiplied by the result ofthe Forage Value Index (computed annually from data supplied by the NationalAgricultural Statistics Service) added to the Combined Index (Beef CattlePrice Index minus the Prices Paid Index) and divided by 100; as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L1(0,0,0),b1,tp0,p8,8/1,g1,t1,aw,11,18</C> <H1>CF=$1.23</H1>andmultiply;<H1>FVI+BCPI^PPI</H1><H2>100</H2><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">CF=Calculated Fee (grazing fee) is the estimated economic value oflivestock grazing, defined by the Congress as fair market value (FMV) ofthe forage;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">$1.23=The base economic value of grazing on public rangeland establishedby the 1966 Western Livestock Grazing Survey;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">FVI=``Forage Value Index'' means the weighted average estimate ofthe annual rental charge per head per month for pasturing cattle on privaterangelands in the 11 Western States (Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado,New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Nevada, Washington, Oregon, and California)(computed by the National Agricultural Statistics Service from the JuneEnumerative Survey) divided by $3.65 and multiplied by 100;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">BCPI=``Beef Cattle Price Index'' means the weighted average annualselling price for beef cattle (excluding calves) in the 11 Western States(Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Nevada,Washington, Oregon, and California) for November through October (computedby the National Agricultural Statistics Service divided by $22.04 per hundredweight and multiplied by 100; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">PPI=``Prices Paid Index'' means the following selected componentsfrom the National Agricultural Statistics Service's Annual National Indexof Prices Paid by Farmers for Goods and Services adjusted by the weightsindicated in parentheses to reflect livestock production costs in the WesternStates: 1. Fuels and Energy (14.5); 2. Farm and Motor Supplies (12.0);3. Autos and Trucks (4.5); 4. Tractors and Self-Propelled Machinery (4.5);5. Other Machinery (12.0); 6. Building and Fencing Materials (14.5); 7.Interest (6.0); 8. Farm Wage Rates (14.0); 9. Farm Services (18.0).</ITAG>(2) Any annual increase or decrease in the grazing fee for any given yearshall be limited to not more than plus or minus 25 percent of the previousyear's fee.(3) The grazing fee for any year shall not be less than $1.35 per animalunit month.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-2088 Filed 2-1-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-84-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>