<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88902-0041 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-02-88.f2.A1040</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Occupational Safety and Health Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">29 CFR Part 1952</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. T-023]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Virginia State Plan; Eligibility for Final Approval Determination;Comment Period and Opportunity To Request Public Hearing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed final State plan approval; request for writtencomments; notice of opportunity to request informal public hearing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document gives notice of the eligibility of theVirginia State occupational safety and health plan, as administered bythe Virginia Department of Labor and Industry, for determination undersection 18(e) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 as to whetherfinal approval of the State plan should be granted.If an affirmative determination under section 18(e) is made, Federal standardsand enforcement authority will no longer apply to issues covered by theVirginia plan. This notice announces that OSHA is soliciting written publiccomment regarding whether or not final State plan approval should be granted,and offers an opportunity to interested persons to request an informalpublic hearing on the question of final State plan approval.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Written comments requests for a hearing must be receivedby October 7, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Written comments or requests for a hearing should besubmitted, in quadruplicate, to the Docket Officer, Docket No. T-023, RoomN2439 Rear, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210, (202) 523-7894.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>James Foster, Director, Officeof Information and Consumer Affairs, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,U.S. Department of Labor, Room N3649, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20210, (202) 523-8148.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>Section 18 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29 U.S.C.651, <T3>et seq.,</T3> (the ``Act'') provides that States which desire to assumeresponsibility for the development and enforcement of occupational safetyand health standards may do so by submitting, and obtaining Federal approvalof, a State plan. Procedures for State plan submission and approval areset forth regulations at 29 CFR Part 1902. If the Assistant Secretary,applying the criteria set forth in section 18(c) of the Act and 29 CFR1902.3 and 1902.4, finds that the plan provides or will provide for Statestandards and enforcement which are at least as effective as Federal standardsand enforcement, ``initial approval'' is granted. A State may commenceoperations under its plan after this detemination is made, but the AssistantSecretary retains discretionary Federal enforcement authority during theinitial approval period a provided by section 18(e) of the Act. A Stateplan may receive initial approval even though, upon submission, it doesnot fully meet the criteria set forth in andSection;1902.3 and .4 if it includessatisfactory assurances by the State that it will take the necessary ``developmentalsteps'' to meet the criteria within a three-year period (29 CFR 1902.2(b)).The Assistant Secretary publishes a ``certification of completion of developmentalsteps'' when all of a State's developmental commitments have been satisfactorilymet (29 CFR 1902.34).When a State plan that has been granted initial approval is developed sufficientlyto warrant a suspension of concurrent Federal enforcement activity, itbecomes eligible to enter into an ``operational status agreement'' withOSHA (29 CFR 1954.3(f)).A State must have enacted its enabling legislation, promulgated State standards,achieved an adequate level of qualified personnel, and established a systemfor review of contested enforcement actions. Under these voluntary agreements,concurrent Federal enforcement will not be initiated with regard to Federaloccupational safety and health standards in those issues covered by theState plan, where the State program is providing an acceptable level ofprotection.Following the initial approval of a complete plan, or the certificationof a developmental plan, the Assistant Secretary must monitor and evaluateactual operations under the plan for a period of at least one year to determine,on the basis of actual operations under the plan, whether the criteriaset forth in section 18(c) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.37 are being applied.An affirmative determination under section 18(e) of the Act (usually referredto as ``final approval'' of the State plan) results in the relinquishmentof authority for Federal concurrent enforcement jurisdiction in the Statewith respect to occupational safety and health issues covered by the plan(29 U.S.C. 667(e)). Procedures for section 18(e) determinations are foundat 29 CFR Part 1902, Subpart D. In general, in order to be granted finalapproval, actual performance by the State must be ``at least as effective''overall as the Federal OSHA program in all areas covered under the Stateplan.An additional requirement for final approval consideration is that a Statemust meet the compliance staffing levels, or benchmarks, for safety inspectorsand industrial hygienists established by OSHA for that State. This requirementstems from a 1978 Court Order by the U.S. District Court for the Districtof Columbia (<T3>AFL-CIO</T3> v. <T3>Marshall,</T3> C.A. No. 74-406), pursuant to a U.S. Court of Appealsdecision, that directed the Assistant Secretary to calculate for each Stateplan State the number of enforcement personnel needed to assure a ``fullyeffective'' enforcement program.A final requirement for final approval consideration is that a State mustparticipate in OSHA's Integrated Management Information System (IMIS).This is required so that OSHA can obtain the detailed program performancedata on a State necessary to make an objective continuing evaluation ofwhether the State performance meets the statutory and regulatory criteriafor final approval.History of the Virginia Plan and of Its Compliance Staffing Benchmarks.Virginia PlanOn December 18, 1972, Virginia submitted an occupational safety and healthplan in accordance with section 18(b) of the Act and 29 CFR Part 1902,Subpart C, and on April 11, 1973, a notice was published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>(38 FR 9194) concerning the submission of theplan, announcing that initial Federal approval of the plan was at issueand offering interested persons 30 days in which to submit data, viewsand arguments in writing concerning the plan.Comments addressing specific areas of the Virginia plan, including allegeddeficienices, were received from the Virginia State Association of ProfessionalFire Fighters; Mary A. Marshall, Member of the Virginia House of Delegates;Harold Gordon of Gordon and Healy; the American Federation of Labor andCongress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO); and the Virginia StateAFL-CIO. Following review of the Virginia plan, the public comments, andthe results of discussions with the State, several modifications and clarificationswere received from the State.Plan review and a subsequent determination as to effectiveness, requiredunder section 18(c) of the Act and Subpart B of 29 CFR Part 1902, disclosedseveral reasons for determining that the Virginia plan as submitted, whichrelied primarily on criminal enforcement procedures, was not ``at leastas effective'' as the Federal civil enforcement scheme. Consequently, theAssistant Secretary initiated formal proceedings in accordance with section18(d) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.19(a) to reject the plan. A Notice ofthe Proposed Rejection and Notice of Hearing was published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4> (39 FR 24844, August 1, 1974) which fully describedthe ramifications of the State's reliance on a criminal enforcement processand the Assistant Secretary's conclusions regarding the resulting lackof effectiveness of the proposed Virginia program in comparison to Federalenforcement procedures. Although an opportunity was given for a publichearing on the rejection proceeding, only representatives of the Districtof Columbia requested permission to appear, and that request was subsequentlywithdrawn.In view of the complexity of the subject matter involved in the proposedrejection, Requests for Admissions, Interrogatories and Answers to Interrogatorieswere exchanged between the parties to the proceeding. Before the commencementof a formal hearing on the proposed rejection, the Virginia General Assembly,in its 1975 regular session, amended section 40.1-49.1 of the Code of Virginia(1950) which serves as the enforcement portion of the enabling legislation.On June 16, 1975, the U.S. Department of Labor filed a motion to dismissthe proposed rejection on the grounds that the amended legislation, whichprovided for civil rather than criminal court review of contested enforcementactions and the right of employees to participate as parties in those proceedings,was in the process of being reviewed for possible approval and had renderedmoot the proceeding on which the rejection was based. To this end, pursuantto section 18(c) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.12, the Assistant Secretarypublished for public comment in the <T4>Federal Register </T4> (40 FR 25741, June 18, 1975) a notice of Submissionof Modifications to the Developmental Plan which recognized that the 1975amendments appeared substantially to remove the basis for the proposedrejection. Public comments to this notice were received from Area 4, UnitedPaper Workers International Union, AFL-CIO. There were no requests fora public hearing.Prior to the date scheduled for argument on whether the proposed rejectionproceeding should be dismissed, the Assistant Secretary and the VirginiaCommissioner of Labor and Industry agreed upon Consent Findings, confirmedby a subsequent Consent Order, notice of which was published in the October30, 1975 <T4>Federal Register </T4>(40 FR 50584), to suspend the proposed rejectionproceedings pending the outcome of OSHA's review of the amended Virginiaplan.Although the 1975 legislative amendments appeared to resolve many of theobjections to Virginia's enforcement process, the Department of Labor'sreview tentatively determined that the Virginia plan still did not provideenforcement procedures ``as effective as'' their Federal counterparts.Discussions and meetings between State and Federal representatives, however,resulted in several administrative commitments and legislative proposalsby Virginia in response to the concerns expressed by Federal reviewers.The 1976 session of the Virginia General Assembly enacted further amendmentsto the State's enabling legislation. On June 21, 1976, the State formallysubmitted its revised plan, including the amended enabling legislation,to the Assistant Secretary. As noted above, the plan included provisionsfor the review of contested cases by the Virginia civil court system whereasFederal OSHA utilizes an administrative review process.On September 28, 1976, the Assistant Secretary published a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice granting approval of the Virginia planas a developmental plan under section 18(b) of the Act (41 FR 42655). Theplan provides for a program patterned in most respects (other than itsprocedures for contested cases) after that of the Federal OccupationalSafety and Health Administration.The Virginia plan covers all occupational safety and health issues exceptprivate sector maritime employment and employment on military facilities.The Virginia Department of Labor and Industry is designated as having responsibilityfor administering the plan throughout the State. At the time of initialplan approval, the responsibility for health standards enforcement restedwith the Bureau of Occupational Health in the Virginia Department of Health.Effective July 1, 1985, the Bureau of Occupational Health was transferredfrom the Department of Health to the Department of Labor and Industry.The plan provides for the adoption by Virginia of standards which are ``atleast as effective'' as Federal occupational safety and health standards.In most cases the State standards are identical to the Federal. The planrequires employers to furnish employment and place of employment whichis free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to causedeath or serious physical harm, and to comply with all occupational safetyand health standards promulgated by the State agency. Employees are requiredto comply with all standards and regulations applicable to their conduct.The plan contains provisions similar to Federal procedures governing emergencytemporary standards; imminent danger proceedings; coverage under the generalduty clause; variances; safeguards to protect trade secrets; protectionof employees against discrimination for exercising their rights under theplan; and employer and employee rights to participate in inspection andreview proceedings. Appeals of citations and penalities are filed withthe Commissioner of Labor and Industry and are heard by the General DistrictCourts of Virginia, which are located in each Virginia county and in theindependent cities. (Although the General District Courts are not courtsof record, the 1979 session of the Virginia General Assembly enacted amendmentsto Title 40.1 of the Code of Virginia to require the Virginia courts toissue written orders based on findings of fact and conclusions of law incases involving the contest of citations and penalties related to violationsof occupational safety and health standards.) Decisions of the GeneralDistrict Courts may be appealed to the Virginia Circuit Courts. Decisionsof the Circuit Courts may be appealed to the Virginia Supreme Court.The notice of initial approval noted a few additional distinctions betweenthe Federal and Virginia programs. The State does not cover private sectormaritime employment or military facilities. As indicated above, unlikethe Federal administrative process for the review of contested cases, inVirginia, General District Courts hear formal contests of penalties and/orcitations for safety and health violations. Appeals of District Court determinationsare heard de novo by the State Circuit Courts.The Assistant Secretary's initial approval of the Virginia developmentalplan, a general description of the plan, a schedule of required developmentalsteps, and a provision for discretionary concurrent Federal enforcementduring the period of initial approval were codified in the Code of FederalRegulations (29 CFR Part 1952, Subpart EE; 41 FR 42655, September 28, 1976).A minor correction to the approval notice was published on February 25,1977 (42 FR 10989). As a result of the approval of the Virginia State plan,the Assistant Secretary published a notice announcing the Dismissal ofRejection Proceedings against the Virginia plan (41 FR 56412, December28, 1976).In accordance with the State's developmental schedule, all major structuralcomponents of the plan were put in place and documentation submitted forOSHA approval on or before September 23, 1979. These ``developmental steps''included amendments to Title 40.1 of the Code of Virginia, promulgationof State occupational safety and health standards essentially identicalto Federal standards and establishment of a public employee program. Incompleting these developmental steps, the State developed and submittedfor Federal approval all components of its program including, among otherthings, legislative amendments, a judicial system of review for contestedcases, a merit staffing system, regulations for inspections, citationsand proposed penalties, recordkeeping and reporting regulations, a voluntarycompliance program, including on-site consultation services, and a safetyand health poster for private and public employees.These submissions were carefully reviewed by OSHA; after opportunity forpublic comment and modification of State submissions, where appropriate,the major plan elements were approved by the Assistant Secretary as meetingthe criteria of section 18 of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.3 and 1902.4. TheVirginia subpart of 29 CFR Part 1952 was amended to reflect each of theseapproval determinations (see 29 CFR 1952.104).On October 1, 1981 an operational status agreement was entered into betweenFederal OSHA and Virginia. A <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice announcing the operational status agreementwas published on June 11, 1982 (47 FR 25323). Under the terms of the agreement,OSHA voluntarily suspended the application of concurrent Federal enforcementauthority with regard to Federal occupational safety and health standardsin all issues covered by the Virginia plan.On August 15, 1984, in accordance with procedures at 29 CFR 1902.34 and1902.35, the Assistant Secretary certified that Virginia had satisfactorilycompleted all developmental steps (49 FR 33123, August 21, 1984). In certifyingthe plan, the Assistant Secretary found the structural features of theprogram_the statute, standards, regulations, and written procedures foradministering the Virginia plan_to be at least as effective as correspondingFederal provisions. Certification does not, however, entail findings orconclusions by OSHA concerning adequacy of actual plan performance. Ashas already been noted, OSHA regulations provide that certification initiatesa period of evaluation and monitoring of State activity to determine inaccordance with section 18(e) of the Act whether the statutory or regulatorycriteria for State plans are being applied in actual operations under theplan and whether final approval should be granted.On June 13, 1978, OSHA published a notice in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>(43 FR 25491) requesting public comment on apetition received by the Agency requesting withdrawal of OSHA approvalof the Virginia State plan. The petition was submitted by the Oil, Chemical,and Atomic Workers (OCAW) International Union. Three additional petitionsrequesting plan withdrawal were subsequently filed by the Fairfax County,Virginia, Board of Supervisors, the Virginia State AFL-CIO, and the Buildingand Construction Trades Department of the AFL-CIO. On October 3, 1980,a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice was published (45 FR 65625) requestingpublic comments on the three petitions as well as providing an additionaltime period for public comments on the OCAW petition.The OCAW petition alleged that Virginia's enforcement of safety and healthstandards was not as effective as that of Federal OSHA. The Virginia StateAFL-CIO criticized Virginia's judicial review system and alleged that Virginiahad failed to enforce safety and health standards as effectively as FederalOSHA. The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors and the Building and ConstructionTrades Department of the AFL-CIO alleged that Virginia's enforcement inthe construction industry was ineffective and insufficient.Of the 101 written comments received in response to the two notices requestingpublic comment, 97 expressed support for the Virginia plan while four letterssupported the petitions for withdrawal, two of those letters having beensubmitted by petitioners themselves. In a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice dated July 14, 1981 (46 FR 36141) theAssistant Secretary announced that in light of recent Federal monitoringdata, comparison with Federal performance, information provided in thepublic comments, and other relevant factors, a withdrawal proceeding againstthe Virginia State plan was not warranted and the petitions were thereforedenied.On December 12, 1986, OSHA published a <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice (51 FR 44784) that effective October 1,1986, concurrent Federal authority would be exercised in Virginia withrespect to general schedule inspections resulting in denials of entry underthe Virginia State plan. The resumption of concurrent enforcement authoritywas undertaken as a temporary measure to allow Virginia to complete itsefforts to legislatively address difficulties it had encountered in thearea of right of entry. The specific difficulty resulted from a 1985 VirginiaSupreme Court decision that suggested, but did not expressly hold, thatVirginia employers challenging general schedule inspection warrants wouldbe entitled to discovery, including the release of confidential inspectionscheduling information and ``establishment lists'' of workplaces likelyto be inspected in the future. In a subsequent case involving a challengeto a State inspection warrant, the Circuit Court for the City of Roanoke,relying on the 1985 Virginia Supreme Court decision, ordered State officialsresponsible for enforcing the plan to submit to discovery requested bythe employer, including the submission of data underlying the Virginiainspection plan, deposition of officials responsible for developing andimplementing the inspection scheduling plan, and the release to the employerof various confidential scheduling material, including establishment lists.In cases involving similar challenges to Federal OSHA inspection warrants,the Federal courts have held such discovery improper. It was the AssistantSecretary's determination that these State court decisions rendered Virginia'sright of entry authority less effective than the Federal and necessitatedthe reinstitution of limited concurrent Federal enforcement authority toensure worker protection.The 1987 session of the Virginia General Assembly enacted legislative amendmentsto remedy the Virginia plan's right of entry difficulties. OSHA's reviewof those amendments determined that the amendments provided the Virginiaplan with a basis to obtain search warrants on terms and conditions equivalentto those which are available Federally. Accordingly, the Assistant Secretaryapproved the legislative amendments in the September 17, 1987 <T4>Federal Register</T4> (52 FR 35069) and announced that the limitedexercise of concurrent Federal jurisdiction in Virginia had been terminatedwhen the amendments became effective on July 1, 1987. A recent court decisionhas upheld the State's revised warrant authority.Virginia BenchmarksUnder the terms of a 1978 Court Order in <T3>AFL-CIO</T3> v. <T3>Marshall</T3>, compliance staffing levels (benchmarks) necessary fora ``fully effective'' enforcement program were required to be establishedfor each State operating an approved State plan. In 1980, in response tothe Court Order, OSHA established benchmarks for all approved State plans,including benchmarks of 51 safety and 74 health compliance officers forVirginia. The 1978 Court Order noted that new information might warrantan adjustment by OSHA of the fully effective benchmarks. In September 1984Virginia in conjunction with OSHA, completed a reassessment of the levelsstaffing benchmarks of 38 safety and 21 health compliance officers. Afteropportunity for public comment and service on the AFL-CIO, the AssistantSecretary approved these revised staffing requirements on January 17, 1986(51 FR 2481).<ITAG tagnum="84">Determination of Eligibility</ITAG>This <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice announces the eligibility of the Virginiaplan for an section 18(e) determination. (29 CFR 1902.39(c) requires thatthis preliminary determination of eligibility be made before section 18(e)procedures begin.) The determination of eligibility is based upon OSHA'sfindings that:(1) The Virginia plan has been monitored in actual operation for at leastone year following certification. The results of OSHA monitoring of theplan since the commencement of plan operations are contained in writtenevaluation reports which are prepared annually and made available to theState and to the public. The results of OSHA's most recent post-certificationmonitoring during the period from January 1, 1987 through March 31, 1988are set forth in an section 18(e) <T3>Evaluation Report of the Virginia Plan</T3>, which has been made partof the record of the present proceedings.(2) The plan meets the State's revised benchmarks for enforcement staffing.In January 1986, pursuant to the terms of the Court Order and the <T3>1980 Report to the Court</T3> in <T3>AFL-CIO</T3> v. <T3>Marshall</T3>, OSHA approved revised fully effective benchmarks of38 safety and 21 health compliance officers for Virginia based on an assessmentof State-specific characteristics and historical experiences. Virginiahas allocated these positions, as evidenced by the FY 1988 <T3>Application for Federal Assistance</T3> in which the State has committeditself to funding the State share of salaries for 38 safety and 21 healthcompliance officers. The FY 1988 application has been made part of therecord in the present proceeding.(3) Virginia participates and has assured its continued participation inthe Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) developed by OSHA.<ITAG tagnum="84">Issues for Determination in the 18(e) Proceedings</ITAG>The Virginia plan is now at issue before the Assistant Secretary for determinationas to whether the criteria of section 18(c) of the Act are being appliedin actual operation. 29 CFR 1902.37(a) requires the Assistant Secretary,as part of the final approval process, to determine if the State has appliedand implemented all the specific criteria and indices of effectivenessof andSection;andSection; 1902.3 and 1902.4. The Assistant Secretary must makethis determination by considering the factors set forth in andSection; 1902.37(b).OSHA believes that the results of its evaluation of the Virginia plan,contained in the section 18(e) Evaluation Report, considered in light ofthese regulatory criteria and the criteria in section 18(c) of the Act,indicate that the regulatory indices and criteria are being met, and theAssistant Secretary accordingly has made an initial determination thatthe Virginia plan is eligible for an affirmative section 18(e) determination.This notice initiates proceedings by which OSHA expects to elicit publiccomment on the issue of granting an affirmative section 18(e) determinationto Virginia. In order to encourage the submission of informed and specificpublic comment, a summary of current evaluation findings with respect tothese criteria is set forth below.(a) Standards and VariancesSection 18(c)(2) of the Act requires State plans to provide for occupationalsafety and health standards which are at least as effective as Federalstandards. A State is required to adopt, in a timely manner, all Federalstandards and amendments or to develop and promulgate standards and amendmentsat least as effective as the Federal standards. See andSection;andSection;1902.37(b)(3), 1902.3(c), 1902.4 (a) and (b). The Virginia plan providesfor adoption of standards which are in most cases identical to Federalstandards. For OSHA standards requiring State action during the section18(e) evaluation period, Virginia's adoption process met the six-monthtime frame for 12 of 13 standards. (One standard took 7 months to adopt.)[Evaluation Report, p. 6.]Where a State adopts Federal standards, the State's interpretation andapplication of such standards must ensure consistency with Federal interpretationand application. Where a State develops and promulgates its own standards,interpretation and application must ensure coverage at least as effectiveas comparable Federal standards. While acknowledging prior approval ofindividual standards by the Assistant Secretary, this requirement stressesthat State standards, in actual operation, must be at least as effectiveas the Federal standards. See andSection;andSection; 1902.37(b)(4), 1902.3(c)(1),1902.3(d)(1), 1903.4(a), and 1902.4(b)(2). As already noted, the Virginiaplan provides for adoption of standards identical to Federal standards.Virginia also adopted standards interpretations which are identical tothe Federal.The State is required to take the necessary administrative judicial orlegislative action to correct any deficiency in its program caused by anadministrative or judicial challenge to any State standard, whether thestandard is adopted from the Federal standards or developed by the State.See andSection; 1902.37(b)(5). No such challenge to State standards has everoccurred in Virginia.When granting permanent variances from standards, the State is requiredto ensure that the employer provides as safe and healthful working conditionsas would have been provided if the standard were in effect. See andSection;andSection;1902.37(b)(6) and 1902.4(b)(2)(iv). Virginia had four requests for a permanentvariance during the 18(e) evaluation period. Two were closed owing to lackof response from the applicants, one application was withdrawn, and onewas pending. [Evaluation Report, p. 7.]Where a temporary variance is granted, the State must ensure, among otherthings, that the employer complies with the standard as soon as possibleand provides appropriate interim employee protection. See andSection;andSection;1902.37(b)(7) and 1902.4(b)(2)(iv). The Virginia temporary variance proceduresrequire that any employer granted a temporary variance must have an effectiveprogram for coming into compliance with the standard as soon as possible.During the section 18(e) evaluation period, no temporary variance requestswere received. [Evaluation Report, p. 7.](b) EnforcementSection 18(c)(2) of the Act requires State plans to maintain an enforcementprogram which is at least as effective as that conducted by Federal OSHA;section 18(c)(3) requires the State plan to provide for right of entryand inspection of all work places at least as effective as that in section8 of the Act.The State inspection program must provide that sufficient resources bedirected to designated target industries while providing adequate protectionto all other workplaces covered under the plan. See andSection;andSection;1902.37(b)(8), 1902.3(d)(1), and 1902.4(c). Data contained in the section18(e) Evaluation Report indicates that 96.2% of State programmed safetyinspections and 100% of programmed health inspections were conducted inhigh hazard industries. [Evaluation Report, p. 12.]In cases of refusal of entry, the State must exercise its authority, throughappropriate means, to enforce the right of entry and inspection. See andSection;andSection;1902.37(b)(9), 1902.3 (e) and (f), and 1902.4(c)(2) (i) and (ix). Title40.1 of the Code of Virginia allows the Commissioner to seek a warrantto permit entry into such establishment that has refused entry for thepurpose of inspection or investigation. Virginia had 18 denials of entryduring this evaluation period, was successful in obtaining entry in 14instances. Once case was referred to Federal OSHA during the 9-month periodof concurrent Federal jurisdiction, and in 3 instances the short-term constructionjobs were completed before entry could be obtained. [Evaluation Report,pp. 15-16.]Inspections must be conducted in a competent manner following approvedenforcement procedures which include the requirement that inspectors acquireinformation adequate to support any citation issued. See andSection; 1902.37(b)(10),1902.3(d)(1), and 1902.4(c)(2). Procedures for the Virginia Occupationalsafety and health compliance program are set out in the Virginia FieldOperations Manual, which is patterned after the Federal manual, and thusfollows inspection procedures, including documentation procedures, whichare similar to Federal. The Evaluation Report notes overall adherence byVirginia to these procedures.Virginia cited an average of 3.6 violations per programmed safety inspectionwith citations and 4.5 violations per programmed health inspection withcitations, and 17.8% of safety violations and 8.6% of health violationswere cited as serious. The percentage of serious safety and health violationswere lower than the comparable Federal statistics and were attributed toinstances of incorrect hazard classification and identification by complianceofficers. The State provided compliance officers with supplemental trainingto ensure the proper classification of violations of certain specific standards.[Evaluation Report, p. 17.]State plans must include a prohibition on advance notice, and exceptionsmust be no broader than those allowed by Federal OSHA procedure. See andSection;1902.3(f). Virginia adopted approved procedures for advance notice similarto the Federal procedures. There were 13 instances of advance notice. Inall 13 instances, advance notice was properly given in accord with proceduresas required for the effective conduct of inspections. [Evaluation Report,p. 16.]State plans must provide for inspections in response to employee complaints,and must provide an opportunity for employee participation in State inspections.See andSection; 1902.4(c)(i) through (iii). Virginia has procedures similarto Federal OSHA for processing and responding to compliants. The data indicatesthat during the evaluation period the State responded to 56.6% of safetycomplaints and 56.4% of health complaints with an inspection. The State'srelatively high percentage of health complaints responded to with inspectionsas compared to the Federal experience is attributed to the State's policyof investigating all complaints (both formal and non-formal) alleging potentialasbestos exposure. [Evaluation Report, pp. 13-14.] During the current evaluationperiod, 97.6% of all State inspections included either an employee representativeon the walkaround or interviews with employees.State plans must also provide protection for employees against discriminationsimilar to that found in section 11(c) of the Federal Act. See andSection;1902.4(c)(2)(v). Title 40.1 of the Code of Virginia and State regulationsprovide for discrimination protection equivalent to that provided by FederalOSHA. A total of 25 complaints alleging discrimination were investigatedduring the evaluation period, 4 of which were determined to be meritorious.All 4 had been settled or litigated by the end of the period. [EvaluationReport, pp. 19-20.]The State is required to issue, in a timely manner, citations, proposedpenalties, and notices of failure to abate. See andSection;andSection; 1902.37(b)(11),1902.3(d), and 1902.4(c)(2) (x) and (xi). The State's lapse time from lastday of inspection to issuance of citation averaged 28.8 days for safetyand 48.3 days for health.The State must propose penalties in manner that is at least as effectiveas the penalties under the Federal program, which includes first instanceviolation penalties and consideration of comparable factors required inthe Federal program. See andSection;andSection; 1902.37(b)(12), 1902.3(d),and 1902.4(c) (x) and (xi). Virginia's procedures for penalty calculationare the same as the Federal procedures with the exception that the Statehas not adopted the Federal procedure of citing willful violations withinstance-by-instance penalties. The section 18(e) Evaluation Report notedthat Virginia proposes appropriate penalties. The average penalty for serioussafety violations was $325.50 and the average serious health penalty was$447. [Evaluation Report, pp. 18-19.]The State must ensure abatement of hazards cited including issuance ofnotices of failure to abate and appropriate penalties. See andSection;andSection;1902.37(b)(13), 1902.3(d), and 1902.4(c) (vii) and (xi). Follow-up inspectionsaccounted for .9% of Virginia's total safety inspections and 3.7% of itshealth inspections, with 17.2% of the safety follow-up inspections and28.6% of the health follow-ups resulting in failure-to-abate notifications.Virginia's abatement periods for serious violations averaged 7.9 days forsafety and 28.3 days for health. [Evaluation Report, p. 18.]Whenever appropriate, the State must seek administrative and judicial reviewof adverse adjudications. Additionally, the State must take necessary andappropriate action to correct any deficiencies in its program which maybe caused by an adverse administrative or judicial determination. See andSection;andSection;1902.37(b)(14) and 1902.3 (d) and (g). As noted above, a 1985 decisionby the Virginia Supreme Court had created a situation whereby the State'sability to obtain search warrants when denied entry on general scheduleinspections was severely compromised. The State plan officials recognizedthe difficulty and successfully sought corrective legislative amendmentsfrom the 1987 session of the Virginia General Assembly. Those amendmentsbecame effective on July 1, 1987. The Virginia section 18(e) EvaluationReport noted no other instances of adverse adjudications. [Evaluation Report,pp. 4 and 19-20.](c) Staffing and ResourcesThe State is required to have a sufficient number of adequately trainedand competent personnel to discharge its responsibilities under the plan.See section 18(c)(4) of the Act; 29 CFR 1902.37(b)(1), 1902.3(d) and 1902.3(h).A State must also direct adequate resources to administration and enforcementof the plan. See section 18(c)(5) of the Act and andSection; 1902.3(i). Asdiscussed above, the Virginia plan provides for 38 safety compliance officersand 21 industrial hygienists as set forth in the Virginia FY 1988 grant.This staffing level meets the approved, revised ``fully effective'' benchmarksfor Virginia for health and safety staffing, as discussed elsewhere inthis notice.Virginia provides its safety and health personnel with formal trainingbased on the needs of the staff and availability of funds. The OSHA TrainingInstitute is utilized for staff training, and the State conducts semi-annualconferences to train personnel in new and updated policy and technicalchanges. In 1987, safety compliance officers received 6,278 hours and industrialhygienists received 6,431 hours of formal training. [Evaluation Report,pp. 9-10.] (d) Other Requirements States which have approved plans must maintain a safety and health programfor State and local employees which must be as effective as the State'splan for the private sector. See andSection; 1902.3(j). The Virginia planprovides a program in the public sector which is comparable to that inthe private sector, except that no penalties are proposed. Injury and illnessrates are higher in the public sector than in the private (all case rate_9.4;lost workday case rate_4.5). The State and local government lost workdaycase rate decreased slightly from 1985 to 1986 (4.6 to 4.5) while the privatesector rate showed a slight increase (from 3.4 to 3.5). As a factor of its section 18(e) determination, OSHA must consider whetherthe Bureau of Labor Statistics' annual occupational safety and health surveyand other available Federal and State measurements of program impact onworker safety and health indicate that trends in worker safety and healthinjury and illness rates under the State program compare favorably withthose under the Federal program. See andSection; 1902.37(b)(15). The 1985and 1986 Bureau of Labor Statistics injury and illness rates for Virginia(private sector all case rate for 1985 was 7.3 and for 1986 was 7.6; lostworkday case rate for 1985 was 3.4 and for 1986 was 3.5) were comparableto rates in States where Federal OSHA provides enforcement coverage. In1986, the all case incidence rates and the lost workday case rates forprivate sector, manufacturing and construction experienced a mix of increasesand decreases in Virginia, the rates of increase were within the acceptablerange established under OSHA's State Plan Activities Measures. In addition,only one of the five most hazardous industries in Virginia showed an increasefrom 1985 to 1986 in its lost workday case rate (SIC 42, Lumber and WoodProducts, except Furniture), and that rate (8.9) was the same as the 1986Federal rate for that particular industry. State plans must assure that employers in the State submit reports to theSecretary in the same manner as if the plan were not in effect. See section18(c)(7) of the Act; 29 CFR 1902.3(k). The plan must also provide assurancethat the designated agency will make such reports to the Secretary in suchform and containing such information as he may from time to time require.Section 18(c)(8) of the Act; 29 CFR 1902.4(1). Virginia employer recordkeepingrequirements are identical to those of Federal OSHA, and the State participatesin the BLS Annual Survey of Occupational Illness and Injuries. As notedabove, the State participates and has assured its continuing participationwith OSHA in the Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) as a meansof providing reports on its activities to OSHA. Section 1092.4(c)(2)(xiii) requires States to undertake programs to encouragevoluntary compliance by employers by such means as conducting trainingand consultation with employers and employees. Training programs for boththe State's staff and the public sector have been established and are ongoing.In the public sector, 199 employers and supervisors and 5,789 employeesparticipated in 149 training sessions in 1987. In the private sector, 192employers and supervisors and 3,864 employees participated in 280 trainingsessions. [Evaluation Report, p. 10.] In addition, on-site consultationservices are provided in the public sector. (The State's on-site consultationprogram for the private sector is conducted apart from the State plan underan agreement with OSHA under section 7(c)(1) of the OSH Act.) <ITAG tagnum="84">Effect of andSection; 18(e) Determination </ITAG>If the Assistant Secretary, after completion of the proceedings describedin this notice, determines that the statutory and regulatory criteria forState plans are being applied in actual operations, final approval willbe granted and Federal standards and enforcement authority will cease tobe in effect with respect to issues covered by the Virginia plan, as providedby Section 18(e) of the Act and 29 CFR 1902.42(c). Virginia has excludedfrom its plan: Safety and health coverage in private sector maritime activities(enforcement of occupational safety and health standards comparable to29 CFR Parts 1915, shipyard employment; 1917, marine terminals; 1918, longshoring;and 1919, gear certification, as well as provisions of general industrystandards (29 CFR Part 1910) appropriate to hazards found in these employments).In addition, Virginia does not cover employment on military facilities.Thus, Federal coverage of private sector maritime employment and militaryfacilities would be unaffected by an affirmative section 18(e) determination.In the event an affirmative section 18(e) determination is made by theAssistant Secretary following the proceedings described in the presentnotice, a notice will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> in accordance with 29 CFR 1902.43; the noticewill specify the issues as to which Federal authority is withdrawn, willstate that Federal authority with respect to enforcement under section5(a)(1) of the Act and discrimination complaints under section 11(c) ofthe Act remains in effect, and will state that if continuing evaluationsshow that the State has failed to maintain a compliance staff which meetsthe revised fully effective benchmarks, or has failed to maintain a programwhich is at least as effective as the Federal, or that the State has failedto submit program change supplements as required by 29 CFR Part 1953, theAssistant Secretary may revoke final approval and reinstate Federal enforcementauthority or, if the circumstances warrant, initiate action to withdrawapproval of the State plan. At the same time, Subpart C of 29 CFR Part1952, which codifies OSHA decisions regarding approval of the Virginiaplan, would be amended to reflect the section 18(e) determination if anaffirmative determination is made. <ITAG tagnum="84">Documents of Record </ITAG>All information and data presently available to OSHA relating to the Virginiasection 18(e) proceeding have been made a part of the record in this proceedingand placed in the OSHA Docket Office. The contents of the record are availablefor inspection and copying at the following locations:<ITAG tagnum="15">Docket Office, Room N-2439 Rear, Docket No. T-023 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department ofLabor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Regional Administrator_Region III, U.S. Department of Labor-OSHA,Gateway Building, Suite 21000, 3535 Market Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania19104. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Virginia Department of Labor and Industry, 205 North Fourth Street,Richmond, Virginia 23241-0064.</ITAG>To date, the record on final approval determination includes copies ofall <T4>Federal Register</T4> documents regarding the plan, including noticesof plan submission, initial Federal approval, certification of completionof developmental steps, codification of the State's operational statusagreement, and other plan supplements. The record also includes the Stateplan document, which includes a plan narrative, the State legislation,regulations and procedures, an organizational chart for State staffing;the State's FY 1988 Federal grant; and the January 1, 1987 through March31, 1988 18(e) Evaluation Report and all previous, post-certification reports.<ITAG tagnum="84">Public Participation </ITAG>Request for Public Comment and Opportunity to Request Hearing The Assistant Secretary is directed under andSection; 1902.41 to make a decisionwhether an affirmative section 18(e) determination is warranted or not.As part of the Assistant Secretary's decision-making process, considerationmust be given to the application and implementation by Virginia of therequirements of section 18(c) of the Act and all specified criteria andindices of effectiveness as presented in 29 CFR 1902.3 and 1902.4. Thesecriteria and indices must be considered in light of the 15 factors in 29CFR 1902.37(b) (1) through (15). However, this action will be taken onlyafter all the information contained in the record, including OSHA's evaluationof the actual operations of the State plan, and information presented inwritten submissions and during an informal public hearing, if held, isreviewed and analyzed. OSHA is soliciting public participation in thisprocess so as to assure that all relevant information, views, data andarguments related to the indices, criteria and factors presented in 29CFR Part 1902, as they apply to Virginia State plan, are available to theAssistant Secretary during this administrative proceeding. Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and argumentswith respect to this proposed section 18(e) determination. These commentsmust be received on or before (35 days) and submitted in quadruplicateto the Docket Officer, Docket No. T-023, Room N-2439 Rear, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Written submissionsmust clearly identify the issues which are addressed and the positionstaken with respect to each issue. The State of Virginia will be affordedthe opportunity to respond to each submission.Pursuant to 29 CFR 1902.39(f), interested persons may request an informalhearing concerning the proposed section 18(e) determination. Such requestsalso must be received on or before (35 days) and should be submitted inquadruplicate to the Docket Officer, Docket T-023, at the address notedabove. Such requests must present particularized written objections tothe proposed section 18(e) determination. The Assistant Secretary willdecide within 30 days of the last day for filing written views or commentsand requests for a hearing whether the objections raised are substantialand, if so, will publish notice of the time and place of the scheduledhearing.The Assistant Secretary will, within a reasonable time after the closeof the comment period or after the certification of the record if a hearingis held, publish his decisions in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. All written and oral submissions, as well asother information gathered by OSHA, will be considered in any action taken.The record of this proceeding, including written comments and requestsfor hearing and all materials submitted in response to this notice andat any subsequent hearing, will be available for inspection and copyingin the Docket Office, Room N-2439 Rear, at the previously mentioned address,between the hours of 8:15 a.m. and 4:45 p.m.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>OSHA certifies pursuant to the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (5 U.S.C.601 <T3>et seq.</T3>) that this determination will not have a significant economicimpact on a substantial number of small entities. Final approval wouldnot place small employers in Virginia under any new or different requirements,nor would any additional burden be placed upon the State government beyondthe responsibilities already assumed as part of the approved plan.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 1952</ITAG>Intergovernmental relations, Law enforcement, Occupational safety and health,Occupational Safety and Health Administration.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Sec. 18, 84 Stat. 1608 (29 U.S.C. 667); 29 CFR Part 1902, Secretaryof Labor's Order No. 9-83 (43 FR 35736)).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 30th day of August, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John A. Pendergrass,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-19972 Filed 9-1-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-26-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>