<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88120-0091 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-20-88.f2.A1090</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 20, 1988/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Guidelines for Federal Statistical Activities</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Management and Budget.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of a draft circular establishing guidelines forFederal statistical activities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is solicitingpublic comment on a draft OMB Circular that would revise government-wideguidance for planning and conducting statistical surveys, publishing statisticaldata, documenting statistical methods and procedures, and using standardstatistical classifications, definitions, and data sources. The guidance,which applies to all Federal agencies subject to the Paperwork ReductionAct of 1980, is intended to assure that the results of statistical surveysand studies sponsored by the Federal government are as reliable and usefulas possible and that statistical activities are conducted as efficientlyas possible.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments must be received on or before April 19, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments are invited on any aspect of the Circular. Theyshould be made in writing and sent to Dorothy M. Tella, Office of Managementand Budget, Room 3001, New Executive Office Building, Washington, DC 20503.The comments will be available for public examination at this address.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Dorothy M. Tella, (202) 395-3093.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Statistics collected and publishedby the Federal government constitute a large part of the available informationabout the United States economy, population, natural resources, environment,and public and private institutions. These data are used by the Federalgovernment and others as the basis for actions that affect people's livesand well-being. It is essential that they be collected, processed, andpublished in a manner that guarantees and inspires confidence in theirreliability. The statistical programs of the Federal government are decentralizedamong seventy or more agencies or separate departmental units. It is thereforealso essential that, to the extent permitted by law, there be sufficientgovernment-wide uniformity in statistical methods and practices to ensurethe maximum usefulness of the statistics produced.The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, as amended (44 U.S.C. 3504), givesthe Director of OMB broad responsibility for improving the usefulness ofinformation collected, maintained, and disseminated by the Federal governmentand for reducing the Federal government's reporting burden on the public.Among the Director's functions under the Act are statistical policy andcoordination functions, which include the development and implementationof policies, principles, standards, and guidelines concerning statisticalcollection procedures and methods, statistical data classification, statisticalinformation presentation and dissemination, and such statistical data sourcesas may be required for the administration of Federal programs. This Circular provides revised guidance for designing, conducting, andpublishing statistical surveys and studies sponsored by Federal agencies.The guidelines are intended to ensure that such surveys and studies aredesigned to produce reliable data as efficiently as possible and that methodsare documented and results presented in a manner that makes the data asaccessible and useful as possible. The Circular would also establish guidelinesfor the use of standard classifications, definitions, and data sources.The Circular would rescind and replace guidance on the conduct of Federalstatistical activities currently contained in 19 statistical policy directives.(Section 2 of the Circular lists the rescinded directives.) The Circularwould, however, leave in place Directive No. 19, ``Reports of the Departmentof Commerce on International Transactions'' (43 FR 19272, May 4, 1978).The Circular would for the first time establish guidelines for documentingall methods, procedures, and models used to produce statistical estimatesand would revise and strengthen existing guidance on planning of statisticalsurveys, treatment of respondents, publication of statistical data, anduse of standard statistical classifications, definitions, and data sources.The Circular would discontinue certain classifications and definitionsas government-wide statistical standards, as indicated below. The attachments to the Circular address the following subjects:<T3>Planning Statistical Surveys. </T3>The OMB paperwork regulation (5CFR Part 1320) requires that when agencies seek OMB approval to collectinformation, they demonstrate that they have taken reasonable steps toensure that the information is useful and that the cost and burden of collectingit have been minimized. Attachment A of the Circular specifies the documentationthat the sponsoring agency shall include in its request for OMB approvalof a statistical survey to demonstrate that the survey is designed efficientlyand will produce reliable, useful results.<T3>Treatment of Respondents. </T3>The guidelines in Attachment B are intendedto reassure respondents to statistical surveys that the Federal governmentis dealing with them honestly and forthrightly and that their interestsare being protected. For this purpose, agencies that sponsor statisticalsurveys should provide certain information to potential respondents aboutthe purpose of each survey and the planned use of the survey data, includingany matching or combination of individual respondent data with data fromadministrative sources. Any such match or combination should meet the conditionsspecified in section 3.c. of the attachment. Matches for statistical purposes,to which the guidance in Attachment B applies, are not covered by the OMBGuidelines for conducting computerized matching programs (47 FR 21656,May 19, 1982). Agencies should take the specific steps outlined in AttachmentB to ensure the protection from public disclosure of information collectedunder a pledge of confidentiality. Attachment B would also establish certaindesign guidelines for statistical surveys conducted under mandatory reportingauthority, in order to minimize the burden of such surveys on individualrespondents.<T3>Statistical Publications. </T3>Attachment C contains guidelines forthe presentation and documentation of the results of statistical surveysand studies. To ensure that other agencies and the public have an opportunityto verify and use the results of all Federally-sponsored statistical surveysand studies, the sponsoring agency should either publish the results ormaintain them in an accessible data base such that requests for summarydata or tabulations can be met within 90 days. This guidance is based onthe presumption that data collected for statistical purposes have practicalutility, as defined in 5 CFR Part 1320, only to the extent that they areaccessible to potential users within and outside the Federal government.In deciding whether to publish the results or else to maintain them inan accessible data base, agencies will be expected to conform to the policieson the dissemination of government information products and services establishedin section 8.a.(9) of OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal InformationResources (50 FR 52730, December 24, 1985).<T3>Documentation of Methods and Procedures. </T3>Attachment D containsguidelines under which agencies would maintain publicly available documentationof all statistical methods, procedures, and models used to produce statisticaldata and estimates, thereby enabling users to make informed, independentjudgments about the quality of data and estimates and to verify that theyhave been produced by sound, replicable methods. <T3>Compilation, Release, and Evaluation of Principal Federal EconomicIndicators. </T3>Attachment E contains guidelines for the compilation,release, and evaluation of data series that have been designated as principaleconomic indicators by the Director of OMB. The provisions in this attachmentare the same as those in Statistical Policy Directive No. 3 (50 FR 38932,September 25, 1985), except for the addition, in Section 8, of the provisionthat agencies inform the public of the uncertainty or probable range oferror in preliminary estimates of economic indicators.<T3>Use of Standard Classifications, Data Sources, and Definitions. </T3>AttachmentF establishes, and prescribes the uses of, certain standard statisticalclassifications, data sources, and definitions, which have all been previouslyestablished in OMB Statistical Policy Directives. Five classificationsor definitions would be discontinued as government-wide statistical standardseither because the current standards have not proven useful for the statisticalpurposes intended (standard Federal administrative regions, the standardindustrial classification of enterprises, and the standard reference baseperiod for Federal government general-purpose index numbers) or becausethey are used by only one or two agencies to collect and publish statistics(the standard classification of fields of science and engineering and thestandard gas pressure base). In the latter case, OMB believes it is morepractical for the principal user agencies to maintain the standards. TheCircular makes it clear that the definitions of Metropolitan StatisticalAreas (MSAs), the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), and the StandardOccupational Classification (SOC) are established and maintained by OMBsolely for statistical purposes and that agencies that use these statisticalstandards in nonstatistical programs bear the responsibility for assuringthat the standard definitions or classifications are appropriate for thoseuses.<T3>Provision of Statistical Data to International Organizations. </T3>AttachmentG provides guidance on the implementation of Executive Order 10033.In several cases, statistical activities covered by this Circular are alsocovered by other OMB Circulars. In such cases, this Circular supplementsor clarifies the guidance in the other Circulars as it relates to statisticalcollections and publications. The specific instances of each are notedin the appropriate portions of the Circular. <ITAG tagnum="6">Wendy L. Gramm,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator for Information and Regulatory Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">OMB Circular No. A-</ITAG><T2>XX</T2><ITAG tagnum="16">To the Heads of Executive Departments and Establishments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16"/><T3>Subject: </T3>Guidelines for Federal Statistical Activities.1. <T3>Purpose. </T3>This Circular revises government-wide guidance for planningand conducting statistical surveys, publishing statistical data, and documentingstatistical methods and procedures. These guidelines are intended to assurethat all statistical surveys and studies sponsored by the Federal governmentproduce as accurate and useful information as possible, serve their purposesas efficiently as possible, and impose no unnecessary burden on respondents.The Circular also prescribes four standards_a standard data source forpopulation estimates, a standard data source for labor force and unemploymentestimates, standard categories for reporting race and ethnic background,and a standard definition of poverty_to be used in the administration ofFederal programs, consistent with statutory requirements. It also clarifiesthe responsibilities of agencies that use the Standard Industrial Classification(SIC), the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC), and the standarddefinitions of Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) for nonstatisticalpurposes. 2. <T3>Rescissions. </T3>This Circular rescinds and replaces Statistical PolicyDirectives Nos. 1-2 and 5-18 (43 FR 19260, May 4, 1978); Statistical PolicyDirective No. 3 (46 FR 3253, January 14, 1981), as revised (50 FR 38932,September 25, 1985); and the directive entitled ``Comparability of Statisticson Business Size'' (47 FR 21362, May 18, 1982).3. <T3>Authority. </T3>The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, as amended (44U.S.C. 3504); the Budget and Accounting Procedures Act of 1950, as amended(31 U.S.C. 1104); Executive Order 10253 of June 11, 1951, as amended (see31 USCA 1104); and Executive Order 10033 of February 8, 1949, as amended(see 22 USCA 286f).4. <T3>Background. </T3>The Paperwork Reduction Act grants the Director ofthe Office of Management and Budget (OMB) broad authority to develop andimplement government-wide policies, principles, standards, and guidelinesconcerning statistical collection procedures and methods, statistical dataclassifications, statistical information presentation and dissemination,and statistical data sources required for the administration of Federalprograms. The Act also reassigns to the Director the authority in the Budgetand Accounting Procedures Act to develop programs and issue regulationsand orders for the improved gathering, compiling, analyzing, publishing,and disseminating of statistical information for any purpose by the variousagencies of the executive branch of the Federal government. Since the PaperworkReduction Act took effect in 1981, OMB has provided government-wide guidanceon collecting and publishing statistical data in 19 statistical policydirectives: Directives Nos. 1-2 and 5-19 (43 FR 19260, May 4, 1978); DirectiveNo. 3 (46 FR 3253, January 14, 1981), as revised (50 FR 38932, September25, 1985); and a directive establishing standard business size categoriesfor statistical purposes, ``Comparability of Statistics on Business Size''(47 FR 21362, May 18, 1982). This Circular rescinds and replaces all ofthese directives except Directive No. 19, ``Reports of the Department ofCommerce on International Transactions'' (43 FR 19272, May 4, 1978).OMB information collection reviews and other evaluations of statisticalactivities and publications have pointed to a need for more explicit guidanceto agencies on (1) planning statistical surveys so that they meet the requirementsset forth in 5 CFR Part 1320 for OMB approval under the Paperwork ReductionAct; (2) treating respondents to statistical surveys in a manner that ensuresthe public's continued willingness to provide accurate, timely informationto the Federal government for statistical purposes; and (3) documentingstatistical surveys and studies in such a way as to make their resultsas useful as possible, minimize the risk that statistics may be misinterpreted,and ensure the public that estimates have been produced by sound, replicablemethods. The Circular establishes guidelines on these aspects of statisticalwork, as well as on the use of standard classifications, data sources,and definitions for statistical and administrative purposes; on the compilation,release, and evaluation of principal Federal economic indicators; and onthe provision of statistical data to international organizations, consistentwith the requirements of Executive Order 10033.5. <T3>Coverage. </T3>The provisions of the Circular apply to all Federalagencies subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (see 5 CFR 1320.7(a)),to all statistical surveys and studies sponsored by those agencies, andto all publications resulting from such surveys and studies. 6. <T3>Agency Implementation. </T3>This Circular provides policy guidanceon statistical issues. This guidance should be applied to the extent permittedby the laws governing the agency's actions.7. <T3>Definitions. </T3>For the purposes of this Circular: a. ``Benchmarking'' is the reconciliation of one estimate with anotherthat is thought to be more accurate.  b. ``Data'' is used interchangeably with ``information'', as defined in5 CFR 1320.7(k), when referring to information collected in or resultingfrom statistical surveys and studies. c. An ``estimate'' is a numerical value or relationship that is derivedfrom a survey, model, other statistical or mathematical procedures, orprofessional judgment.  d. ``Imputation'' means assigning estimated values to fill in missing dataon individual statistical records or to replace data supplied by respondentsthat an agency believes to be in error. Changes to correct obvious codingor recording errors made by the agency are not imputations. Filling inmissing data with data that the same respondent has supplied on anotherstatistical or administrative record is not defined as imputation if thedata were supplied in response to the same question for the same time period.e. ``Publication'' means any release of statistical data or results ofa statistical study for distribution or sale to the public on paper, computertape, disk, or any other semipermanent medium, or by means of electronicdata bases. f. A Federal agency is the ``sponsor'' of a statistical survey or studyif:  (1) That agency conducts the survey or study using funds appropriated toit or available for discretionary use through other means;  (2) That agency provides funds appropriated to it to another Federal agency,other government organization, or a private contractor to conduct the surveyor study; or  (3) The survey or study is conducted under a grant from or cooperativeagreement with that agency and:  (A) The grantee or cooperating party is conducting the survey or studyat the specific request of the agency for the planning, operation, or evaluationof its programs; or  (B) The terms and conditions of the grant or agreement provide for prioror ongoing agency approval of the collection of information or the proceduresto be used in the survey or study. g. ``Statistics'' are the quantitative results of a survey or study. Statisticsinclude both aggregate estimates and the elements of individual data records.h. Information collected for ``statistical purposes'' is information collectedfor the purpose of reporting population characteristics, developing statisticalprocedures, or constructing sampling frames. Information collected forany other purpose is for ``nonstatistical purposes''. i. ``Statistical study'' means any study that makes use of a survey, model,or statistical or mathematical procedure or of estimates derived by thesemeans.  j. ``Statistical survey'' means a collection of data from or about anypopulation or group for the purpose of studying characteristics of thepopulation or group. Both collections of data gathered directly from respondentsin a census or sample of the study population and compilations of datafrom administrative records for statistical purposes are defined as statisticalsurveys. 8. <T3>Contents. </T3>The guidance provided by this Circular is set forthin the attachments:<ITAG tagnum="15">Attachment A_Planning of statistical surveys</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Attachment B_Treatment of respondents</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Attachment C_Statistical publications</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Attachment D_Documentation of methods and procedures </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Attachment E_Compilation, release, and evaluation of principal Federaleconomic indicators  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Attachment F_Use of standard classifications, data sources, and definitions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Attachment G_Provision of statistical information to internationalorganizations  </ITAG>9. <T3>Submission of Agency Plan. </T3>Within 120 days of the publicationof this Circular, the head of each agency shall submit to the Directora plan, including completion dates, for bringing all the agency's programsinto compliance with the guidelines in the Circular. Where appropriate,these plans shall be coordinated with the anticipated schedule for paperworkclearance reviews. 10. <T3>Judicial Review. </T3>This Circular is not intended to create any rightor benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party againstthe United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person. 11. <T3>Information Contact. </T3>Chief, Statistical Policy Office, Officeof Information and Regulatory Affairs. Telephone: (202) 395-3093. <ITAG tagnum="84">ATTACHMENT A_Circular No. A-<T2>XX</T2></ITAG>Planning of Statistical Surveys  1. This attachment outlines the documentation that is to accompany statisticalsurveys when they are submitted to OMB for approval under the PaperworkReduction Act, in order to demonstrate that the surveys meet the relevantrequirements of the Act and its implementing regulation, 5 CFR Part 1320.It replaces guidance on the planning of statistical surveys previouslycontained in Statistical Policy Directive No. 1, ``Standards for StatisticalSurveys,'' which is rescinded by this Circular. 2. With every request for OMB approval of a statistical survey under thePaperwork Reduction Act, the sponsoring agency shall submit supportingdocumentation to demonstrate that the survey has a useful purpose and isdesigned to accomplish that purpose as efficiently as possible. That documentationshall include the following information: a. <T3>The analytical purpose of the survey.</T3> The documentation shallstate specifically the analytical problem or research question the surveyis expected to solve or answer and shall explain the role the survey isexpected to play in the analysis. If the analysis calls for any individualmatch or combination of data collected directly from respondents in thesurvey with data from administrative sources, the documentation shall fullydescribe the purpose of and plans for the match or combination. Any suchmatch or combination should comply with the provisions in Attachment B,Section 3.c. When requesting OMB approval of a pretest, the sponsoringagency shall specify the aspect of the survey that is to be pretested,the design features of the actual survey that will be determined by theresults of the pretest, and the agency's plans and timetable for evaluatingthe pretest results. b. <T3>The statistical objectives of the survey.</T3> The documentation shallspecify the population to be investigated, the variables for which dataare to be gathered, the parameters to be estimated on the basis of surveydata, and the accuracy requirements for these estimates. If the surveyis to investigate relationships among variables, differences among populations,or changes over time, the documentation shall indicate the necessary accuracyof the estimates of these relationships, differences, or changes.  c. <T3>The need for a survey.</T3> For any survey that involves a new collectionof data from the public, the sponsoring agency shall describe its effortsto obtain suitable data from other sources, including existing surveys,administrative records, and model-based estimates, and explain why suchalternatives were rejected. d. <T3>The feasibility of the survey.</T3> The sponsoring agency shall submitdocumentation to demonstrate that the desired information exists and thatit can be obtained through a survey in a sufficiently timely manner andat a sufficient level of accuracy and detail to serve the analytical purposesof the survey.  e. <T3>Justification of the proposed frequency of the survey.</T3> If thesurvey is to be recurring, the sponsoring agency shall submit documentationto demonstrate that: (1) Measurable changes in the phenomena being studied are expected to occurin the proposed interval between data collections and that such changesneed to be estimated to fulfill the analytical purpose of the survey;(2) Without a survey at the proposed frequency, changes during this intervalcould not be estimated with an acceptable degree of accuracy; and (3) The sponsoring agency is able and intends to collect, process, andpublish data promptly if collection is at the frequency proposed. f. <T3>The survey design.</T3> The sponsoring agency shall submit documentationto demonstrate that: (1) The survey will collect all data not available from other sources thatare necessary for the analyses the survey is intended to support.(2) The survey is designed to satisfy the accuracy requirements of theanalyses it is intended to support. The documentation shall include estimatesof the variance of key parameters, including composites and projections,to demonstrate that they are likely to be within acceptable limits. Ifthe survey is intended to measure relationships among variables, differencesamong populations, or changes over time, the documentation shall also includecalculations to demonstrate that the relationships, differences, or changesof interest can probably be measured with the precision required. If thesample design calls for nonprobability sampling, the documentation shallexplain the basis for statements about the accuracy of the estimates. (3) The survey design is operationally feasible. The sponsoring agencyshall demonstrate that it is able to carry out the survey as designed.(4) Adequate steps have been taken to minimize the impact of nonsamplingerror on the estimates to be derived from survey data. The documentationshall identify the potential sources of error and give the sponsoring agency'sprojection of the size of such errors and their impact, individually andin the aggregate, on the estimates. All potential sources of nonsamplingerror shall be analyzed, including:  (A) Any differences between the target population (the universe of study)and the sampling frame; (B) Any conceptual differences between the parameters to be estimated onthe basis of survey data and the parameters desired for the planned analyses;(C) In statistical studies that involve control groups, dissimilaritiesbetween the study group and the control group; and (D) The expected extent and impact of overall and item nonresponse. Thedocumentation shall include estimates of response rates based on the sponsoringagency's prior experience (or the experience of the organization conductingthe survey) with the same survey or similar surveys. If the agency anticipatessignificantly different rates of nonresponse for different subgroups ofthe sampled population or for different questions in the survey, it shallprovide separate estimates for all such subgroups and questions. If timelinessof response is important (for example, if the sponsoring agency has specifiedcut-off dates for publishing or using data), it shall indicate the expectedresponse rates by the relevant cut-off dates. Under 5 CFR 1320.6(g), statistical surveys must be designed to produceresults that can be generalized to the universe of study. Accordingly,the sponsoring agency shall submit documentation to demonstrate eitherthat nonsampling error is sufficiently small that it is unlikely to biasestimates derived from survey data, or that effective methods have beendeveloped to adjust for such error. All benchmarking, imputation, and otheradjustment methods shall be described in the documentation.  (5) The proposed design satisfies the survey objectives in a way that minimizesthe burden on respondents, consistent with sound administrative practicesand reasonable cost to the government. In estimating the burden on respondents,agencies shall take into account the amount of time it will take to provideproper responses and the cost of the time of the particular individualswho will be asked to respond, including any time that will be requiredby agency follow-up. Before submitting a survey to OMB for approval, thesponsoring agency shall analyze the benefits and costs of a range of possibledesign options, including alternative sample sizes and data collectiontechniques. The documentation supporting the request for approval shallsummarize the results of this analysis.(6) The survey meets the conditions set forth in Attachment B, Section4, whenever response to the survey is mandatory. The documentation forsurveys that use mandatory reporting authority shall also provide a justificationof the use of such authority in terms of its effectiveness in meeting thesurvey's objectives. The documentation shall include the sponsoring agency'splans for enforcing the penalties for nonresponse.g. <T3>Performance and Quality Measures.</T3> The documentation shall specifywhat measures the sponsoring agency will use to evaluate the performanceof the survey and the quality of the data collected. It shall list theperformance indicators that will be calculated and available after completionof the survey, such as:(1) Nonresponse rates;(2) Rates of edit failure;(3) Percentage of cases requiring follow-up or reinterview; and(4) Timeliness measures, such as the number of days required to collectdata from respondents and the number of days between the reference dateof the survey and the date survey results are published.The documentation shall also include a description of the information validationtechniques and quality control procedures that will be used to verify thatdata in publications or in final data bases are equivalent to the dataactually collected. h. <T3>Disclosure control techniques.</T3> The documentation shall state whatdisclosure control techniques are to be used in each kind of release ofsurvey data (e.g., summary tabulations and microdata products). If variablesor table cells are to be suppressed, the documentation shall indicate whatvariables will be suppressed and what cross classifications are likelyto be lost. The description of disclosure control techniques shall be generalenough so that it cannot be used to breach the protection against disclosure.The documentation shall report the sponsoring agency's efforts to minimizethe impact of its disclosure control techniques on the usefulness of thesurvey data.i. <T3>Quality standards for publishing data.</T3> The documentation shallspecify what quality standards the sponsoring agency will use to determinewhether data from the survey are publishable or should be suppressed. j. <T3>Processing and reporting of survey data.</T3> The documentation shalldescribe:(1) The editing and imputation procedures to be used in processing thesurvey data;  (2) The procedures to be used in preparing estimates based on survey data,including benchmarking and seasonal adjustment methods and methods forcreating composite variables; and (3) The contents of all planned products of the survey, including tabulationsto be published, analytical reports to be prepared by the sponsoring agency,and public use data products, with the dates that the sponsoring agencyintends to release these products. If the data to be gathered in the surveyare likely to be of substantial interest for research purposes, the sponsoringagency should plan to produce a public-use data file. The data file shouldbe offered on a cost-recovery basis, i.e., with the fees for purchase oruse of the file set so as to recover the agency's incremental cost of preparing,maintaining, and distributing the file, as provided in OMB Circular A-25.The agency's documentation shall indicate whether the agency plans to releasea public-use data file in conformity with the provisions in AttachmentC, Section 2.d. The documentation shall also provide a schedule for suchrelease.k. <T3>The basis for any pledge of confidentiality.</T3> If the sponsoringagency intends to make a pledge of confidentiality covering informationcollected in the survey, the documentation shall include the statementrequired by Attachment B, Section 3.b.(1) of this Circular, and shall indicatewhether the agency has complied with all the other provisions of AttachmentB., Section 3.a. and 3.b. <ITAG tagnum="84">ATTACHMENT B_Circular No. A-<T2>XX</T2></ITAG>Treatment of Respondents 1. This attachment sets forth guidelines for the treatment of respondentsto statistical surveys, and replaces guidance on this subject previouslycontained in section 8 of Statistical Policy Directive No. 1. The guidelinesin this attachment are independent of obligations imposed on agencies bythe Privacy Act and apply regardless of whether the record systems supportingan agency's statistical programs are exempt from certain provisions ofthat Act under 5 U.S.C. 552a(k). Moreover, these guidelines are to be appliedin addition to all relevant provisions of 5 CFR Part 1320. The guidelinesfor matching or combining statistical and administrative information (Sections2.d.(3) and 3.c.) apply only to matches for statistical purposes and thereforedo not overlap the OMB Guidelines for conducting computerized matchingprograms (47 FR 21656, May 19, 1982), which specifically exclude from theircoverage matches for statistical purposes.2. <T3>Informing respondents.</T3> Agencies that sponsor statistical surveysshould ensure that potential respondents are provided the following informationat the time they are asked to participate in such surveys:a. The names of all sponsors of the survey, including organizations otherthan Federal agencies that are providing funding for the survey;b. The subjects about which respondents will be asked to supply information,in sufficient detail to alert respondents to any sensitive topics in thesurvey;c. For surveys in which information is to be collected periodically fromthe same respondents, the period during which and the frequency with whichthe respondent will be asked to supply information;d. The uses that are intended to be made of information from the survey(e.g., to publish statistics on a stated subject or to carry out a particularstudy). The sponsoring agency should explicitly state: (1) Whether it intends to use the information exclusively for statisticalpurposes. In cases for which that is the intent, the sponsoring agencyshould explicitly state the measures it has taken and its legal authorityto prevent nonstatistical uses;(2) Whether a pledge of confidentiality, made in accordance with the requirementsof Section 3.b. of this attachment, covers the information collected andthe fact of the respondent's participation in the survey; and(3) Whether it plans to match or combine survey data with information aboutsurvey respondents from administrative sources. If any individual matchor combination of survey data and administrative information is intended,the sponsoring agency should explain its nature and purpose to potentialrespondents; and e. If the survey uses mandatory reporting authority, a full quotation ofthe relevant text of the statute(s) and/or regulation(s) that establishthe mandatory reporting authority and the penalties for nonresponse. 3. <T3>Protection of confidentiality and privacy.</T3>a. A Federal agency that collects information for statistical purposesunder a pledge of confidentiality should protect that information frompublic disclosure to the extent permitted by law. Measures to provide thisprotection should include at a minimum:(1) Written policies that proscribe the use of such information for nonstatisticalpurposes; (2) Written policies and procedures for ensuring the physical securityof the information while in the possession of the agency, its contractors,or its grantees. Where appropriate, these should include policies implementingthe provisions of Appendix III of OMB Circular A-130 (50 FR 52730, December24, 1985), on the Security of Automated Information Systems;(3) A program to ensure that the agency's employees, contractors, and granteesare fully aware of their responsibilities for the safeguarding of confidentialinformation; and(4) Such other policies, programs, or agency rules as are available andnecessary to protect from public disclosure respondent information thatthe agency believes qualifies for exemption from disclosure under the Freedomof Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).Policies, programs, or rules established for this purpose should eliminateany legal or administrative discretion otherwise retained by the agencyto make public disclosures that are not consistent with the provisionsof this section. Before submitting to OMB for review any proposed informationcollection for statistical purposes that is to be covered by a pledge ofconfidentiality, the sponsoring agency shall have resolved any legal questionsaffecting its ability to prevent public disclosure of the information.b. To ensure consistent and accurate public understanding of pledges ofstatistical confidentiality, no agency should make such a pledge of confidentialityunless:(1) It has provided a statement to OMB that it believes the informationcovered by the pledge is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of InformationAct, indicating upon what exemption it relies and, if the exemption isby statute, citing the relevant statute; (2) It has met the requirements of Section 3.a. of this attachment forprotecting confidentiality; and (3) It includes in the information collection the following uniform pledgeof confidentiality:<ITAG tagnum="21">This information collection conforms to legal and administrative standardsestablished by the Federal government to assure confidential treatmentof statistical information. The information you provide will be used onlyfor statistical purposes and will not be published or released in any formthat would reveal specific information reported by any individually identifiablerespondent. The [name of sponsoring agency or department] has determinedthat the information you provide, as well as the fact that you have participatedin this survey, is exempt from public disclosure under the Freedom of InformationAct.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">In any case where potential respondents might misinterpret agencystatements concerning statistical use or confidential treatment, OMB mayrequire the sponsoring agency to display on information collection forms,or otherwise convey to potential respondents, an explicit statement ofnoncompliance with the confidentiality provisions of this Circular. c. If information is collected for statistical purposes, as stated to respondentspursuant to Section 2.d.(1) of this attachment, any individual match orcombination of that information with information from administrative recordsshould meet the following conditions:(1) The match or combination is exclusively for statistical purposes;(2) The sponsor of each statistical survey involved in the match or combinationhas informed all respondents as required in Section 2.d.(3) of this attachment;and(3) Any match or combination involving a statistical survey is conductedas described in the sponsoring agency's request for OMB approval of thesurvey, submitted in accordance with Attachment A, Section 2.a. of thisCircular. 4. <T3>Designing and conducting surveys that use mandatory reporting authority.</T3>Unless there is a statutory requirement that the survey be designed otherwise,any statistical survey that uses mandatory reporting authority should meetthe following conditions:a. The survey is designed so that all units in the population of study,or within each designated sampling stratum of the population, have an equalprobability of being included in the survey;b. If the survey requires periodic responses by the same respondents, thesample is redrawn at regular intervals not to exceed 3 years; andc. The information that respondents are required to provide includes onlyfactual information that can be obtained from and verified by respondents'records. <ITAG tagnum="84">ATTACHMENT C_Circular No. A-<T2>XX</T2></ITAG>Statistical Publications1. This attachment sets forth guidelines for publishing the results ofstatistical surveys and studies. It replaces guidance previously containedin Statistical Policy Directive No. 2, ``Standards for the Publicationof Statistics,'' which is rescinded by this Circular. 2. <T3>Obligation to publish. </T3>a. Agencies that sponsor statistical surveys and studies should eitherpublish the results or else make them available upon request in a formthat does not reveal information about any individually-identifiable respondent.Nonpublished results should be maintained in a data base that is sufficientlyaccessible that requests by other agencies or the public for tabulationsor summaries can be met within 90 days. b. Except as provided in Attachment E of this Circular for principal Federaleconomic indicators, no data collected in a statistical survey should besuppressed or withheld from release unless:(1) Suppression is necessary to protect the confidentiality of informationprovided by individual respondents, or(2) The data fail to meet the quality standards for publication that thesponsoring agency has specified in its request for OMB approval of thedata collection, as required in Attachment A, Section 2.i. of this Circular.If it is necessary to suppress data because they fail to meet these standards,the sponsoring agency shall report to OMB the data items to be suppressedand the basis for suppression, as soon as the agency has that information,and should: (A) Notify potential users that the data will not be published or otherwisereleased; and(B) Make no use of the suppressed data in any published reports or estimates.c. Agencies should annually publish, either in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> or in an agency publication, a catalog of thestatistical data in their files, indicating the form in which they areavailable to the public (e.g., hardcopy reports, public use tapes, online,tabulations upon request), the period of time for which they will remainavailable in each form, and the name, address, and telephone number ofthe office within the issuing agency to which inquiries may be directed.d. Agencies should provide for the prompt release of public-use data filesthat enable analysts outside the sponsoring agency to reproduce and verifythe sponsoring agency's results, test alternative hypotheses, and developalternative interpretations. If survey plans submitted to OMB includedthe preparation of public-use data files (see Attachment A, Section 2.j.(3)),the sponsoring agency should release these files no later than 90 daysafter the sponsoring agency's first published reports (except for preliminarysummary tabulations) based on survey data. If such files are not availablewhen the first reports are issued, the reports should contain a noticeregarding their forthcoming availability. 3. <T3>Use of standard statistical classifications and definitions.</T3> Agenciesshould use the standard classifications and definitions set forth in AttachmentF when publishing statistics for which there are such standards. When reportingstatistics for which there are no such standards, the classifications anddefinitions used should support the broadest possible range of analyticaluses of the data. Publications should explain all standard classificationsand definitions that are used and provide appropriate references. 4. <T3>Presentation of statistics.</T3> The following guidelines apply tothe presentation of statistical data in publications. a. Data tables, charts, and graphs. Tables, charts, and graphs should bedesigned and labeled so that their meaning is clear and unambiguous. Thepublication should include an explanation of all technical terms and thedefinitions of all categorizations or appropriate references for them.Any term whose usage differs from common usage or might otherwise be misconstruedshould be clearly defined. Labels should be properly aligned, groups clearlyseparated, and all group totals included. Labels for subgroups should besufficiently indented to ensure that relationships among the categoriesare clear. If all subcategories are not displayed, there should be an explanationof what has been omitted. If tables contain percentages, the populationtotals that are needed to reproduce the numbers on which the percentagesare based should be reported. b. Complete presentation.(1) Any publication that contains data tables based on sample surveys shouldalso report estimates of standard deviations or variances. Variances andstandard deviations should be directly measured from the sample wheneverpossible. If generalized variances or other approximations to the variancesare used in the publication, the publication should clearly inform usersthat the variance estimates are approximations and statistics that relyon these variances may be inaccurate. The publication should fully describethe methods used to estimate variances. (2) To enable users to evaluate further the reliability of estimates, theagency issuing the publication should publish, or offer and be preparedto provide upon request, the actual number of observations in each publishedtable cell. (3) To enable users to discern the extent and impact of imputation, agenciesshould identify imputed data items with separate codes when they publishunsummarized data (as in public-use data files). When they publish summarizeddata, agencies should report the percentage of observations that are imputedfor each variable included in the summary and should indicate (by codeor other means) the percentage of data items that are imputed in each publishedtable cell. c. Discussion of findings. The evidence to support conclusions and statementsabout causes and effects should be presented in full in the publication.Inferences about differences and changes should be based upon generallyaccepted statistical techniques, which should be identified and describedin the publication. d. Preliminary and revised estimates. Any data or reports that are releasedprior to final editing, compilation, or correction should be clearly labeledas preliminary. The release should explain the limitations of the preliminaryestimates, describe the nature of future corrections, and provide the scheduleddates for the publication of revisions. When revised data are published,the quantitative difference between the preliminary and revised data shouldbe shown, the revision process described, and the effects of the revisionson the interpretation of the data explained. 5. <T3>Documentation.</T3> All publications of results of a statistical surveyor study should include documentation that describes the purpose of andthe procedures for conducting the survey or study and the quality and limitationsof the results. For reports that are part of a regular series, the requireddocumentation may be published separately but should be kept completelycurrent and accurate. For one-time surveys or studies and for the firstpublication in a series, the documentation should be available at the sametime as the publication. Public-use data files should provide the documentationboth in paper form and as part of the file. The documentation should cover:a. The purpose of the study. b. A description of the study design. The documentation should explainthe rationale for the study design and how the study was conducted. Thedescription should be sufficiently detailed to serve most needs of theprincipal users of the publication and to ensure that all users are alertedto aspects of the study design that affect the interpretation of results.It should include a brief account of the outcome of the quality controlprocedures used. The publication should refer the user to the completedocumentation of methods and procedures that the sponsoring agency maintainsin accordance with Attachment D of this Circular. c. The sources of all statistical data used in the study. The documentationshould clearly identify data that were collected through different surveysor from different administrative record systems and describe how such datawere changed through editing and imputation. The documentation should clearlyidentify constructed and estimated variables and describe the methods usedto construct composite variables and the models or statistical proceduresused to develop estimates. If data have been subjected to aggregate adjustments,such as benchmarking or seasonal adjustment, this should be clearly notedand the adjustment methods described. d. A discussion of the limitations of the survey or study results. Sufficientinformation should be presented to enable the user to judge the accuracyof the reported results of the study and the extent to which the resultscan be extrapolated or generalized to other populations or circumstances.6. <T3>Review of publications.</T3> Before releasing any publication, theagency should review it to ensure that it clearly and correctly presentsinformation and that it complies with the standards in this Circular. Agenciesthat regularly issue statistical publications should establish a formalreview process with written procedures and specific assignments of responsibility.The process should provide for independent review of each publication byat least one competent professional who was not involved in the preparationof the publication or the survey or study on which it is based. 7. <T3>Assistance to users.</T3> All publications should contain the name,address, and telephone number of an office within the agency issuing thepublication that may be contacted for further information or assistance.The documentation of public-use files should indicate what user servicesare available for the file and what period of time such services will remainavailable. <ITAG tagnum="84">ATTACHMENT D_Circular No. A-<T2>XX</T2></ITAG>Documentation of Methods and Procedures 1. Agencies that regularly publish statistics should maintain completeand current documentation of all methods and procedures used to producethese estimates. This documentation should be publicly available in itsentirety and therefore should not contain any information that the agencyconsiders to be exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of InformationAct (5 U.S.C. 552). The documentation should include, but is not limitedto, the areas detailed in this attachment. 2. <T3>Surveys.</T3> Agencies that sponsor statistical surveys should maintainfor each survey a file documenting the survey design and the operationsused to collect, process, and publish data from the survey. The file shouldbe maintained until the survey is no longer being conducted and demandfor the data no longer exists. The documentation file should include:a. Descriptions of: the target population; the sampling frame; the correspondencebetween the target population and the sampling frame; the sample design;collection methods, locations, and dates; follow-up procedures; the methodsused to edit and tabulate survey data; any imputation and adjustment proceduresapplied to survey data; and the procedures used to control the qualityof survey operations.b. Copies of the forms used in the survey, including the survey questionnaireand the instructions to both respondents and interviewers;c. The performance statistics, such as those presented in Attachment A,Section 2.g. of this Circular, that the sponsoring agency, its contractors,or its grantees have used for management and evaluation of the survey;andd. The results of any evaluations of survey operations and data, includingquality control audits.3. <T3>All imputation procedures, coding procedures, and procedures used toadjust data acquired through surveys or administrative records.</T3> Thedocumentation of such procedures, including benchmarking, revision, andseasonal adjustment procedures, should be complete enough to enable a competentprofessional from outside the agency to duplicate the procedures and results.4. <T3>Models.</T3> The documentation of models used to generate estimatesshould be complete enough to enable a competent professional from outsidethe agency to use the model and duplicate the sponsoring agency's results.Model documentation should include the following: a model specification;a summary of the purpose of the model, including its principles, structure,and assumptions; a complete mathematical statement of the model; a descriptionof any data base used with the model; a description of the validation,verification, and audit record associated with the model; and the resultsof using the model, including both the raw outputs and analysis based onthose outputs. If the documentation is for a computer model, it should also include auser's guide explaining how to run the model. 5. <T3>The procedures used to generate statistical estimates that are requiredby statute or by this Circular to be used by Federal agencies in makingdeterminations about the benefits, obligations, privileges, or rights ofspecific individuals or entities.</T3> Complete, current documentationof all procedures, including specific assumptions and decision rules, shouldbe available in published form at the time such estimates are released.All statistical estimates used in making such determinations should themselvesbe published. <ITAG tagnum="84">ATTACHMENT E_Circular No. A-<T2>XX</T2></ITAG>Compilation, Release, and Evaluation of Principal Federal Economic Indicators1. This attachment replaces Statistical Policy Directive No. 3, ``Compilation,Release and Evaluation of Principal Federal Economic Indicators,'' whichthis Circular rescinds.2. Agencies that publish statistical estimates that have been designatedby the Director of OMB as principal Federal economic indicators shouldfollow the procedures prescribed in this attachment for the compilation,release, and evaluation of these estimates.  3. <T3>Designation of Principal Indicators. </T3>The Director of OMB shalldetermine, after consultation with the affected Federal agencies, the statisticsand estimates to be designated as principal Federal economic indicatorsand covered by this attachment to the Circular. At the beginning of eachcalendar year, OMB will publish the list of indicators covered and thescheduled dates for release of each indicator during the year.  4. <T3>Prompt Release. </T3>The interval between the end of the period towhich the statistics refer and the date when the data or estimates arereleased to the public should be as short as practicable. Agencies shouldcompile and release series that are issued quarterly or more frequentlywithin 22 working days of the end of the reference period.  5. <T3>Release Schedule. </T3>The releasing agency is responsible for ensuringthat the interested public is aware of the release time and date. The lastreport of each calendar year should contain the time and date of all reportsin the upcoming year. In addition, each release should include an announcementof the time and date of the next release. The releasing agency shall providea schedule of releases for the upcoming calendar year to the StatisticalPolicy Office, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, OMB, by November30th of each year. Changes in the release schedule may occur only if special,unforeseen circumstances arise. The releasing agency should announce andfully explain any schedule changes as soon as it has determined they areunavoidable.  There should be one office in the agency that can provide the release scheduleof all the agency's principal economic indicators. The name, address, andtelephone number of this office should be readily available to the public.Agencies should establish and maintain no more than two specific timesof day for the release of their principal economic indicators and shouldonly release indicators at such designated times.  6. <T3>Announcement of Changes. </T3>Agencies should announce any plannedchange in data collection, analysis, or estimation methods that may affectthe interpretation of a principal economic indicator as far in advanceof the change as possible. The agency should include the announcement ina regular report of the economic indicator. When possible, a period forpublic comment should be provided between the announcement of an intendedchange and its implementation. At a minimum, for quarterly and monthlyseries, the agency should announce the change at least three reports beforethe first report affected by the change. For weekly and annual series,the announcement should precede the first report affected by the changeby at least three months. In the first report affected by the change, theagency should include a complete description of the change and its impact. Agencies should fully explain unforeseeable changes due to special circumstancesas soon as they are known and in the first report affected by the change. 7. <T3>Release Procedure. </T3>The statistical agency that produces each principaleconomic indicator should issue it in a press release or other printedreport. The agency should issue a press release where this will significantlyspeed up the dissemination of data to the public.  Each statistical agency is responsible for establishing procedures to ensurethat there is no premature release of information or data estimates duringthe time required for preparation of the public report. This includes theprotection of public-use data banks, which should not receive any dataor estimates until they are officially released. As soon as copies of materialsfor public release have been prepared, the agency should physically securethem.  Except for the authorized distribution described in this section, agenciesshould ensure that no information or data estimates are released beforethe official release time.  The agency shall provide prerelease information to the President, throughthe Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, as soon as it is available.The agency should grant prerelease access to others only under the followingconditions: a. The agency head has established whatever security arrangements, andimposed whatever conditions on the granting of access, that are necessaryto prevent unauthorized dissemination or use.  b. The agency head will ensure that any person granted access has beenfully informed of, and has agreed to, these conditions. c. Any prerelease of information under an embargo will not precede theofficial release time by more than 30 minutes.  d. In all cases, prerelease access will precede the official release timeonly to the extent necessary for an orderly review of the data.  All employees of the Executive Branch who receive prerelease distributionof information and data estimates as authorized above are responsible forensuring that no release occurs prior to the official release time. Exceptfor members of the staff of the agency issuing the principal economic indicatorwho have been designated by the agency head to provide technical explanationsof the data, employees of the Executive Branch should not comment publiclyon the data until at least one hour after the official release time.  8. <T3>Preliminary Estimates and Revisions.</T3> Deciding when to releasea principal economic indicator requires the balancing of accuracy and timeliness.Agencies should not withhold information needed to evaluate current economicconditions by imposing unnecessarily stringent accuracy requirements onpreliminary estimates. They should, however, fully inform the public ofthe degree of inaccuracy that is accepted to accommodate timely release.In the case of estimates based on probability samples, agencies shouldpublish measures of uncertainty based on the sampling variance and considerationof nonsampling errors, e.g., a root-mean-square error estimate or its equivalent.In cases where the confidence interval about any single point estimatecannot be estimated, results should be presented only in the form of aninterval estimate. Methods used to estimate upper and lower bound valuesthat define the interval estimate should be designed to meet three objectives:(1) Preliminary interval estimates should include the final point estimatewith high probability; (2) the width of the interval should be consistentwith the error history of the indicator being estimated; and (3) the boundvalues should be consistent with any confidence intervals that can be estimatedfor components of the indicator.For either point or interval estimates, agencies shall apply the followingguidelines when issuing and evaluating preliminary data and revisions: a. Agencies should clearly identify estimates as preliminary or revised; b. If the difference between preliminary and final aggregate estimates,or the width of a preliminary interval estimate, is large relative to averageperiod-to-period differences, the agency should either take steps to improvethe accuracy of preliminary estimates or delay the release of estimatesuntil a reliable estimate can be made;  c. If preliminary estimates show signs of a consistent bias (for example,if revisions are consistently in the same direction), the agency shouldtake steps to eliminate this bias; d. Revisions occurring for routine reasons, such as benchmarking and updatingof seasonality factors, should be consolidated and released simultaneously; e. Agencies should release routine revisions of a principal economic indicatoronly as part of the regular reporting schedule; and f. Revisions occurring for other than routine reasons should be fully explainedand should be released as soon as adjustments can be completed.  9. <T3>Granting of Exceptions. </T3>Prior to taking any action that may becontrary to the provisions of Attachment E, the head of a releasing agencyshall consult with the Director of OMB. If the Director determines thatthe action is contrary to the provisions of this attachment, the head ofthe agency may apply for an exception. Any agency requesting an exceptionshall demonstrate that the proposed exception is necessary and consistentwith the purposes of the Circular.  10. <T3>Performance Evaluation. </T3>Each agency that issues a principal Federaleconomic indicator shall submit a performance evaluation of that indicatorto the Statistical Policy Office, Office of Information and RegulatoryAffairs, OMB, every three years. A schedule for the performance evaluationof data series or estimates designated as principal Federal economic indicatorswill be prepared by the Statistical Policy Office. The evaluation shalladdress the following issues:  a. The accuracy and reliability of the series, e.g., the magnitude anddirection of all revisions, the performance of the series relative to establishedbenchmarks, and the proportion and effect of nonresponses or responsesreceived after the publication of preliminary estimates;  b. The accuracy, completeness, and accessibility of documentation describingthe methods used in compiling and revising the indicator; c. The agency's performance in meeting the designated release scheduleand the prompt release objective of this Circular; d. The agency's ability to avoid disclosure prior to the scheduled releasetime; and  e. Any additional issues that the Director may specify in writing to theagency at least 6 months in advance of the scheduled submission date. The Director will review the evaluation to determine whether the indicatoris prepared and published in conformity with all OMB statistical policies,standards, and guidelines. OMB will include a summary of the year's evaluationsand their reviews in the annual report to Congress required by 44 U.S.C.3514.<ITAG tagnum="84">ATTACHMENT F_Circular No. A-<T2>XX</T2></ITAG>Use of Standard Classifications, Data Sources, and Definitions1. This attachment replaces guidance on the use of standard classifications,data sources, and definitions previously contained in Statistical PolicyDirectives 5-17 and in the directive on ``Comparability of Statistics onBusiness Size'' (47 FR 21362, May 18, 1982), all of which this Circularrescinds. Nine of the standards established in these directives are retainedin the Circular. Five others have been discontinued as government-widestatistical standards, either because they have not proven useful for thestatistical purposes intended or because they are used by only one or twoagencies in collecting and publishing statistics and can effectively bemaintained by these agencies. The discontinued standards are a standardreference base period for Federal government general-purpose index numbers;standard Federal administrative regions; the standard industrial classificationof enterprises; the standard classification of fields of science and engineering;and the standard gas pressure base.2. Agencies should use standard statistical classifications, data sources,and definitions for the purposes and in the manner specified in this section.a. <T3>Metropolitan Statistical Areas</T3>All agencies that conduct statistical programs to collect and publish datafor Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) should use the most recent definitionsof Metropolitan Statistical Areas established by the Office of Managementand Budget. OMB establishes and maintains the definitions of Metropolitan StatisticalAreas solely for statistical purposes. In periodically reviewing and revisingthe MSA definitions, OMB does not take into account or attempt to anticipateany nonstatistical uses that may be made of the definitions, nor will OMBmodify the definitions to meet the requirements of any nonstatistical program.Therefore, if an agency uses the MSA definitions in a nonstatistical program,it is that agency's responsibility to ensure that the definitions are appropriatefor such use. In cases where an agency is publishing for comment a proposedregulation that would use the MSA definitions for a nonstatistical purpose,the agency should seek public comment on the proposed use of the MSA definitions.Agencies that use the MSA definitions in a nonstatistical program may modifythe MSA definitions, exclusively for the purposes of that program. However,in order to avoid confusion with the standard statistical definitions,all such modifications should be clearly identified as deviations fromthe OMB standard definitions of Metropolitan Statistical Areas.b. <T3>Standard Industrial Classification </T3>All agencies that conduct statistical programs to collect and publish establishmentdata by industry type should use the Standard Industrial Classification(SIC), as published in the most recent edition of the <T3>Standard Industrial Classification Manual</T3>. OMB establishes and maintains the Standard Industrial Classification solelyfor statistical purposes. In periodically reviewing and revising the SIC,OMB does not take into account or attempt to anticipate any nonstatisticaluses that may be made of the classification, nor will OMB modify the classificationto meet the requirements of any nonstatistical program.Therefore, if an agency uses the SIC in a nonstatistical program, it isthat agency's responsibility to ensure that the classification is appropriatefor such use. In cases where an agency is publishing for comment a proposedregulation that would use the SIC for a nonstatistical purpose, the agencyshould seek public comment on the proposed use of the SIC. Agencies thatuse the SIC in a nonstatistical program may modify the SIC, exclusivelyfor the purposes of that program. However, in order to avoid confusionwith the standard statistical classification, all such modifications shouldbe clearly identified as deviations from the Standard Industrial Classification.Any agency requesting or requiring an establishment to provide its SICcode as part of an information collection shall clearly identify withinthe information collection instrument or its directions the name, address,and telephone number of a unit within that agency that will assist respondentsin determining their appropriate SIC code. When submitting any such informationcollection request to OMB for clearance, the agency shall disclose anymodifications it has made in the SIC for the purposes of any nonstatisticalprogram of which the information collection is a part and shall demonstratethat it has sufficient and appropriately-trained personnel to assist itsrespondents in determining their SIC codes.c. <T3>Standard Occupational Classification</T3>All agencies that conduct statistical programs to collect and publish databy occupation should use the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC),as published in the most recent edition of the <T3>Standard Occupational Classification Manual</T3>. OMB establishes and maintains the Standard Occupational Classificationsolely for statistical purposes. In periodically reviewing and revisingthe SOC, OMB does not take into account or attempt to anticipate any nonstatisticaluses that may be made of the classification, nor will OMB modify the classificationto meet the requirements of any nonstatistical program.Therefore, if an agency uses the SOC in a nonstatistical program, it isthat agency's responsibility to ensure that the classification is appropriatefor such use. In cases where an agency is publishing for comment a proposedregulation that would use the SOC for a nonstatistical purpose, the agencyshould seek public comment on the proposed use of the SOC. Agencies thatuse the SOC in a nonstatistical program may modify the SOC, exclusivelyfor the purposes of that program. However, in order to avoid confusionwith the standard statistical classification, all such modifications shouldbe clearly identified as deviations from the Standard Occupational Classification.Any agency requesting or requiring respondents to provide SOC codes aspart of an information collection shall clearly identify within the informationcollection instrument or its directions the name, address, and telephonenumber of a unit within that agency that will assist respondents in determiningtheir appropriate SOC codes. When submitting any such information collectionrequest to OMB for clearance, the agency shall disclose any modificationsit has made in the SOC for the purposes of any nonstatistical program ofwhich the information collection is a part and shall demonstrate that ithas sufficient and appropriately-trained personnel to assist its respondentsin determining their SOC codes.d. <T3>Standard Business Size Categories</T3>When publishing statistics, agencies should use the size categories inthe table below to classify reporting businesses by number of employees,revenues, or assets. Tabulations based on these categories should be accompaniedby precise definitions of the variables used to measure size and of thetype of reporting unit tabulated. <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L0,tp9,p0,8/9,i1,s25,xs32,r25</C><T4>Business Size Categories</T4><ITAG tagnum="96">[Revenues or assets (dollars)]</ITAG><H1> </H1><H1> </H1><H1> </H1><ITAG tagnum="1"><D>under </D><D>$25,000.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$25,000 <D> under </D><D>$50,000.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$50,000 <D>under </D><D>$100,000.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$100,000 <D>under </D><D>$250,000.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$250,000 <D>under </D><D>$500,000.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$500,000 <D>under </D><D>$1 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$1 million <D>under </D><D>$2.5 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$2.5 million <D>under </D><D>$5 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$5 million <D>under </D><D>$10 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$10 million <D>under </D><D>$25 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$25 million <D>under </D><D>$50 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$50 million <D>under </D><D>$100 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$100 million <D>under </D><D>$250 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$250 million <D>under </D><D>$500 million.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$500 million <D>under </D><D>$1 billion.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$1 billion <D>under </D><D>$2.5 billion.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$2.5 billion <D>under </D><D>$5 billion.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">$5 billion <D/>or more<D> </D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L0,tp9,p0,8/9,i1,s25,xs32,7</C><T4>Business Size Categories</T4><ITAG tagnum="96">[Employment (number of employees)]</ITAG><H1> </H1><H1> </H1><H1> </H1><ITAG tagnum="1">0<D>(none) </D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1<D>under </D><D>5</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5 <D>under </D><D>10</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10 <D>under </D><D>20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">20 <D>under </D><D>50</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">50 <D>under </D><D>100</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100 <D>under </D><D>250</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">250 <D>under </D><D>500</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">500 <D>under </D><D>1,000</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1,000 <D>under </D><D>2,500</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2,500 <D>under </D><D>10,000</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10,000 <D/>or more <D> </D></ITAG></ITAG>Agencies may combine adjacent size categories or truncate the size scale,if the limited scope of the data, the need to ensure the confidentialityof individual responses, or very large sampling variability makes it undesirableto publish data at the recommended level of detail. The reasons for suchactions should be noted in the affected publication. Unless the categoriesare combined to ensure confidentiality of individual responses, agenciesshould, when they publish data that combine size categories, maintain unpublishedestimates or internal documentation sufficient to allow reasonable retrospectiveestimates of the unpublished detail. Agencies may define additional partitionswithin the standard categories to meet particular analytical needs, butthese should be in addition to, not in lieu of, the standard categories.e. <T3>Standard Payroll Reporting Period</T3>Agency requests to employers for data from their payroll records to beused for statistical purposes should refer to the payroll period that includesthe twelfth day of the month.f. <T3>Source of Population Data for Use in the Administration of FederalPrograms</T3>Agencies that are required by law to allocate Federal funds or determineeligibility for participation in a Federal program on the basis of thetotal population of State, county, or local units of government shoulduse_to the extent permitted by law_the most current population estimatesof the Bureau of the Census that have been published for all units of therelevant levels of government. If total population is used with other variablesin a ratio or formula that is the basis of allocating Federal funds ordetermining eligibility for participation in a Federal program, unlessotherwise required by law all the variables shall refer to the same year,which shall be the most recent year for which all data are available.g. <T3>Standard Source of Labor Force and Unemployment Estimates for Use inthe Administration of Federal Programs</T3>Agencies that are required by law to allocate Federal funds or determineeligibility for participation in a Federal program on the basis of theemployment, unemployment, or labor force participation levels or ratesin the population or any subgroups of the population of State, county,or local units of government, should use_to the extent permitted by law_themost current estimates published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics thatare available for all units of the relevant levels of government.h. <T3>Definition of Poverty</T3>Agencies that are required by law to use the definition of poverty establishedby the Office of Management and Budget, and agencies that publish statisticalestimates of the number of persons, families, or households in poverty,should continue to use as the definition of poverty the annual income thresholdsthat for 1986 and prior years have been published by the Bureau of theCensus in its Current Population Reports, P-60 series. For 1987 and subsequentyears, the definition of poverty shall be the 1986 thresholds adjustedannually by the year-over-year change in the Consumer Price Index for allurban consumers. i. <T3>Racial and Ethnic Categories</T3>To the extent permitted by law, agencies should use the following categoriesfor all purposes that require classifying people by racial and/or ethnicbackground. A person's racial and/or ethnic background is determined bythe way in which the person chooses to be identified in his/her community.<ITAG tagnum="16">Racial Categories:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">American Indian or Alaska Native</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">Asian or Pacific Islander</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">Black</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">White</ITAG>In establishing reporting systems and collecting data, agencies shouldpermit individuals to identify themselves as ``other'' if they believethey do not fall into any of the categories listed above.<ITAG tagnum="14">Ethnic Categories:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">Hispanic</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">Not of Hispanic origin</ITAG>Agencies may use other, more detailed categories as long as such categoriescan be aggregated into the basic categories listed in this section.<ITAG tagnum="84">ATTACHMENT G_Circular No. A-<T2>XX</T2></ITAG>Provision of Statistical Information to International Organizations1. This attachment replaces Statistical Policy Directive No. 18, ``Providingof Statistical Information to International Organizations,'' which thisCircular rescinds.2. In accordance with Section 1 of Executive Order 10033 of February 8,1949, as amended (see 22 USCA 286f), the Director of OMB will determine,with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, what statistical informationshall be provided in response to official requests received by the UnitedStates Government from any international organization of which the UnitedStates is a member, and will determine which agency or agencies shall preparethe statistical information to be provided. Agencies that have not beenpreviously designated by the Director to prepare such information shallnotify the Director and receive his concurrence before compiling or providingany statistical information for publication or use by any internationalorganization of which the United States is a member.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-696 Filed 1-19-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3110-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>