<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88914-0010 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-14-88.f2.A1009</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">ARCHITECTURAL AND TRANSPORTATION BARRIERS COMPLIANCE BOARD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">36 CFR Part 1190</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Minimum Guidelines and Requirements for Accessible Design</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>United States Architectural and Transportation BarriersCompliance Board (ATBCB).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final Rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Architectural and Transportation Barriers ComplianceBoard (ATBCB) hereby amends the <T3>Minimum Guidelines and Requirements for Accessible Design </T3>(MGRAD)to provide minimum guidelines and requirements for accessible leased facilities.MGRAD is issued by the ATBCB pursuant to section 502(b)(7) of the RehabilitationAct of 1973, to establish minimum guidelines and requirements for standardsissued by the four standard-setting agencies under the Architectural BarriersAct of 1968.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>September 14, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Mark W. Smith, ATBCB, 1111 18thStreet, NW., Suite 500, Washington, DC 20036, (202) 653-7834 (v/TDD). Thisis not a toll-free number. This final rule is available on cassette atthe above address for persons with visual impairments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">A. Background</ITAG>The Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (ATBCB)was established by section 502 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended(Pub. L. 93-112, 29 U.S.C. 792) to insure compliance with standards prescribedpursuant to the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (Pub. L.90-480, 42 U.S.C. 4151 et seq.) (the Act). The Act is intended to insurethat certain buildings, including leased buildings, financed with Federalfunds are designed, constructed, and altered in accordance with standardsissued by four Federal agencies to provide ready access and use of suchbuildings to physically handicapped people. The four agencies authorizedto issue standards for all design, construction and alteration subjectto the Act are the Department of Defense for its buildings and facilities;the Department of Housing and Urban Development for residential structures;the U.S. Postal Service for its buildings and facilities; and the GeneralServices Administration for all other buildings and facilities.A 1978 amendment to Section 502 of the Rehabilitation Act, Pub. L. 95-602,authorized the Board to issue minimum guidelines and requirements (MGRAD)for these standards. The MGRAD now in effect was published on August 20,1982 (47 FR 33862), and is codified at 36 CFR Part 1190.<ITAG tagnum="84">B. Rulemaking History</ITAG>One MGRAD section, 36 CFR 1190.34, was originally intended to contain requirementsfor standards for leased buildings. It was reserved, however, in recognitionof the fact that litigation was pending concerning whether the Act requiresthat buildings be made accessible at the time of leasing, or only as theyare otherwise altered. That litigation was resolved by a court decisionholding that the Architectural Barriers Act (the Act) requires that buildingsbe made accessible at the time of leasing. <T3>Rose </T3>v. <T3>United States Postal Service, </T3>774 F.2d 1355 (9th Cir. 1985). Inearly 1986, a decision was made not to seek <T3>certiorari </T3>in the United States Supreme Court. One standard-issuingauthority has issued interim standards intended to carry out the court'smandate. 51 FR 13122 (April 17, 1986).The ATBCB's staff was directed by the Board Chairperson at the Board'smeeting on March 13, 1986, to begin development of MGRAD provisions forandSection; 1190.34 and to work with the four standard-setting agencies inthat effort. The resulting working group also included representativesof the Department of Justice, whose member of the Board was then chairpersonof the Board's Standards Committee. The Standards Committee approved theresulting proposal at its meeting on November 18, 1986. The Board approvedthe proposal on November 19, 1986 and it was published on February 11,1987 (52 FR 4352).The February 11, 1987 notice of proposed rulemaking also proposed provisionsthat would have completed another reserved section of MGRAD, andSection;1190.190, regarding detectable warning surfaces that may be used as warningsfor visually impaired persons. On September 16, 1987 (52 FR 34955) theATBCB issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to incorporate a number oftechnical provisions of the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS)and current American National Standards Institute standard on accessibility(A117.1 (1986)) into MGRAD. As stated in the September notice of proposedrulemaking, comments received to date on the detectable warning surfacesissue will be considered together with any future comments on the subjectthat might be received in response to that notice. The ATBCB intends tomake some decision on detectable warning surfaces at the conclusion ofthe rulemaking proceeding initiated with the September notice. MGRAD andSection;andSection;1190.70(e)(9) and 1190.80(f) will remain reserved until that time.Seven comments addressed the February 11, 1987 proposed provisions forleased facilities. Three of the seven merely expressed general supportfor the proposal. Those comments which addressed the proposed rule withmore specificity, and the Board's responses to those comments, are describedin the following section-by-section discussion of the final rule. In additionto the changes mentioned therein, minor typographical and stylistic changeshave been incorporated into the final rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">C. Overview of the Final Rule</ITAG>The final rule establishes the following requirements at andSection; 1190.34:Subsection (a)Section 1190.34(a) requires that any building or facility or portion thereofsubject to the Architectural Barriers Act that is to be leased by the FederalGovernment, without having been designed or constructed in accordance withits specifications, must comply with the accessibility requirements ofandSection; 1190.31, New construction, or incorporate the features listedin andSection; 1190.33(c), Alterations. It further requires, where buildingscomplying with both andSection;andSection; 1190.31 and 1190.33 are available,that reasonable preference be given to buildings offered for lease thatmeet the requirements for new construction. This recognizes that otherrequirements such as location may override the marginal increase in accessibilitythat a building meeting new construction standards might afford, comparedto a building meeting the requirements for alterations.Subsection (b)Since facilities available for leasing by the Federal Government (otherthan those designed and constructed to meet Federal standards) are limitedto the building stock in a given locality that is offered on the marketat that particular time, there may be cases where so space is offered forlease that meets either andSection; 1190.31 or andSection; 1190.33. To coverthose situations, andSection; 1190.34(b) establishes minimum guidelines andrequirements that must be met by making alterations to the space beforeit can be occupied.One comment from a Federal Department stated that more liberal provisionsare necessary in order for Federal agencies to continue operations in certainsmall rural communities where accessible leased buildings are not available.In developing the rule, the ATBCB was cognizant of the difficulties ofFederal agencies in securing accessible leased facilities in certain communitiesand drafted the proposed rule accordingly. The proposed rule provided inandSection; 1190.34(b) that, in many cases, buildings not otherwise in compliancewith the minimum requirements set forth elsewhere in MGRAD would nonethelessbe acceptable provided certain accessible features were present. The proposedrule also included, in andSection; 1190.34(g), exceptions that should helpto address this concern in some instances. Finally, Federal Departments,agencies, or instrumentalities which are unable to secure leased facilitiesthat meet these requirements may apply to the appropriate standard settingagency, as provided in 24 CFR 40.5 (HUD), USPS Handbook RE-4, (51 FR 13122),41 CFR 101-19.605 (GSA) or DOD Construction Criteria DOD 4270.1M (5/8/1985),for a waiver or modification of standards. In light of the foregoing, theBoard has not amended the rule in response to this comment.The requirements in subsection (b) assure that accessible routes are providedto those spaces where the principal functions are carried out and to certainbuilding features_toilet rooms and parking areas_where such features aredetermined to be necessary for access to and use of the building or facility.These requirements in subsection (b) are intended to permit leased spaceto have an accessible route to public activity areas, public toilets, andother elements necessary for public access to or use of the space whichare different from the accessible route to other areas such as those usedby employees.One comment found confusing the statement in andSection; 1190.34(b)(1) thatseparate accessible routes may be provided to areas serving different users.In response, the following clarification is offered. The intent of thissubsection is to avoid requirements for accessible routes unnecessary inlight of the nature of the facility and which, in all likelihood, wouldserve no useful purpose to any disabled person in most cases. For example,in a leased government bookstore with a retail outlet patronized by thepublic and a separate workroom for processing mail orders for employeesonly, there would have to be an accessible route to the workroom for employeesand an accessible route to the retail outlet for the public. There is norequirement for an accessible route from the retail outlet to the workroomsince there is no occasion for the public to enter the workroom. However,accessible routes would be required for members of the public to gain accessto any other areas of the building necessary for public use such as restrooms,if provided to the public, and the means of access to other public areas(e.g., elevators). This subsection is not intended to require an accessibleroute between public use and other activity areas, where the differentareas are intended to be kept separate.Subsection (b) also specifies the minimum number of accessible toilet roomsthat must be provided based on the number and locations of toilet roomsin the building or facility. Two modifications have been made to andSection;1190.34(b)(2)(i) to clarify the Board's intent with regard to the requirementsfor accessible toilets. A new andSection; 1190.34(b)(2)(i)(B) has been substitutedfor the paragraph so denominated in the proposed rule. A new andSection;1190.34(b)(2)(i)(C) has also been added in the final rule. The effect ofthese two new provisions is to make it clear that in a leased buildingproviding only one toilet per sex, one accessible toilet per sex or oneaccessible unisex toilet must be provided.This subsection, moreover, is not intended to require accessible toiletor other facilities to be provided where the intended use of the facilitydoes not require such facilities to be provided for non-handicapped persons.In post offices, for example, where the work area and public retail areasare typically kept separate, and typically only the employees are providedwith toilet facilities, this subsection does not require that the publicbe provided with either a toilet in the public areas or an accessible routeto the employee toilet. An accessible toilet and an accessible route tothat toilet are required, however, if there is a public toilet.The rule applies to buildings, facilities, or portions thereof leased bythe Federal Government. If a portion of a building, such as a third floor,is leased, the rule requires an accessible route from an accessible entranceto the building, not just from the entrance to the third floor.Subsection 1190.34(b)(4) requires that consideration be given to providingcertain other accessible spaces or features complying with appropriateMGRAD sections. This is consistent with 36 CFR 1190.33(c)(6) except withregard to parking. One comment stated that the proposed provisions regardingparking facilities are inadequate because they are limited to cases inwhich such facilities are addressed in lease agreements and parking isseldom addressed in leases. In fact, Federal leases are generally not silenton parking facilities. Therefore, no change has been made in this provision.The intent of this provision is to parallel the approach to providing accessibleparking taken in the new construction provisions of MGRAD. Those provisionsstate in andSection; 1190.31(b)(1), with respect to new construction, thatif parking is provided to the public or visitors, accessible parking mustbe provided. To require accessible parking spaces in leased facilitieswhere other parking is not provided for under the lease would impose aheavier burden on leased property than MGRAD requires for new construction.It is not the intent of this provision to require Federal tenants to makespecial arrangements for accessible parking where no parking whatsoeveris provided. However, where parking is provided for under a lease, or whereit is otherwise available as in the case of a Federal tenant in a shoppingcenter, parking and passenger loading zones complying with andSection; 1190.60should be provided to the extent feasible.Subsections (c) and (d)Subsection 1190.34(c) provides that when leased space is subsequently altered,the alterations are required to comply with andSection;1190.33, Alterations.Similarly, andSection;1190.34(d) provides that, if leased space is increasedby the construction of an addition which is also leased by the FederalGovernment, the addition must be constructed in accordance with andSection;1190.32,Additions.Subsection (e)Section 1190.34(e) permits space to be leased without further alterationif it meets past or present state or local access codes or the standardsrecommended by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A117.1,and provides features required by andSection;1190.34. The purpose of thisprovision is to allow buildings which already have the features neededfor accessibility to the proposed area to be leased as is, even thoughthe building may not comply in one respect or another with the presentfederally prescribed way of achieving the goal of accessibility. Thereare many buildings of relatively recent construction which were privatelydesigned and constructed in accordance with ANSI A117.1 or with state orlocal building codes, which are generally consistent with or identicalto standards recommended by ANSI. Thus, the rule permits the leasing ofspace that complies with other codes and that provides the accessibilityfeatures required by the rule, even though the space may not meet all ofthe technical requirements of this rule. For example, ANSI A117.1-1961(R 1971) (``ANSI''), a standard currently in use by one-third of the statesand previously used by several others, requires accessible toilets ``witha seat 20&quot; from the floor'' (<T3>See,</T3> ANSI section 5.6.2). UFAS 4.16.3 requires that accessibletoilets ``shall be 17 to 19 in * * * measured to the top of the toiletseat.'' Leased space with restrooms meeting the ANSI toilet height requirementwould be permissible under this rule notwithstanding the requirement ofUFAS.Subsection (e) does not, however, permit leasing inaccessible space ina building which otherwise met non-Federal accessibility requirements referencedin this section.Several comments expressed a concern about andSection;1190.34(e). This concernalso relates to andSection;1190.34(f), which provides that once a leasedspace is made accessible, no new accessibility alterations can be compelled,except for alterations and additions covered by andSection;1190.34 (c) and(d), respectively. It is argued that andSection;1190.34 (c) and (d) takentogether would perpetuate inadequate standards of accessibility and barhandicapped persons from buildings leased for Federal use. These commentspoint to the need for a reiteration of an important limitation to andSection;1190.34(e),which was explained in the preamble to the proposal and is stated in theregulation itself. Subsection (e) only permits the leasing of space conformingto local codes or the ANSI standard where such space also provides theaccessibility features specified in this section. For example, a leasedspace meeting the local code but failing to provide an accessible routefrom an accessible entry, failing to provide accessible toilet facilitieswhere they are provided to the public, or failing to provide accessibleparking where parking is addressed in the Federal tenant's lease woud notbe in accord with these minimum guidelines. On the other hand, a leasedfacility meeting the local code and providing these features would be acceptableeven though it may deviate in minor respects from the technical provisionsof the minimum guidelines.Subsection (f)This subsection provides that once leased space is accessible or made accessibleunder these provisions, no new accessibility alterations will be required,except where alterations or additions covered by andSection;1190.34 (c) and(d) are made.In addition to the comment discussed above, another comment addressed therule in andSection;1190.34(f) that once a leased building is deemed to beaccessible under this section, it need not be further altered except undercertain specified circumstances. This comment stated that, in any event,modifications should be required if necessary in order for disabled employeesto perform their duties. In the event that a qualified handicapped employeeis prevented from performing his or her duties as a result of being assignedto a leased facility not accessible to a person with his or her specialneeds, legal recourse may be available under either section 501 (29 U.S.C.791) or section 504 (29 U.S.C. 794) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.Section 501 requires Federal agencies to have affirmative action plansfor the hiring, placement and advancement of individuals with handicapsand section 504 prohibits discrimination in Federal programs on the basisof physical handicap.Subsection (g)Exceptions are specified in andSection;1190.34(g). The first exception isfor cases where the space is necessary for officials servicing naturalor human-made disasters. In such situations, space generally must be leasedon an emergency basis, without the opportunity for planning. The secondexception is for space leased for use on an intermittent basis. This allowsleasing of special use spaces, such as Department of Defense test sitesthat may be used as locations for test instruments and are visited onlyon an intermittent basis to check or service such instruments. The thirdexception is for short-term leases not to exceed twelve months, which,for example, occasionally must be obtained quickly on short notice, whennew leased space does not become available as planned (such as when a leaseexpires but unanticipated construction delays prevent the planned occupationof new space). As described below, in response to a comment the final rulehas been modified to provide that the short-term lease may not be renewedor extended for more than twelve months. The exception for short-term leasesis intended to provide for continuity of government operations until suchtime as space meeting Federal accessibility requirements does become available.An additional exception is provided for mechanical rooms and other spaceswhich normally are not frequented by the public or by handicapped employeesof the occupant agency or which by nature of their use are not requiredto be accessible. This exception also is provided under andSection;1190.33,Alterations and andSection;1190.32, Additions.One comment stated that these exceptions are inappropriate and unauthorizedby the <T3>Rose</T3> decision cited in a preceding section. The <T3>Rose</T3> decision determined that certain leased facilities are coveredby the Act. The ATBCB's authority to issue minimum guidelines and requirementsis pursuant to section 502(b)(7) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Inthe provisions of the Architectural Barriers Act which direct the fourstandard setting agencies to issue standards, Congress clearly specifiedthat such standards were to insure access ``whenever possible''. See, 42U.S.C. 4152, 4153, 4154, and 4154a. Since Congress provided for the exerciseof discretion in the promulgation of the ABA's standards, it follows thatsome degree of discretion was also intended by Congress in the promulgationof the minimum guidelines and requirements for those standards.The comment expressed concern that the exception for property leased onan ``intermittent basis'' lacks clarity. This exception is intended tocover a narrow class of special circumstances. For example, the occasionalleasing of a specially equipped university laboratory for a short-termresearch project would qualify as a special use. Similarly, the leasingof an automotive proving grounds to test a piece of military equipmentwould be an intermittent use. The leasing of space in a shopping mall fora seasonal mail handling facility for the holiday season would be an ``intermittentbasis'' lease. In applying this exception, the ATBCB expects agencies toweigh such factors as the special need for the facility in question, theduration of the lease, whether the lease has been renewed or extended,the whether the need for the facility is predictable and recurring.The comment also expressed the concern that the exception for short-term(less than one year) leases would be abused by agencies seeking to circumventaccessibility requirements by a succession of short-term leases for thesame facility. In response, the ATBCB has amended andSection;1190.34(g)(1)(iii)to provide that such a short-term lease may only be renewed or extendedwhere necessary, for example due to construction delays, for up to 12 months.Another comment objected to andSection;1190.34(g)(2) which excludes fromaccessibility requirements mechanical rooms and other places in leasedbuildings not frequented by the public or disabled employees or which bytheir nature are not required to be accessible. The comment states thatthis provision could lead to discriminatory situations. The provision merelyimplements language of similar effect in the Act's definition of ``building'',which includes any building or facility ``the intended use for which eitherwill require that such building or facility be accessible to the public,or may result in employment or residence therein of physically handicappedpersons * * *.'' 42 U.S.C. 4151. Moreover, as noted previously, section504 prohibits discrimination against qualified handicapped persons.<ITAG tagnum="84">D. Other Information</ITAG>This final rule has been submitted to the Office of Management and Budgetand reviewed under procedures established in Executive Order 12291. TheATBCB has determined, as required by the National Environmental PolicyAct of 1969, 42 U.S.C. 4332, that the proposal will not have any significantimpact on the environment. This rule does not constitute a ``major rule''as that term is defined in section 1(b) of the Executive Order 12291 onFederal Regulations. With regard to andSection;1190.34, both the United StatesPostal Service and the General Services Administration, the two agencieswhich issue standards covering the majority of the buildings currentlyleased by the Federal Government that are subject to the ArchitecturalBarriers Act, already have standards governing accessibility of leasedbuildings which in their view impose costs substantially equivalent toany impact of the proposed rulemaking.Pursuant to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 605(b) (the Regulatory FlexibilityAct), the ATBCB certifies that this rule will not have a significant economicimpact on a substantial number of small entities.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 36 CFR Part 1190</ITAG>Buildings, Handicapped, Leasing.Accordingly, 36 CFR Part 1190 is amended as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="21">By vote of the Board on May 11, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William J. Tangye,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Chair, Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.</ITAG>36 CFR Part 1190 is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 1190_MINIMUM GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSIBLE DESIGN</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 1190 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Section 502(b) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29U.S.C. 792(b)(7)), as amended by the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services,and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-602), 92Stat. 2979, and the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-506).</ITAG>2. The Table of Contents is revised by (1) removing the word ``[Reserved]''after andSection; 1190.34 in Subpart C and adding in its place the words,``Accessible buildings and facilities: Leased''.3. Section 1190.34 is amended by removing the word ``[Reserved]'' and allthat follows and adding in lieu thereof the following provisions:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1190.34</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Accessible buildings and facilities: Leased.</ITAG>(a) Buildings or facilities or portions thereof leased by the Federal Governmentshall comply with andSection; 1190.31, New construction, or shall incorporatethe features listed in andSection; 1190.33(c), Alterations. Where both typesof buildings are available for leasing, reasonable preference must be givento buildings or facilities complying with andSection; 1190.31, New construction.(b) If space complying with paragraph (a) of this section is not available,space may be leased only if the space meets, or is altered to meet, thefollowing conditions:(1) At least one accessible route is provided from an accessible entrancecomplying with andSection; 1190.120, Entrances, to those areas in which theprincipal activities for which the building or facility was leased areconducted. Separate accessible routes may be provided to areas servingdifferent groups of users (e.g., the public, employees).(2) The accessible route shall comply with the requirements of andSection;1190.50, Walks, floors, and accessible routes, and provide access to whateveraccessible facilities are either required or provided, such as accessibletoilets.(i) Toilet facilities, to the extent required for the ready intended useof the building or facility, shall be provided as follows_(A) Where more than one toilet for each sex is provided in a building orfacility, at least one toilet facility which complies with andSection; 1190.150,Toilet and bathing facilities, shall be provided for each sex on each floorhaving toilets; or(B) In a building or facility providing only one toilet for each sex, eitherone unisex toilet or one toilet for each sex complying with andSection; 1190.150shall be provided; or(C) In a building or facility where only one toilet is provided, one unisextoilet complying with andSection; 1190.150 shall be provided.(ii) Parking facilities, if a parking area is included within the lease,shall be provided complying with andSection; 1190.60, Parking and passengerloading zones, to the extent feasible.(3) Where an agency determines that an area does not require the provisionof toilets or parking facilities for the users or occupants of that area,nothing in this section shall be construed to require the provision ofany such facilities.(4) Consideration shall be given to providing accessible elements and spacesin each altered building or facility complying with:(i) Section 1190.160 Drinking fountains and water coolers;(ii) Section 1190.180 Alarms;(iii) Section 1190.210 Telephones;(iv) Section 1190.220 Seating, tables, and work surfaces;(v) Section 1190.230 Assembly areas; and(vi) Section 1190.240 Storage.(c) If space leased in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (a)or (b) of this section is subsequently altered, then the alterations shallcomply with the requirements of andSection; 1190.33, Alterations.(d) If space leased in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (a)or (b) of this section is increased by construction of an addition, theaddition shall comply with andSection; 1190.32, Additions, to the extentit is leased by the Federal Government.(e) If leased space at the time of leasing meets past or present stateor local codes or the recommended standards of the American National StandardsInstitute (ANSI) A117.1 for accessibility to physically handicapped people,and provides the features required by this section, the space may be usedas is or altered to comply with the technical requirements of paragraph(a) or (b) of this section.(f) Once leased space in an existing building is accessible or is madeaccessible hereunder, no new accessibility alterations shall be requiredunder this subpart except where alterations or additions are made to thebuilding which are covered by paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section.(g) <T3>Exceptions. </T3>(1) If no space complying with paragraph (a) or (b)of this section is available for leasing, space as available may be leasedwithout alterations:(i) If the lease is necessary for officials servicing natural or human-madedisasters on an emergency basis;(ii) If the space is used on an intermittent basis; or(iii) If the occupancy of the space is for no more than twelve months.If delays occur during the twelve months, the short-term lease may be extendedfor no more than an additional 12 months.(2) Mechanical rooms and other spaces which normally are not frequentedby the public or employees with handicaps of the occupant agency or whichby nature of their use are not required to be accessible are excepted fromthis section.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-20251 Filed 9-13-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6820-BP-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>