<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88106-0019 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-06-88.f2.A1018</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 3 / Wednesday, January 6, 1988/ Rules and Regulations <ITAG tagnum="52">FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Parts 525, 583, and 584</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 87-1299] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Qualified Thrift Lender Test; Savings and Loan Holding Company Amendments;Federal Home Loan Bank Advances</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">Date: December 22, 1987. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (``the Board''), asthe operating head of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation(``FSLIC'' or ``Corporation'') is amending its regulations governing savingsand loan holding companies to implement the qualified thrift lender testenacted in the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-86,101 Stat. 552 (``CEBA''). The CEBA amends section 408 of the National HousingAct, 12 U.S.C. 1730a, also commonly known as the Savings and Loan HoldingCompany Act (``the SLHC Act''), to provide that the current exemption fromthe nonthrift activity restrictions for unitary savings and loan holdingcompanies will be available only where the subsidiary institution meetsthe new qualified thrift lender test. The CEBA also amends section 10 ofthe Federal Home Loan Bank Act (``FHLBank Act''), 12 U.S.C. 1430, to reducethe eligibility for advances from the Federal Home Loan Banks (``FHLBanks'')of member institutions that do not meet the qualified thrift lender test.This regulation sets forth the new qualified thrift lender test, whichrequires that an insured institution must maintain 60 percent of its tangibleassets in housing and housing-related investments in order for the institutionto have Qualified Thrift Lender (``QTL'') status. The regulation also implementsthe new statutory limitations on eligibility for advances and permissibleholding company activities where an institution fails to maintain its QTLstatus.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>January 1, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Christina M. Gattuso, ActingRegulatory Counsel (202-377-6649), Nancy M. Lytle, Attorney (202-377-6077),Regulations and Legislation Division, Kevin Corcoran, Deputy Director forCorporate, Corporate and Securities Division (202-377-6962), Office ofGeneral Counsel; Richard C. Pickering, Deputy Director (202-377-6770),Robert Pomeranz, Senior Policy Analyst (202-377-6730), Office of Policyand Economic Research; Thomas Sheehan, Director, Policy Analysis Division,Office of District Banks (202-377-6351); Federal Home Loan Bank Board,1700 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20552; or Thomas Melo, Deputy Director(202-778-2652), Ben F. Dixon, Policy Analyst (202-778-2519), Office ofRegulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision; Federal Home Loan Bank System,900 Nineteenth Street, NW., Washington, DC 20006.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Introduction; Statutory Authority </ITAG>Section 104(c)(1) of the CEBA amends section 408 of the National HousingAct (12 U.S.C. 1730a) by adding a new subsection (o) entitled ``QualifiedThrift Lender Requirements.'' CEBA, tit. I, sec. 104(c)(1), section 408(o).This provision sets forth a QTL test for all insured institutions, includingboth state-chartered institutions and Federal associations.\1\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ For purposes of the QTL test, an insured institution isdefined as a Federal savings and loan association, a Federal savings bank,a building and loan, savings and loan or homestead association or a cooperativebank, the accounts of which are insured by the Federal Savings and LoanInsurance Corporation, and includes a Federal savings bank the depositsof which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and asavings bank which is deemed by the Corporation to be an insured institutionunder 12 U.S.C. 1730a(n). <T3>See</T3> 12 U.S.C. 1730a(a)(1)(A).As stated in the legislative history of the CEBA, Congress' objective inpromulgating the QTL provisions was one of ``committing insured institutionsto the unique, congressionally defined role of providing housing-relatedfinance.'' H.R. Rep. No. 261, 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 137 (1987). The keycomponent of the QTL test is whether the institution's ``actual thriftinvestment percentage'' equals or exceeds 60 per cent of its tangible assetson an average basis over time; that is, whether the institution consistentlyinvests the stated majority of its tangible assets in certain ``qualifiedthrift investments.'' Generally, these qualified investments are relatedto domestic real estate or manufactured housing, but they include otherassets that are incidental to the thrift's housing-related investments.In addition to setting forth the QTL test and defining necessary terms,section 104(c) of CEBA provides a special transition period for state-charteredsavings banks and a five-year disqualification for any insured institutionthat fails to maintain its QTL status. Moreover, certain exceptions andexemptions may be granted by the FSLIC. Finally, the CEBA requires theFSLIC to adopt regulations implementing the requirements of the QTL testthat must be effective on or before January 1, 1988. The CEBA provides that an insured institution's ability to qualify as athrift lender may affect its ability to obtain advances from its FHLBankas well as the ability of any holding company parent and nonthrift affiliatesof the institution to engage in certain nontraditional thrift activities.In particular, section 105 of the CEBA provides that member institutionsthat do not have QTL status will be eligible for advances only to the extentthat they hold qualified thrift investments. Moreover, section 104(b) ofthe CEBA provides that the current exemption for unitary thrift holdingcompanies from the activities restrictions in the Act will now be availableonly if the subsidiary thrift institution meets the QTL test. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Description of the Proposal </ITAG>On October 2, 1987, the Board proposed a rule to implement the QTL Test.<T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1041, 52 FR 39076 (Oct. 20, 1987). First,the proposal added to the Board's regulations a new andSection; 583.27 settingforth the QTL test and enumerating a list of investments considered tobe ``related to domestic residential real estate or manufactured housing''for purposes of the test. Second, the proposal amended the Board's regulationsgoverning permissible activities of savings and loan holding companiesto reflect the new limitations under the CEBA on nonthrift activities forsuch companies. Finally, the proposal amended the Board's regulations governingFHLBank advances to reflect the effect of failure to meet the QTL teston an institution's ability to receive FHLBank advances. The comment periodon the proposal expired on November 19, 1987. In connection with its proposed rulemaking, the Board held two days ofpublic hearings on November 3 and 4, 1987 on the proposed QTL regulationand six other regulations it proposed to implement the CEBA. Twenty-threeindustry representatives participated in these hearings. The number ofwitnesses addressing the QTL proposal included four members of an overviewpanel and four members of the panel specifically concerned with the QTLtest. Of these eight witnesses, six represented trade associations, onean insured institution, and one a law firm. Remarks by participants inthe hearing are summarized below as part of the public comment summary.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Discussion of Comments </ITAG>The Board received a total of 53 public comments in response to the proposal.Thirty-two commenters supported the proposa1, twenty of whom suggestedmodifications. Only seven commenters opposed the proposal, of whom fivesuggested modifications. Fourteen commenters suggested modifications buttook no apparent position on the proposal. The majority of comments (31)were submitted by insured institutions. Of the remainder, seventeen weresubmitted by industry trade associations, three by law firms, one by anindividual, and one by a securities firm. Commenters suggested both technicaland substantive modifications to the proposal. Although the comment periodended on November 19, 1987, the Board has considered late-filed and late-receivedletters in its efforts to maximize public participation in the rulemaking.After carefully considering the issues raised by the commenters, whichare more fully discussed below, the Board has determined to adopt the amendmentssubstantially as proposed with certain modifications and clarifications.A. Definition of Qualified Thrift Lender Section 104(c)(1) of the CEBA provides that an insured institution shallhave QTL status if its qualified thrift investments equal or exceed 60percent of its assets ``on an average basis in 3 out of every 4 quartersand 2 out of every 3 years.'' Section 104(c) defines the term ``qualifiedthrift investments'' as the sum of: (1) The aggregate amount of loans,equity positions, or securities held by the insured institution (or anysubsidiary thereof) that are ``related to domestic residential real estateor manufactured housing;'' (2) the value of property used by the institutionor its subsidiary in the conduct of the business of the institution orits subsidiary; (3) the types of liquid assets required to be maintainedunder section 5A of the FHLBank Act, 12 U.S.C. 1425a; and (4) 50 percentof the dollar amount of residential mortgages originated by the institutionor its subsidiary and sold within 90 days of origination. CEBA, tit. I,sec. 104(c), section 408(o)(5)(B). The aggregate amount of the assets describedin the latter two categories may not exceed 10 per cent of the institution'stangible assets. As the Board noted in the proposal, Congress left to the Board fairly broaddiscretion to implement the requirements of the QTL test. The majorityof commenters supported the approach taken by the Board in the proposal;however, many suggested various modifications or additions to the listof irems that would count as qualified thrift investments. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Housing Related Investments </ITAG>In the proposal, the Board took a very flexible approach in determiningwhich assets would qualify as housing related investments. The Board attemptedto make the list of housing related investments as comprehensive as possibleby including all types of investments related to insured institutions'traditional role of encouraging thrift and facilitating private home ownership.Accordingly, the proposal included all forms of home mortgages, home improvementloans, and loans made on the security of residential real estate or manufacturedhousing (including home equity loans). Similarly, the proposal includedall investments acquired by the institution through foreclosure and liquidationof any of the aforementioned investments, as well as any other equity interestsheld by the institution and its subsidiaries in residential real estate.The proposed list also included stocks, bonds, and other securities issuedor guaranteed by the FHLBanks, the newly established Financing Corporation,the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan MortgageCorporation, the Government National Mortgage Association, and obligationsissued by the FSLIC.Further, the Board proposed that all forms of residential mortgage-relatedsecurities be included as housing-related investments under the proposal.For example, these securities include pass-through participation type certificatesas well as pay-through bonds. Mortgage-related securities also include,but are not limited to, any portion or tranche of a collateralized mortgageobligation or REMIC. They also include any type of derivative product currentlyexisting or hereafter created, such as so-called residual or stripped securities(assuming such instruments are an authorized and permissible part of theinstitution's portfolio.) This list of securities is meant to be illustrativeand not exhaustive of the types of qualifying investments in the continuallyevolving mortgage-related securities marketplace. The proposed list also included any investment in a corporation, partnership,or trust whose primary activities include servicing residential real estateloan portfolios, developing residential real estate housing located inany State, or any other housing-related activities such as domestic residentialloan origination or the sale of residential loans. A company is consideredto have its primary activity in such activities if it derives more thanhalf its annual gross revenues from such activities. Similarly, the proposalwould permit institutions to count land loans, as defined in 12 CFR 561.18,as a housing related investment once actual construction of residentialhousing begins. Moreover, as proposed, the regulation would allow an institution to countany investments in state housing corporations and community developmentprojects. Also included in the proposal would be investments in obligationsof any state or political subdivision that are issued for the purpose ofproviding financing for residential housing or incidental services. Theterm incidental services is intended to include municipal projects thatare related to the public financing and maintenance of housing_for example,municipal bonds floated for the purpose of constructing or repairing aneighborhood sewage system. Finally, the proposal contemplated that the Office of Regulatory Policy,Oversight and Supervision (``ORPOS'') could issue T-Memoranda that listparticular investments that qualify as housing-related investments underparagraph (c) but are not specifically listed in the regulation. This approachis similar to the approach taken in ORPOS Memorandum No. T-2-3h (April25, 1985) with respect to liquid assets and permissible investments forFederal associations. A majority of commenters expressed support for the flexible approach takenby the Board in defining what assets may count as housing-related investments;while a few commenters believed that the list of housing-related investmentswas too broad. Several commenters suggested various additional investmentsthat they contended should be included as housing-related investments.A few commenters suggested that FHLBank certificates of deposit, depositaccounts (including overnight deposits), and other obligations of the FHLBankSystem be counted as housing-related investments. Similarly, some commenterssuggested that investments in other federally insured thrifts should beincluded in the list. In response to these commenters, the Board has determinedto include all obligations of the FHLBank System as housing-related investmentsand also to include a thrift's investments and deposits in other insuredinstitutions. In the Board's view, these items promote economical homefinancing because they strengthen the FHLBank System by encouraging theplacement and maintenance of funds in that System. Therefore, they areproperly includable as housing-related investments. Two commenters suggested that institution's shares in the FSLIC secondaryreserve should be included as a housing-related investment arguing thatthe secondary reserve was established to benefit the FSLIC and thus isclearly housing related. While an institution's share in the secondaryreserve could arguably be incidentally related to housing, the Board declinesto include this item as a housing-related investment. Several commenters contended that direct obligations of the United States,such as Treasury Bonds, should be included as housing-related investmentsbecause they are inherently intertwined with housing-related investments.These commenters argued that such instruments influence the national interestrate and thereby control the availability of affordable home financing.It is, of course, correct that certain obligations of the United Statesaffect interest rates and are therefore related to housing. The CEBA, however,prescribes that they be included as qualified thrift investments not underthe housing- related investment category but under the liquid asset category.Direct obligations of the United States, such as Treasury Bills or Bonds,are included as liquid assets in andSection; 523.10 and therefore may becounted, subject to the overall 10 percent limitation, as qualified thriftinvestments. The Board does not believe it was the intent of Congress toinclude such obligations as housing-related investments and consequentlydeclines to include them.A few commenters suggested that commercial loans, consumer loans, savingsaccount loans, overdraft loans, and credit card loans be included as housingrelated investments. Such commenters advocated counting either the entireamount of these loans or the portion of them that can be statisticallylinked to housing-related activities such as home improvement or construction.Similarly, one commenter asserted that any home equity loans that are classifiedas consumer loans should be included. Another commenter suggested includingthe value of property and materials necessary to successful housing development,<T3>e.g., </T3>basic infrastructure such as utility and transportation,local shopping areas, local medical facilities, nursing facilities, playgrounds,parks, dedicated school property, and recreational property subject toa test that they are reasonably related to and primarily for the benefitof a specific identifiable project, or subject to a percentage limit. In response to these suggestions the Board first notes that the regulationas proposed includes home equity loans as housing related investments.Such loans would be included under the category of ``loans made on thesecurity of residential real estate or manufactured housing.'' After carefulconsideration, the Board has determined not to include specifically inthe regulation the other suggestions offered by commenters as housing relatedinvestments. The Board notes that the purpose of the QTL test is to commitinstitutions to the unique, congressionally defined role of providing housing-relatedfinance. The items suggested by commenters are related to housing onlyin an incidental way, and the Board believes that their relationship tohousing is too attenuated to justify inclusion in this prong of the QTLtest. Moreover, although the Board recognizes that certain commercial loans,credit card loans, overdraft loans, and other types of consumer loans maybe used for home improvement purposes, in the Board's view, the difficultyof calculating and documenting which portion of such loans are in factused for such purposes outweighs any potential advantage of including themin the rule as housing related investments. Moreover, the Board does not believe it necessary to add items that arehousing related only in a questionable way in order to assist insured institutionsin meeting the QTL test. The list of housing related investments is alreadyvery broad and flexible; consequently, most institutions should be ableto meet the QTL test without great difficulty. For these reasons, the Board declines to include the loans described abovein the regulatory list of housing related investments. If, however, aninstitution does not have 60 per cent of its assets in qualified thriftinvestments for any reporting quarter and if it can show with adequatedocumentation that certain consumer loans or commercial loans in its portfolioare in fact housing related, it may include such loans for purposes ofmeeting the QTL test pursuant to the guidelines set forth in a SupervisoryMemorandum to be issued by the ORPOS. One commenter, representing the Association of Savings Banks of PuertoRico, urged the Board to include various investments peculiar to PuertoRican thrifts as housing-related investments. These investments includedGovernment Development Bank deposits, rates and debentures; Social HousingMortgage Trust Funds, Puerto Rico Housing Bank obligations; and variousother obligations of the Puerto Rican government and its agencies. In theBoard's view, several of these investments are already included withinthe scope of the regulation. The ORPOS will issue a Memorandum that willenumerate those Puerto Rico investments that qualify as housing relatedinvestments. In response to the Board's specific request for comment on the extent towhich investments in entities whose primary activities include residentialreal estate activities should be included as housing related investments,several commenters advocated including proportional amounts of investmentsin a real estate servicing entity that derives less than 50 per cent ofits primary revenue from housing-related investments. For example, if suchan entity derives 30 per cent of its primary revenues from housing relatedinvestments, then 30 per cent of a thrift's investment in the entity shouldbe includable. One commenter suggested that the entity's ``holdings'' aswell as its revenues should count toward the fifty per cent test. Anothercommenter asserted that the test should measure a <T3>majority of assets </T3>in housing related investments regardless ofthe sources of revenues. Failure to include investments on a proportionalbasis, according to one commenter, would only encourage the formation ofadditional subsidiaries to separate out nonqualifying revenues. In contrast,one commenter asserted that the 50 per cent threshold was reasonable andinvestments in an entity that derives less than that from housing-relatedactivities should not be counted. In response to these commenters, the Board has determined to allow an institutionto include as a housing related investment its investment in a corporation,partnership or trust whose activities include servicing residential realestate loan portfolios, developing residential domestic real estate, orany other housing related activities such as domestic residential loanorigination or the sale of domestic residential loans. Institutions mayinclude the amount of their investment in such an entity in proportionto the amount of primary revenue the entity derives from housing relatedinvestments. For example, if such an entity derives 70 per cent of itsprimary revenue from housing related investments, an institution may include70 per cent of its investment in such an entity as a housing related investment.Similarly, if an entity derives 20 per cent of its primary revenue fromhousing related investments, an institution may include 20 per cent ofits investment in such an entity as a housing related investment. The Boardcautions, however, that institutions must have adequate documentation tosupport the inclusion of any such investment. Accordingly, the Board today is revising the proposal to permit institutionsto include the amount of their investment in real estate servicing entitiesin proportion to the amount of primary revenue the entity derives fromhousing related activities. Additionally, the Board has amended the proposalto clarify that institutions may only include investments under this subsectionin real estate servicing entities that are not subsidiaries of such institutions.As discussed more fully below, the Board has made this amendment in orderto eliminate the ``double counting'' problem that arises where an institutioncounts its subsidiary's investments as housing related investments andalso counts its investment in its subsidiary as a housing related investment.Many commenters addressed the issue of whether acquisition, developmentand construction loans (``ADC loans'') should be counted as housing relatedinvestments before actual construction begins if an insured institutioncan document the residential purpose of the loan. One commenter recommendedthat the final regulation clarify that ADC loans for raw land to be improvedby construction of the type of structures enumerated in section 5(c)(5)of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (``HOLA''), as amended (12 U.S.C.1464(c)(5)), are included within the scope of the regulation. With theexception of one institution that totally opposed including ADC loans asqualified housing-related investments, a large number of commenters favoredincluding preconstruction land loans where sufficient documentation isprovided to attest to their residential purpose. Commenters offered several suggestions with respect to the type of documentationthat could be used to show the residential nature of a particular ADC loan.Three commenters recommended that the definition of qualified ADC loansused in the tax code test for a building and loan association be used:``Loans made to finance the acquisition or development of land shall bedeemed to be loans secured by an interest in residential real propertyif * * * there is reasonable assurance that the property will become residentialreal property within a period of 3 years from the date of acquisition ofthe land.'' Internal Revenue Code 7701(a)(19)(c) (1982 andamp; Supp. III1985). Other commenters suggested the following documentation: (1) Evidencecertified by appropriate local or county authorities that the land thatis serving as collateral for the loan is in fact zoned for residentialpurposes at the time the financing is extended; (2) an appraisal used duringthe loan underwriting process and prepared in accordance with Board regulationsthat establishes the market value of the property based on its developmentfor residential purposes; (3) a proposed development plan setting forththe nature of the residential development and the budget and schedule forthe development; (4) a certification by the institution's management thatthe land loan was funded on the basis that it would be used for the acquisitionand/or development of residential property; and (5) appropriate documentationverifying the availability of utilities, sufficient to service the propertyonce developed for residential purposes. The Board is persuaded by the arguments offered by the commenters and hasdetermined that land loans that are properly documented to show the residentialnature of the loan may be included as housing related investments whetherthe institution or its subsidiary holds such loans directly or investsin them indirectly through a nonsubsidiary real estate servicing entity.The ORPOS will issue a Supervisory Memorandum before January 1, 1988, thatwill set forth the documentation needed to support inclusion of residentialpurpose land loans as a housing related investment. Several commenters contended that the value of institutions' purchasedmortgage loan servicing rights \2\<NOTE/> should be included as housing related investments becausethey are an integral part of the secondary mortgage market. One commenterasserted that including these rights as qualified thrift investments wouldencourage thrifts to shift their dependence away from interest rate-sensitiveinvestments to fee-based income from mortgage servicing. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ A purchased mortgage loan servicing right may be definedas a contractual right to receive fees for servicing mortgage loans orsecurities backed by mortgage loans held by investors. One commenter, who favored including the mortgage servicing rights, tookissue with the manner in which such servicing rights are treated for purposesof calculating the actual thrift investment percentage (``ATIP''). Accordingto this commenter, the current formulation would include in the numeratorpurchased servicing rights held by a real estate servicing entity but excludethose rights held directly by the insured institution, thereby discouraginginstitutions from acquiring such rights directly. The Board agrees with the commenters and has included in today's finalrule purchased residential mortgage servicing rights held by the institutionor its subsidiary as a housing related investment. Purchased mortgage servicingrights clearly are an integral part of the secondary market and thereforeare properly includable as a housing related investment. Moreover, thefinal rule also includes excess servicing rights as a housing related investment.Such servicing rights are created when an institution sells a group ofloans and retains the right to service those loans. In the Board's view,these excess servicing rights are identical in nature with purchased servicingrights and are therefore also properly includable as housing related investments.Several commenters urged the Board to clarify that multifamily residentialproperty assets are included in the scope of housing related investments.The Board notes that the list of housing related investments includes homemortgages, which are defined in 12 CFR 521.6 as ``a mortgage on real estate* * * which comprises one or more homes or other dwelling units.'' In theBoard's view, this reference clearly includes multifamily residential assets.Similarly, loans made on the security of liens upon domestic residentialreal estate also include multifamily housing. Another commenter sought clarification as to whether loans made upon thesecurity of university dormitories, nursing or convalescent homes, andreal property on which a mobile home park is situated are considered tobe residential real estate for purposes of the QTL test. The Board notesthat the purpose of andSection; 583.27(c) is to enumerate those broad categoriesof investments that, in the Board's view, are housing related. Clearly,there are many items that may not be specifically listed in paragraph (c)that fall within the board categories listed therein. It is the Board'sintent that the supervisory memoranda issued by ORPOS will enumerate specificitems that fall within the scope of the regulation, similar to the currenttreatment of liquid assets in Memorandum No. T 2-3h. In response to thespecific issues raised by the commenter, the Board historically has consideredloans made upon the security of university dormitories, nursing or convalescenthomes and real property on which a mobile home park is located as residentialreal property. <T3>See, e.g., </T3>ORPOS Memorandum No. T-7 (Aug. 31, 1983) (dormitoriesgenerally classified as residential real estate); 48 FR 23032, 23036 (May23, 1983) (the term ``residential real estate'' includes multifamily structuressuch as dormitories and nursing or convalescent homes). Accordingly, theBoard believes that the items mentioned by the commenter clearly fall withinthe definition of housing related investments. Additionally, commenters raised several questions with regard to whethercertain contra assets are deducted in determining the amount of an institutionsqualified thrift investments. The Board takes this opportunity to clarifythat the calculation of the aggregate amount of qualified thrift investmentis based on the aggregate <T3>net </T3>amount of such investments as reported on an institution'smonthly and quarterly reports to the Board. Thus, any such investment wouldnot include contra assets such as valuation allowances or discounts. Accruedinterest on an eligible investment, however, would be included. Although not specifically raised by commenters, the Board wishes to takethis opportunity to clarify that investments in housing related assetsthat are subject to repurchase agreements are included as housing relatedinvestments. The Board has amended the proposal to specifically includesuch investments as housing related investments.Finally, to assure continued flexibility to take account of the changingmarketplace, several commenters proposed establishing a procedure wherebyan institution could request qualification of particular assets on a case-by-casebasis through a supervisory memoranda. An alternative recommendation wasto give the ORPOS the authority to approve new investments without havingto resort to the T-memo process, but permit denials only with the concurrenceof the Office of General Counsel.  As the Board noted in the proposal, the ORPOS may issue Supervisory Memorandathat list particular investments that qualify as housing related investmentsunder paragraph (c) but are not specifically enumerated therein. The Boardhas directed the ORPOS to issue the first such Memorandum prior to January1, 1988, the effective date of this rule. The Board anticipates that theMemorandum will be updated by the ORPOS as is necessary. The Board notes,however, that institutions may request a legal opinion from the Officeof General Counsel (``OGC'') as to whether a particular investment thatis not specifically listed in paragraph (c) or the Memorandum may be includedas a housing related investment. The OGC's decision on such opinion requestssubsequently would be incorporated into the Supervisory Memorandum. TheBoard wishes to emphasize that the intent of the Supervisory Memorandumis to clarify whether certain investments not specifically listed fallwithin the scope of the investments listed in paragraph (c). Similarly,the Board envisions that requests for legal opinions will not be seekingan expansion of the list but instead a clarification as to whether a particularinvestment fits within the scope of the regulation or the Memoranda issuedpursuant thereto. The Board does not view either of those vehicles as routesto expand the scope of housing related investments beyond that of the regulation.Finally, the Board wishes to emphasize that neither andSection; 583.27(c)nor any Supervisory Memorandum issued pursuant thereto is intended to expand,contract, or otherwise affect an institution's investment authority underrelevant statutes and regulations. Specifically, insured institutions mayonly invest in those assets listed in paragraph (c) to the extent theyhave independent legal authority, under either law or regulation, to makesuch investments. To the extent an institution has independent legal authorityto make an investment, andSection; 583.27(c) sets forth those investmentsthat may be counted as qualified thrift investments for purposes of meetingthe QTL test.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Other Types of Qualified Thrift Investments </ITAG>In addition to the housing related investment component discussed above,the proposal incorporated the other statutory components of qualified thriftinvestments. First, the book value of business property used by the institutionor its subsidiary in the conduct of business was included as a qualifiedthrift investment. One commenter contended that business property shouldbe interpreted to include furniture, fixtures and equipment. Another commenter,however, believed that investments in business property should be limited,in order to reduce the ability of thrifts to invest in high-risk investments.Another commenter asked whether business property includes appraised equitycapital. The Board takes this opportunity to clarify that business property includesfixed personalty and real property assets at book value. Institutions may<T3>not</T3>, however, include appraised equity capital in calculatingthe value of its business property. Business property may only be includedat book value, <T3>i.e., </T3>the actual amount paid for the asset at acquisition, lessdepreciation. Consistent with the CEBA, the proposal also included as qualified thriftinvestments: (1) Liquid assets held by the institution (not its subsidiaries)of the type required to be maintained under section 5A of the Federa1 HomeLoan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1425a): and (2) 50 per cent of the dollar amountof mortgages originated by the institution or its subsidiary and sold within90 days of origination. Under the statute, as implemented by today's finalrule, the latter two categorizes of investments may be counted as qualifiedinvestments only up to a combined aggregate amount not to exceed ten percent of the institution's tangible assets. Several commenters expressed concern about the 10 per cent cap appliedto the combined amount of liquid assets and mortgage sold within 90 days.Some commenters advocated removing the cap altogether or applying a separate20 per cent cap to liquid investments, or a separate 10 per cent cap toeach subcategory. The 10 per cent cap is mandated by the CEBA, however,and the Board is therefore without the statutory authority to revise it.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Calculation of Actual Thrift Investment Percentage </ITAG>As set forth in the CEBA, the ``actual thrift investment percentage'' (``ATIP''),which must equal 60% for an institution to qualify as a QTL, consists ofa numerator comprised of the sum of an institution's qualified thrift investments(including investments of subsidiaries except in the case of liquid assets)and a denominator comprised of the institution's (but not its subsidiaries')tangible assets. The Board received several comments on various aspects of the calculationof the ATIP. With respect to the calculation of the numerator, one problemidentified is a ``double counting'' effect that the Board did not intend.As drafted, the proposal could be interpreted to permit an insured institutionto count both its own investment in a subsidiary as well as the subsidiary'sinvestment in qualified assets. Thus, the Board wishes to clarify thatan institution may count the percentage of its investment in its subsidiariesthat is housing related or count its subsidiaries' housing related investments,but not both. The same holds true with respect to the investments of subsidiariesin other subsidiaries (``second tier subsidiaries'').As proposed, the tangible assets denominator would be calculated on anunconsolidated basis, that is, it would include only the assets of theinstitution itself. The Board has encountered no substantial disagreementwith this interpretation of the CEBA and therefore adopts in final formthe unconsolidated calculation. Based on its review of comments, however,the Board has decided to alter its proposed definition of tangible assetsin one respect. Whereas the proposed definition of tangible assets excludedpurchased mortgage loan servicing rights, the Board has decided to includepurchased mortgage servicing rights in the tangible assets base for thefollowing reasons. Although there is not a clear consensus in the accountingcommunity as to whether these assets are tangible or intangible, theseassets do possess some important characteristics of tangible assets because:(1) An active market exists for the purchase and sale of servicing rights;(2) they are priced according to well-accepted valuation and appraisaltechniques; and (3) they generate a measurable yield on investment. Consequently, the Board believes that purchased mortgage servicing rightsshould be included in the denominator as tangible assets. The Board notesthat its action today in no way affects the definition of ``tangible capital''set forth in the Board's equity risk investment regulation. 12 CFR 563.9-8.For purposes of that regulation, purchased mortgage servicing rights arespecifically excluded from the definition of tangible capital and willcontinue to be excluded. Moreover, for purposes of that regulation, tangiblecapital means equity capital as determined in accordance with generallyaccepted accounting principles (``GAAP'') less intangibles. The Board wishesto take this opportunity to make clear that the tangible assets componentof the QTL test is not currently based on GAAP, but instead is definedas the total assets of the institution less intangibles. The Board wishes to note, however, that on December 21, 1987, as part ofits mandate under the CEBA, it adopted a final rule setting forth uniformaccounting standards for insured institutions. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 87-1293. That regulation requires that institutionsfile all financial statements and reports in accordance with GAAP, withthe exception of deferred loan losses and gains, for all reporting periodsbeginning on or after January 1, 1989. This reporting requirement may affectthe amount of assets reported by an institution as qualified thrift investmentsas well as the institution's tangible asset base. Specifically, prior toJanuary 1, 1989, institutions will be reporting some assets on their monthlyand quarterly reports to the Board in accordance with regulatory accountingpractices, which represent deviations from GAAP. As of January 1, 1989,however, all assets will be reported in accordance with GAAP. Institutionsshould be aware of this fact and should take into account what effect,if any, GAAP reporting will have on an institution's ability to continueto meet the QTL test. A few commenters suggested that the calculation of the tangible assetsbase should include any housing related investments of subsidiaries thatare counted in the numerator. The Board has determined not to adopt thisrecommendation. In the Board's view, the CEBA does not mandate such anapproach. Rather, as explained in the proposal, it specifically providesthat investments of both the institution and its subsidiaries are includedin the numerator as qualified thrift investments (with the exception ofliquid assets) and that the tangible assets base is to be calculated onan unconsolidated basis using only the institution's assets and not thoseof its subsidiaries. Moreover, as noted above, commenters expressed strongsupport for the Board's interpretation, remarking that it accurately reflectsthe intent of the statute. The Board therefore is satisfied that the purposeof the QTL test will not be subverted by failure to adopt this change.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Effective Date and Implementation </ITAG>The Board is adopting in substantially the same form as proposed andSection;583.27(a) (1) and (2) which implements the QTL test and deems all insuredinstitutions to have QTL status as of January 1, 1988.\3\<NOTE/> This is the effective date of the QTL regulation and thedate from which all relevant data can now be compiled and compliance calculated.As explained in the proposal, the Board believes that as a practical matter,and as a matter of prudent regulation, this approach represents the mostfair implementation given the more severe burdens imposed by the ``snapshotapproach'' that the Board has specifically rejected.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The Board is also taking the opportunity to revise thedefinition of insured institution in andSection; 583.6 to conform with thedefinition in section 408 of the National Housing Act. As of the January 1, 1988, effective date, then, insured institutions areresponsible for tracking data according to new reporting schedules nowbeing prepared by Board staff. The first reports for the new QTL investmentschedule will be made for the calendar quarter ending March 31, 1988. UnderandSection; 583.27(a)(1) an institution would lose its QTL status at theclose of any calendar quarter during which the institution had failed tomaintain its actual thrift investment percentage at or above 60 percent,which failure made it mathematically impossible for the institution tomeet the 60 per cent test during three out of every four calendar quarters<T3>for each of </T3>two out of every three calendar years. Thus, the earliestpoint at which an institution would lose its QTL status is June 30, 1989,assuming the institution fails the 60 per cent test in at least two ofthe four quarters of the first year (1988) and in the first two quartersof the second year (1989).\4\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ In effect, the proposal contemplates a phase-in of theQTL test. In the Board's view, such a phase-in is consistent with the letterand spirit of the CEBA. <T3>See </T3>S. Rep. No. 19, 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 39 (1987). a. <T3>Averaging Requirement. </T3>In order to prevent evasions of the QTLtest, the regulation directs that compliance be monitored on a quarterlyreporting basis measured over a calendar year period. Calculation of theATIP is to be made on an <T3>average basis </T3>by taking the sum of an institution's qualifyingthrift investments at the end of the calendar quarter being measured andat the end of each of the three immediately preceding months and dividingby the sum of the institution's total tangible assets at the end of thesesame four months.The Board received several suggestions of alternative ways to implementthe averaging requirement to calculate compliance with the QTL test.\5\<NOTE/> Two commenters suggested using a less burdensome quarter-endsnapshot, specifically objecting to including the last month of the previousquarter. Two commenters recommended irrevocable election procedures topermit institutions to use daily or weekly totals instead of the monthlytotals and to make their calculations on a fiscal instead of a calendaryear basis. A final alternative, suggested as the best technique for preventingevasion of the test, would require calculations based on weekly or bimonthlylevels, provided such data is available, or if unavailable, require anannual reconciliation. The Board is not persuaded that these alternativemethods will significantly increase the effectiveness of the test. TheBoard chose to require data from the last month of the previous quarterspecifically to prevent evasions and last minute manipulation of assets.Moreover, the Board has determined not to give institutions the irrevocableelection suggested by the commenters. In the Board's view, such an electionwould defeat its overall goal of seeking uniformity of reporting QTL databy all insured institutions. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ Section 104(c)(1) of the CEBA provides that an insuredinstitution shall have QTL status if its actual thrift investment percentagecontinues to equal or exceed 60 percent on an average basis in 3 out ofevery 4 quarters and 2 out of every 3 years. CEBA, tit. I, sec. 104(c)(1),section 408(o)(1)(B). b. <T3>Principal Supervisory Agent (``PSA'') Calculation of QTL Status. </T3>Commentersdisagreed on whether, as discussed in the proposal, the PSA should be permittedto calculate QTL compliance on dates other than those set forth in theproposal, if he determines that the institution is engaging in transactionsto remove certain assets from its books temporarily for purposes of meetingthe QTL test. Two commenters approved of such authority, with one callingfor 90 days notice before allowing such a calculation. In contrast, fourcommenters vigorously opposed giving the PSA such authority on the groundsthat it would tend to reinforce current perceptions of supervisory arbitrariness,perceptions that have allegedly discouraged investment in the industry;or that it could unduly interfere with business and investment decisions.After carefully weighing the pros and cons of this issue, the Board hasdetermined not to give specific authorization to the PSA to calculate QTLcompliance on dates other than those listed in the regulation. The legislativehistory of CEBA explicitly states that, in promulgating the QTL regulations,the Board must, to the extent possible, ensure that institutions not attemptto evade the requirements of the test. The Board believes the calculationdates specified in the regulation implement this statutory intent. It noteshowever, that manipulation of portfolio composition for purposes of attemptingto evade the test could give rise to a number of remedial actions by thePSA ranging from a request that the institution recalculate its QTL complianceto invocation of the Board's available enforcement remedies. c. <T3>De Novo Institutions. </T3>As stated in the proposal, the Board hasdetermined to give <T3>de novo </T3>institutions the same ``phase-in'' opportunity to meetthe QTL test as is afforded to existing institutions. Thus, a <T3>de novo </T3>institution will be required to meet the test in threeout of four quarters and two out of three years beginning in the quarterfollowing the point at which such institution becomes an insured institution.For example, if an institution obtains its charter on June 21, 1990, theinstitution would have the same 6-quarter phase-in provided for existinginstitutions. That is, the institution would begin reporting its QTL datafor the quarter beginning July 1, 1990 and the first point at which theinstitution could fail the test is the end of the fourth quarter of 1991(December 31, 1991). d. <T3>Data Collection and Reporting. </T3>After carefully considering severaldifferent ways to collect the necessary data from insured institutionsto determine compliance with the QTL test, the Board today is adoptinga ``Proxy Test'' approach that should minimize the reporting burden oninstitutions. Under this approach, institutions will be screened on thebasis of certain line items reported on their end-of-quarter Thrift FinancialReport (``TFR'') which correspond to the most important components of theQTL test. These component items reported on the current TFR (any futurechanges to the TFR may change some of these line items) for the QTL numeratorare: 1. Residential mortgages (Lines A022+A024+A032+A034) 2. Mortgage-backed pass-though securities (Lines A072 through A084) 3. Home improvement loans (Line A180) 4. Retail mobile home loans (Line A230) 5. Residential property held for development/investment/sale (Line A342)6. Collateralized mortgage obligations, including REMICs (Line A385) 7. Fixed assets (Lines A410+A420+A440)8. Liquid assets (Line A900) and one-half of residential mortgages soldduring the quarter (Lines F122 + F123) up to 10 percent of tangible assets.An approximation of the denominator, tangible assets, can also be determinedfrom existing line items on the TFR (Lines A800 - A544). Using this data,the Board will then calculate the ratio each quarter for each institution.Any institution that has a 70 percent ratio will be considered qualifiedfor the quarter without further reporting. Only those institutions witha snapshot ratio below 70 percent would be required to complete a moredetailed QTL reporting form and will be so notified by the Board. (SeeAppendix for a preliminary draft of the form). The Board notes, however,that all institutions should maintain the necessary records to completethe QTL form in the event that they fail the Proxy Test. In the Board's view, a 70 percent threshold is reasonable and appropriatefor the Proxy Test because such a test is based on approximations and notprecise data. Specifically, the Proxy Test includes all qualified assetsin the numerator at gross, rather than net. Consequently, because the numeratorwould include contra asset accounts such as valuation allowances and unearneddiscounts, the numerator could tend to be somewhat exaggerated. Moreover,the Proxy Test is a point-of-time snapshot, not an average of month enddata as is the detailed QTL test. Thus, the Board believes that the 10percent margin sufficiently compensates for any margin of error causedby the use of the Proxy Test. The Board notes that the purpose of the ProxyTest is to minimize to the extent possible the additional reporting requirementswhich result from implementation of the QTL test. It is not the Board'sintent to require institutions to have more than 60 percent of its assetsin qualified thrift investments; the Proxy Test is solely for the convenienceof institutions. e. <T3>Disqualification and Requalification.</T3> The CEBA specifies thatan institution that fails to maintain its QTL status is disqualified andmay not thereafter be a QTL for a period of five years from the close ofthe quarter in which the institution lost its QTL status. This provisionis incorporated into andSection; 583.27(a)(3). At least one commenter deemed the five year disqualification penalty tobe harsh enough to call for some relief such as delaying termination ofQTL status until the end of the third year of a measuring cycle, even thoughfailure is mathematically unavoidable at an earlier date. Although thepenalty may appear harsh, the Board believes that the penalty comportswith the goal the QTL test is intended to promote: assuring the continuedcommitment of insured institutions to the unique, congressionally definedrole of providing housing-related finance. In this regard, the Board isbound by the mandate of the CEBA. The Board notes, however, that the CEBA does not specify how an institutionshould be able to regain its QTL status after a 5-year disqualification.The Board believes that a reasonable approach is to require any ``disqualified''institution to meet the QTL test at the point it is eligible to regainits QTL status (<T3>i.e. </T3>at the earliest, 5 years after the date of the disqualification).In the Board's view, this approach comports with the spirit of CEBA byrequiring a thrift to demonstrate its commitment to home financing by meetingthe QTL test during the standard measuring cycle of three years prior toits requalification. Thus, if the disqualified thrift meets the QTL testduring two of the last three years of its five-year disqualification period,it would be eligible to requalify at the end of such period. However, ifthe institution cannot pass the test at that point, it may not regain QTLstatus until such time as it demonstrates that it has met the QTL testbased on the standard measuring cycle, <T3>i.e.</T3>, three out of four quarters in two out of three years. <ITAG tagnum="81">5. FSLIC Exceptions; Special Phase-In For Certain Institutions </ITAG>The CEBA authorizes the FSLIC to grant temporary exceptions from the QTLtest due to extraordinary circumstances or to facilitate acquisition ormerger of troubled institutions. One commenter requested a temporary exception,subject to periodic review, for Puerto Rican savings banks that, it isasserted, cannot meet the QTL test due to the lack of sufficient housingrelated investments within Puerto Rico and certain Federal tax benefitslimiting their U.S. mainland investment options. Without in any way expressingany opinion on the merits of the recommended exceptions, the Board doesnot find it necessary to address this request in today's final regulationbecause the CEBA provides adequate authority to grant limited and temporaryexceptions on a case-by-case basis. CEBA, tit. I, sec. 104(c)(1), section408(o)(3). Thus, the Board will take this issue under advisement. Two issues were raised with respect to the ten year phase-in to QTL statusprovided for FSLIC-insured savings banks. One party objected to the benchmarkdate of August 10, 1987, and suggested substituting an average computedover the period from August 10 to December 31, 1987. The August 10 date,however, is statutorily mandated and thus cannot be altered. The secondsuggestion is to permit savings banks the same formula for failing thetest, <T3>i.e.</T3>, three out of four quarters, in two out of three years. Thisappears to be simply a matter of properly interpreting the CEBA. In thefirst place, this is not necessary during the ten-year phase-in period,which sets particular targets for particular dates. Once the ten-year phase-inperiod ends, of course, savings banks covered by the transition rule wouldhave to meet the QTL test on the same terms as all other insured institutions,<T3>i.e.</T3>, on a measuring cycle of 3 out of 4 quarters in 2 out ofevery 3 years. Several commenters asked the Board to provide more guidance on how to utilizethe conversion option set forth in CEBA section 104(f) permitting FederalDeposit Insurance Corporation (``FDIC'')-insured state savings banks toapply to be treated as insured institutions so that their parent holdingcompanies may be regulated as savings and loan holding companies. The Boardintends to address this issue in a separate proposed regulation in thenear future which will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.B. Holding Company Activities Section 104(b) of the CEBA completely revises section 408 of the SLHC Act,12 U.S.C. 1730a(c), which governs the activities of savings and loan (``Sandamp;L'')holding companies, to account for the effect of the new qualified thriftlender test on Sandamp;L holding company activities. The CEBA preserves thecurrent exemption from the nonthrift activity restrictions in the SLHCAct for unitary holding companies (or subsidiaries thereof) if the subsidiaryinsured institution meets the QTL test. CEBA, tit. I, sec. 104(b), section408(c)(3). The CEBA also exempts from the nonthrift activity restrictionsthose Sandamp;L holding companies (or subsidiaries thereof) that controlmore than one insured institution if all, or all but one, of such institutionswere acquired pursuant to a supervisory acquisition and all the subsidiaryinsured institutions meet the QTL test. <T3>Id. </T3>Additionally, the CEBA grandfathers the activities of Sandamp;Lholding companies that received approval to acquire an insured institutionprior to March 5, 1987. Finally, section 104(b) of the CEBA restricts multipleSandamp;L holding companies to those activities that were permissible formultiple Sandamp;L holding companies as of March 5, 1987, but permits themto also engage in activities determined by the Federal Reserve Board (``FRB'')to be permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of theBank Holding Company Act (``BHC Act''), subject to any Board limitationsand restrictions. Only four parties commented on the holding company provisions; three wereindustry trade associations and one was an insured institution. All commentersgenerally endorsed the Board's interpretation of the CEBA provisions relatingto activities of savings and loan holding companies. While commenters generally agreed with the proposal's interpretation ofthe scope of the new bank holding company activities permissible for Sandamp;Lholding companies, one commenter urged the Board to take a more expansiveapproach by including, in addition to those activities approved by theFRB under section 4(c)(8), those activities approved under other provisionsof section 4(c) of the BHC Act. After carefully considering this commenter's suggestion, the Board hasnevertheless determined to adopt in final its proposal. Thus, today's finalrule authorizes as permissible nonbanking activities, those activitiesapproved by the FRB under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, which includesthose nonbanking activities set forth in 12 CFR 225.25 as well as thoseactivities approved by order of the FRB under 12 CFR 225.23(d)(2). As notedin the proposal, however, based on its experience in implementing thisprovision, the Board reserves the right to limit or restrict such activities.Similarly, the Board may, at some later date determine to expand the listof permissible nonbanking activities for Sandamp;L holding companies to includethose activities approved by the FRB under other provisions of section4(c) of the BHC Act. One commenter urged the Board to designate as preapproved all activitiesidentified in andSection; 584.2-1, those previously approved by the Boardpursuant to former andSection; 584.2(b)(6), as well as the newly permissiblenonbanking activities approved by the FRB. As noted above, under the finalrule those nonbanking activities approved by the FRB pursuant to the authorityunder section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act are deemed permissible activitiesfor Sandamp;L holding companies. The CEBA, however, mandates that the authorityfor a Sandamp;L holding company to engage in such activities is subject toprior approval by the FSLIC. CEBA, tit. I, sec. 104(b), section 408(c)(2)(F)(i).Accordingly, the Board today is implementing the prior approval requirementby adopting the approach outlined in the proposal to grant the PSA's authorityto make initial determinations on applications to engage in these activities.The specific procedures and timeframes for this application process aregoverned by the new guidelines for application processing published onOctober 2, 1987. <T3>See </T3>52 FR 39064 (October 2, 1987) (to be codified at 12 CFR 571.12).Furthermore, the Board has determined that the multiple holding companyactivities identified in andSection; 584.2-1 will remain subject to the existingnotice procedures set forth therein. One commenter sought clarification that any activities in which a multipleSandamp;L holding company was engaged in prior to March 5, 1987 that werespecifically authorized by andSection; 584.2-1 or approved pursuant to theregulatory approval process under andSection; 584.2(b)(6) are not subjectto termination pursuant to the CEBA. Section 104(b) of the CEBA providesthat the FSLIC may require a grandfathered Sandamp;L holding company to terminateany activity prohibited by section 408(c)(1)(C) of the SLHC Act if theFSLIC determines that such action is necessary to prevent conflicts ofinterest or unsafe or unsound practices. <T3>See id., </T3>sec. 104(b), section 408(c)(6) (B) and (D). In the Board'sview, the termination authority granted to the FSLIC under the CEBA doesnot apply to those activities that continue to be permissible under theCEBA, <T3>i.e., </T3>those activities in which multiples were authorized, byregulation, to directly engage in on March 5, 1987, as well as those activitiesdeemed permissible by the FRB for bank holding companies under section4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act. The Board wishes to note, however,that pursuant to its authority under 12 U.S.C. 1730a(h)(5)(A), the FSLICmay, ``whenever it has reasonable cause to believe that the continuationby a savings and loan holding company of any activity or of ownership orcontrol of any of its noninsured subsidiaries constitutes a serious riskto the financial safety, soundness, or stability of a savings and loanholding company's subsidiary insured institution and is inconsistent withthe sound operation of an insured savings and loan institution or withthe purposes of (section 1730a) or with the Financial Institutions SupervisoryAct, order the savings and loan holding company or any of its subsidiaries,after due notice and opportunity for hearing, to terminate such activities* * *.'' Thus, although the termination authority granted to the FSLICin the CEBA applies only to those nonthrift activities engaged in by Sandamp;Lholding companies, the Board clearly has the authority under the SLHC Actto order an Sandamp;L holding company to terminate <T3>any </T3>activities such company is engaged in where good cause exists.Finally, one commenter sought clarification that any activities previouslyapproved by the Board on a case-by-case basis would be deemed permissiblefor multiple holding companies. Accordingly, the final regulation is amendedat andSection; 584.2-1(b)(12) to clarify that all activities previously approvedby the Board prior to March 5, 1987, pursuant to its authority under formersection 408(c)(2)(F) of the SLHC Act, are permissible activities for multipleSandamp;L holding companies.C. Advances Eligibility Although few parties commented on the limitation on eligibility for advancesfrom the FHLBanks imposed on thrifts failing the QTL test, those who didcomment, with one exception, argued that the penalty was too severe. Onecommenter saw no need for the penalty where an institution is in full compliancewith all regulations, particularly the Direct Investment and RegulatoryCapital Regulations. Several commenters recommended more lenient alternativesfor determining the reduction in advances eligibility. One suggestion wasto use a fraction with 60 per cent (the required ATIP to qualify as a QTL)as the denominator and the institution's actual ATIP as the numerator,<T3>e.g. </T3>50/60, or similarly to reduce eligibility by the amount bywhich the association faces the test. Unfortunately, the Board cannot adoptthe proportional reduction approach because CEBA expressly provides thata non-QTL institution's advances are reduced to the level of its actualATIP, admittedly a much larger reduction. Although not addressed by commenters, the Board wishes to take this opportunityto clarify that all FDIC-insured state-chartered savings banks and allsavings banks subject to the 10-year phase-in rule for QTL status are specificallyexempted by the CEBA from the limitations on advances imposed on non-QTLthrifts under new section 525.1. <T3>See id., </T3>sec. 105, section 10(e)(2); <T3>see also </T3>12 U.S.C. 1813(g). <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Effective Date </ITAG>The Board is adopting this regulation effective January 1, 1988. Whilethe Administrative Procedure Act (``APA'') requires publication of a substantiveregulation not less than thirty days before its effective date, the delayedeffective date requirement may be waived for ``good cause,'' such as whereCongress has prescribed an effective date. <T3>Cf. </T3>Philadelphia Citizens in Action v. Schweiker, 669 F.2d 877,888 (3d Cir. 1982) (relating to notice and comment procedures). The provisionsof the CEBA require that the QTL regulation take effect on January 1, 1988.CEBA, tit. I, sec. 104(c) (2), (3). Accordingly, the Board finds that thestatutorily prescribed effective date constitutes ``good cause'' for dispensingwith the APA delayed effective date requirement. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 604,the Board is providing the following regulatory flexibility analysis. 1. <T3>Need for and Objectives of the Rule. </T3>These elements are incorporatedabove in the ``<T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>'' regarding the proposal. 2. <T3>Issues Raised by Comments and Agency Assessment and Response. </T3>Theseelements are incorporated above in ``<T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>.'' 3. <T3>Significant Alternatives Minimizing Small-Entity Impact and AgencyResponse. </T3>The Small Business Administration defines a small financialinstitution as ``a commercial bank or savings and loan association, theassets of which, for the preceding fiscal year, do not exceed $100 million.''13 CFR 121.13(a). Therefore, small entities to which the final rule appliesinclude insured institutions which had assets totaling $100 million orless as of December 31, 1986, or 1,651 institutions. The final rule treats all institutions in the same manner and this wouldnot have a substantial impact on small entities. <ITAG tagnum="84">Lists of Subjects in 12 CFR Parts 525, 583, and 584 </ITAG>Credit, Federal home loan banks, Government securities, Holding companies,Savings and loan associations, Securities.Accordingly, the Board hereby amends Part 525, Subchapter B, Parts 583and 584, Subchapter F, Chapter V, Title 12, Code of Federal Regulations,as set forth below. <ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER B_FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK SYSTEM </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 525_ADVANCES </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 525 is revised to read as follows, andthe authority citations located at the ends of the sections are removed.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 10, 47 Stat. 731, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1430);sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1437); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of1947. 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>2. Revise andSection; 525.1 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 525.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Limitation on advances. </ITAG>(a) <T3>General. </T3>Unless otherwise authorized by the Board, a Bank shallnot make advances to any member in excess of the limits set forth in andSection;563.8(b) of this chapter. (b) <T3>Reduced eligibility for advances for certain members that are not qualifiedthrift lenders. </T3>Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section,a member that is not a qualified thrift lender, as defined in andSection;583.27 of this chapter, may not receive advances in excess of the amountthat is the product of: (1) The total amount of advances that such member would be eligible toreceive without reference to the qualified thrift lender test containedin andSection; 583.27 of this chapter, and (2) The member's actual thrift investment percentage, as defined in andSection;583.27 of this chapter. (c) <T3>Exceptions. </T3>Paragraph (b) of this section does not apply to: (1) A savings bank as defined in section 3(g) of the Federal Deposit InsuranceAct; or (2) An insured institution that was chartered as a savings bank under Statelaw before October 15, 1982; or (3) An insured institution that acquired its principal assets from an institutionthat was chartered before as a savings bank under State law before October15, 1982; or (4) Any insured institution whose financial stability the Board finds tobe threatened by severe financial conditions. <ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER F_REGULATIONS FOR SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 583_DEFINITIONS </ITAG>3. The authority citation for Part 583 is revised to read as follows, andthe authority citations located at the ends of the sections are removed.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 2, 48 Stat. 128, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1462);sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs. 401-403, 405-407,48 Stat. 1255-1257, 1259-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1726, 1728-1730);sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1730a); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>4. Revise andSection; 583.6 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 583.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Insured institution. </ITAG>The term ``insured institution'' means a Federal association, or interimFederal association, a building and loan, savings and loan, or homesteadassociation or cooperative bank, or an interim state savings and loan association,the accounts of which are insured by the Corporation; any Federal associationthe deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;a savings bank which is deemed by the Corporation to be an insured institutionunder section 408(n) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730a(n));and an institution that retains insurance accounts by the Corporation pursuantto andSection; 563.29-1 of this chapter. 5. Add a new andSection; 583.27 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 583.27</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Qualified thrift lender status. </ITAG>(a) <T3>General test.</T3> For purposes of Parts 525 and 584 of this Chapteran insured institution shall be a qualified thrift lender (``QTL'') ifthe institution's actual thrift investment percentage (as defined in paragraph(b)(1) of this section) equals or exceeds 60 per cent. (1) As of January 1, 1988, an insured institution shall be deemed to haveQTL status and shall maintain its status as a QTL so long as the institution'sactual thrift investment percentage continues to equal or exceed 60 percent during three out of every four calendar quarters in each of two outof every three calendar years. For purposes of this paragraph (a)(1), calculationsof the actual thrift investment percentage shall be made on an averagebasis by taking the sum of an institution's qualified thrift investmentsat the end of the calendar quarter being measured and at the end of eachof the three immediately preceding months and dividing by the sum of theinstitution's total tangible assets at the end of each of these same fourmonths. (2) An institution shall lose its QTL status at the close of the quarterduring which the institution has failed to maintain its actual thrift investmentpercentage at or above 60 per cent, which failure makes it mathematicallyimpossible for the institution to meet the 60 per cent actual thrift investmentpercentage test during three out of every four calendar quarters for eachof two out of every three calendar years on a continuous basis. (3) For purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, a <T3>de novo </T3>institution shall begin a QTL measuring cycle (3 out ofevery 4 calendar quarters in 2 out of every 3 calendar years) at the beginningof the quarter following the date on which its charter was granted. (4) An insured institution that fails to maintain its status as a qualifiedthrift lender may not thereafter be a qualified thrift lender for a periodof five (5) years from the close of the quarter on which the institutionlost its QTL status. (b) <T3>Definitions:</T3> For purposes of determining whether an insured institutionis a qualified thrift lender, the following terms are defined as stated:(1) ``Actual thrift investment percentage'' means the percentage determinedby dividing the amount of an insured institution's qualified thrift investments(as defined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section) by the total amount ofthe institution's tangible assets (as defined in paragraph (b)(2) of thissection). (2) ``Total tangible assets'' of an institution means the total assetsof the insured institution minus goodwill and any other intangible assets,including, but not limited to, purchased deposit base and branch network,and leasehold improvements net of accumulated depreciation. (3) Subject to paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of this section, ``Qualified thriftinvestments'' means, with respect to any insured institution, the sum of:(i) The aggregate net amount of all investments (including loans, equitypositions, or securities) held by such institution (or any subsidiary ofsuch institution) that are related to domestic residential real estateor manufactured housing as defined in paragraph (c) of this section; (ii) The book value of property used by such institution or subsidiaryin the conduct of the business of such institution or subsidiary: and (iii) An aggregate amount not to exceed 10 per cent of such institution'stangible assets of: (A) The liquid assets of the type required to be maintainedunder section 5A of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1425a) andset forth in 12 CFR 523.10 of this Chapter, and (B) 50 per cent of thedollar amount of residential mortgage loans originated by the insured institutionor its subsidiary and sold within 90 days of origination, provided thatthese mortgage loans were sold during the calendar quarter for which theactual thrift investment percentage is being measured. (iv) In calculating the amount of qualified thrift investments held byan institution and its subsidiaries under paragraph (b)(3) of this section,an institution or its subsidiary may not count their investment in subsidiariesas a qualified thrift investment if they are also including their subsidiaries'investments as qualified thrift investments. (c) <T3>Housing related investments. </T3>For purposes of the definition containedin paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section, investments (including such investmentsheld subject to repurchase agreement) that are ``related to domestic residentialreal estate or manufactured housing'' including the following: (1) Any home mortgage, as defined in 12 CFR 521.6, provided that the homeor other dwelling unit is located in any State; (2) Any loan made on the security of liens upon residential real estatelocated in any State, or any loan made for the repair, equipping, alteration,or improvement of any residential real property located in any State; (3) Any investment in manufactured home chattel paper and interests therein,where the underlying security is either manufactured, sold, or used inany State. ``Manufactured home and ``manufactured home chattel paper''shall have the same definitions as contained in andSection; 545.45 (a) and(b) of this chapter;(4) Any investment in any property acquired through the liquidation orin foreclosure of investments described in paragraphs (c) (1), (2) and(3) of this section; and any other equity interest investment in residentialreal estate or residential real property; (5) Any investment in any state housing corporation as defined in andSection;571.8 of this chapter; in any obligations of or issued by any State orany political subdivision thereof that is issued for the purpose of providingfinancing for residential housing or incidental services; and in any communitydevelopment loans or investments of the type described in andSection; 545.41of this chapter; (6) Investments in the stock of a Federal Home Loan Bank, the Federal NationalMortgage Association or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation; orobligations issued by the Corporation, the Federal Home Loan Bank System,or the Financing Corporation; (7) Investments in Federal Home Loan Bank certificates of deposit, depositaccounts (including overnight deposits), and other obligations of the FederalHome Loan Bank System. (8) Investments in the deposits of a Federal association, an interim Federalassociation, a building and loan, savings and loan, or homestead association,or a cooperative bank, or an interim state savings and loan association,the accounts of which are insured by the Corporation; or in the depositsof a Federal association the accounts of which are insured by the FederalDeposit Insurance Corporation; (9) Investments in mortgages, obligations, or other securities that areor ever have been sold by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation pursuantto section 305 or 306 of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act(12 U.S.C. 1454-55); (10) Investments in obligations, participations, securities, or other instrumentsof, issued by, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, theFederal National Mortgage Association or the Government National MortgageAssociation; (11) Investments in any other mortgage-backed securities, including mortgagepass-through certificates, mortgage-backed bonds, and mortgage pay-throughbonds, as well as any derivative mortgage-related security that is createdby disaggregating and repackaging the cash flows to be received as paymentson mortgages and traditional mortgage-backed securities provided that theunderlying assets of such securities or bonds are domestic residentialreal estate assets; (12) Excess servicing rights resulting from the sale of residential mortgageloans as well as investments in the purchased rights to perform the servicingfunction for a specific group of residential mortgage loans that are ownedby others; (13) Any investment in a corporation, partnership, or trust in proportionto the amount of gross revenues derived by such entity from servicing residentialreal estate loan portfolios, developing residential real estate housinglocated in any State, or any other domestic housing related activitiessuch as residential loan origination or selling residential real estateloans. (14) Any investment that the Office of Regulatory Policy Oversight andSupervision hereafter identifies in Supervisory Memoranda as a housingrelated investment for purposes of this regulation. For the purposes of this paragraph (c), the terms ``State,'' ``residentialreal estate,'' and ``residential real property'' shall have the same definitionsthat are stated for these terms in section 5(c)(5) of the Home Owners'Loan Act, as amended, 12 U.S.C. 1464(c)(5). The inclusion of any investmentas a ``qualified thrift investment'' under this regulation is not intendedto expand, contract, or otherwise affect the permissibility of investmentsas determined for any institution under other relevant state and federalstatutes or regulations. (d) <T3>Special phase-in for certain institutions. </T3>(1) Any insured institutionthat was chartered as a savings bank or a cooperative bank under Statelaw before October 15, 1982, or whose principal assets were acquired fromsuch a state savings bank or cooperative bank chartered before October15, 1982, shall be deemed to have the status of a qualified thrift lenderthrough December 31, 1997, <T3>provided that</T3>: (i) The institution's actual thrift investment percentage does not decreasebelow the actual thrift investment percentage calculated for the institutionon August 10, 1987; and (ii) The amount by which_ (A) The actual thrift investment percentage of such institution on thedates indicated in paragraph (d)(2) of this section exceeds (B) The actual thrift investment percentage of such institution on August10, 1987,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">is equal to or greater than the applicable percentage (as indicatedin paragraph (d)(2) of this section) of the amount by which 60 per centexceeds the actual thrift investment percentage of such institution onAugust 10, 1987: (2) The applicable percentages referenced in paragraph (d)(1) of this sectionare 25 per cent on February 10, 1990; 50 per cent on August 10, 1992 and75 per cent on February 10, 1995. (e) <T3>Exceptions. </T3>Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, theCorporation may grant such temporary and limited exceptions from the minimumactual thrift investment percentage requirement contained in paragraph(a) of this section as the Corporation deems necessary if_ (1) The Corporation determines that extraordinary circumstances exist,such as when the effects of high interest rates reduce mortgage demandto such a degree that an insufficient opportunity exists for an insuredinstitution to meet such investment requirements; or (2) The Corporation determines that_(i) The grant of any such exception will facilitate an acquisition undersection 406(f) or 408(m) of the National Housing Act, as amended, and (ii) The acquired institution will comply with the transition requirementsofparagraph (d) of this section. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 584_REGULATED ACTIVITIES </ITAG>5. The authority section for Part 584 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 2, 48 Stat. 128, as amended (12U.S.C. 1462); sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); sec. 401-403,405-407, 48 Stat. 1255-1257, 1259-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1726,1728-1730); sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1730a); Reorg.Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>6. Amend andSection; 584.2 by revising the heading of the section; and byrevising paragraphs (b) and (c) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 584.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Prohibited activities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) <T3>Unrelated business activity. </T3>No savings and loan holding companyor subsidiary thereof that is not an insured institution shall commence,or continue for more than 2 years after August 10, 1987, or the date onwhich such company becomes a savings and loan holding company, whicheveris later, any business activity other than_ (1) Furnishing or performing management services for a subsidiary of suchcompany; (2) Conducting an insurance agency or an escrow business; (3) Holding, managing, or liquidating assets owned by or acquired froma subsidiary insured institution; (4) Holding or managing properties used or occupied by a subsidiary insuredinstitution; (5) Acting as trustee under deed of trust; or (6) Any other activity_ (i) That is permissible for bank holding companies pursuant to 12 CFR 225.23and 225.25, subject to the limitations and requirements of andSection; 584.2-2of this subchapter; or (ii) Is set forth in andSection; 584.2-1, subject to the limitations therein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph (b), any savingsand loan holding company that, between March 5, 1987 and August 10, 1987,received approval pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 1730a(e) to acquire control ofan insured institution shall not continue any business activity other thanthose activities set forth in this paragraph (b) after August 10, 1987.(c) <T3>Service corporation subsidiaries of insured institutions. </T3>Untilfurther notice by order or regulation, the Corporation hereby approveswithout application the furnishing or performing of such services or engagingin such activities as are specified in andSection; 545.74 of this chapter,as now or hereafter in effect, if such service or activity is conductedby a service corporation subsidiary of a subsidiary insured institutionof a savings and loan holding company and if such service corporation haslegal power to do so. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>7. Amend Part 584 by adding a new andSection; 584.2a to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 584.2a</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Exempt savings and loan holding companies and grandfathered activities.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Exempt savings and loan holding companies. </T3>(1) The following savingsand loan holding companies are exempt from the limitations of andSection;584.2(b) of this part: (i) Any savings and loan holding company (or subsidiary of such company)that controls only one insured institution, if the insured institutionsubsidiary of such company is a qualified thrift lender as defined in andSection;583.27 of this subchapter. (ii) Any savings and loan holding company (or subsidiary thereof) thatcontrols more than one insured institution if all, or all but one of theinsured institution subsidiaries of such company were acquired pursuantto an acquisition under section 408(m) or 406(f) of the National HousingAct <T3>and </T3>all of the insured institution subsidiaries of such companyare qualified thrift lenders as defined in andSection; 583.27 of this subchapter.(2) Any savings and loan holding company referred to in paragraph (a)(1)of this section whose subsidiary insured institution(s) fails to qualifyas a qualified thrift lender pursuant to andSection; 583.27 of this subchaptermay not commence, or continue, any service or activity other than thosepermitted under andSection; 584.2(b) of this part, <T3>except that, </T3>the Corporation may allow, for good cause shown,such company (or subsidiary thereof) up to 3 years to comply with the limitationsset forth in andSection; 584.2(b) of this part. (b) <T3>Grandfathered activities for certain savings and loan holding companies.</T3>Notwithstanding andSection; 584.2(b) of this part and subject to paragraph(c) of this section, any savings and loan holding company that receivedapproval prior to March 5, 1987 under 12 U.S.C. 1730a(e) to acquire controlof an insured institution may engage, directly or indirectly or throughany subsidiary (other than a subsidiary insured institution of such company)in any activity in which it was lawfully engaged on March 5, 1987, <T3>Provided that: </T3>(1) The holding company does not, after August 10, 1987, acquire controlof a bank or an additional insured institution, other than an insured institutionacquired pursuant to section 408(m) or 406(f) of the National Housing Act;(2) Any insured institution subsidiary of the holding company continuesto qualify as a domestic building and loan association under section 7701(a)(19)of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 after August 10, 1987; (3) The holding company does not engage in any business activity otherthan those enumerated in andSection; 584.2(b) of this part and in which itwas engaged on March 5, 1987; (4) Any insured institution subsidiary of the holding company does notincrease the number of locations from which such insured institution conductsbusiness after March 5, 1987, other than an increase due to a transactionunder section 408(m) or 406(f) of the National Housing Act; and (5) Any insured institution subsidiary of the holding company does notpermit any overdraft (including an intra-day overdraft) or incur any suchoverdraft in its account at a Federal Reserve bank, on behalf of an affiliate,unless such overdraft results from an inadvertent computer or accountingerror that is beyond the control of both the insured institution subsidiaryand the affiliate. (c) <T3>Termination by the corporation of grandfathered activities. </T3>Notwithstandingthe provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, the Corporation may, afteropportunity for hearing, terminate any activity engaged in under paragraph(b) of this section upon determination that such action is necessary_ (1) To prevent conflicts of interest; (2) To prevent unsafe or unsound practices; or (3) Is in the public interest.(d) <T3>Foreign holding company. </T3>Any savings and loan holding companyorganized under the laws of a foreign country as of June 1, 1984 (includingany subsidiary thereof that is not an insured institution) that controlsa single insured institution on August 10, 1987, shaIl not be subject tothe restrictions set forth in andSection; 584.2 of this Part with respectto any activities of such holding company that are conducted exclusivelyin a foreign country. 8. Amend andSection; 584.2-1 by revising the heading of the section; by revisingparagraph (a); and by adding a new paragraph (b)(12) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 584.2-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Prescribed services and activities of savings and loan holding companies.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General. </T3>For the purpose of andSection; 584.2(b)(6)(ii), the activitiesset forth in paragraph (b) of this section are permissible services andactivities for savings and loan holding companies or subsidiaries thereofthat are neither insured institutions nor service corporation subsidiariesof subsidiary insured institutions. Services and activities of servicecorporation subsidiaries of savings and loan holding company subsidiaryinsured institutions are prescribed by andSection; 584.2(c) of this Part.Notwithstanding and without regard to any other provision of this sectionother than this sentence, a savings and loan holding company and any noninsuredsubsidiary thereof, other than a service corporation, may invest in thetypes of securities specified in andSection;andSection; 523.10 and 545.71 ofthis Chapter without regard to any limitation therein as to amount or maturity.(b) <T3>Prescribed services and activities. * * * </T3>(12) Any services or activities approved by order of the Corporation priorto March 5, 1987 pursuant to its authority under former andSection; 408(c)(2)(F)of the National Housing Act. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>9. Revise the heading and the text of andSection; 584.2-2 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 584.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Permissible nonbanking activities of savings and loan holding companies.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General. </T3>For purposes of andSection; 584.2(b)(6)(i) of this part,the nonbanking services and activities permissible for bank holding companiespursuant to 12 CFR 225.23 or 225.25 are deemed to be permissible for savingsand loan holding companies, or subsidiaries thereof that are neither insuredinstitutions nor service corporation subsidiaries of subsidiary insuredinstitutions: <T3>Provided however, </T3>that no such savings and loan holding companyor subsidiary thereof shall commence, either <T3>de novo </T3>or by an acquisition (in whole or in part) of a goingconcern, any activity described in this paragraph (a) without the priorapproval of the Corporation pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.(b) <T3>Procedures for applications. </T3>Applications to commence any activityprescribed under paragraph (a) of this section shall be filed with thePrincipal Supervisory Agent (``PSA'') of the Federal Home Loan Bank Districtin which the insured institution subsidiary is located. Applications shallbe addressed to the Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervisionand to the Supervisory Agent of the district in which the principal officeof a subsidiary insured institution is located. The Principal SupervisoryAgent (or his designee) shall act upon such application pursuant to theguidelines set forth in andSection; 571.12 of this chapter unless, the PSA,upon notice to the applicant, refers the application to the Corporationbecause it raises issues of law or policy inappropriate for resolutionby the PSA. Where the PSA has referred an application to the Corporation,the Corporation will act on such application pursuant to the guidelinesset forth at andSection; 571.12 of the chapter. (c) <T3>Factors considered in acting on applications. </T3>In evaluating anapplication filed under paragraph (b) of this section, the PSA and theCorporation shall consider whether the performance by the applicant ofthe activity can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public(such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency)that outweigh possible adverse effects (such as undue concentration ofresources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsoundfinancial practices). This consideration includes an evaluation of thefinancial and managerial resources of the applicant, including its subsidiaries,and of any company to be acquired, and the effect of the proposed transactionon those resources.<ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John F. Ghizzoni, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>This Appendix will not appear in the Code of Federal Regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix</ITAG>Data Required for Qualified Thrift Lender Test<ITAG tagnum="81">Report in Thousands of Dollars</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L0,tp9,p0,8/9,g1,t1,i1,s25,5</C>Average Book Value of Balances Heldat the End of the Calendar Quarter and at the End of Each of the PrecedingThree Calendar Months<H1>  </H1><H1>  </H1>Total Tangible Assets<ITAG tagnum="3">1. On Books of Reporting Insured Institution </ITAG><D/>Loans, Equity Positions or Securities Related to Domestic Real Estate<ITAG tagnum="3">2. On Books of Reporting Insured Institution </ITAG><D/><ITAG tagnum="3">3. On Books of Subsidiaries of Reporting Insured Institution (net ofconsolidating adjustments) </ITAG><D/>Fixed Assets Used in Business (net of depreciation)<ITAG tagnum="3">4. On Books of Reporting Institution </ITAG><D/><ITAG tagnum="3">5. On Books of Subsidiaries of Reporting Insured Institution (net ofconsolidating adjustments) </ITAG><D/>Liquid Assets of the Type Specified in Regulation 523.10(g)<ITAG tagnum="3">6. On Books of Reporting Insured Institution </ITAG><D/>Residential Mortgage Loans Sold During Quarter Originated by the SellerWithin 90 Days of Sale<ITAG tagnum="3">7. Sold by Reporting Insured Institution (exclusive of sales to subsidiaries)</ITAG><D/><ITAG tagnum="3">8. Sold by Subsidiaries or Reporting Insured Institution (exclusiveof sales to reporting institutions or to another of its subsidiaries) </ITAG><D/></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 87-29865 Filed 12-31-87; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>