<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88809-0097 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-09-88.f2.A1096</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Employment and Training Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Job Training Partnership Act; Requirements for Acceptable Fixed UnitPrice, Performance-Based Contracts Written Under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Employment and Training Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice; request for comments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Department of Labor is proposing an official interpretationof the requirements for writing acceptable fixed unit price, performance-basedcontracts which conform to the cost classification waiver provisions of20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) regulations,and other pertinent sections of JTPA and the JTPA regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments must be submitted on or before September 8, 1988.The Department of Labor is committed to provide ample advance notice tothe JTPA system before a final official policy interpretation takes effect,and will schedule, if possible, this effective date for the start of ProgramYear 1989 (July 1, 1989).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Submit comments to: Administrator, Office of Job TrainingPrograms, Employment and Training Administration, Room N-4469, 200 ConstitutionAvenue NW., Washington, DC 20210.Commenters on the proposed official interpretation are asked to addressone official copy of their comments to the Administrator, Office of JobTraining Programs as indicated. To expedite the review and analysis ofall responses, it would be helpful if commenters wishing to address individualcopies to other Department of Labor officials clearly identify such additionalsets as ``copies'' of the commenters' official submission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Robert N. Colombo, Telephone:(202) 535-0577.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The Department of Labor (DOL) is proposingthe following official interpretation of the requirements for JTPA TitleII and III agreements to serve adults and youth, which are fixed unit price,performance-based contracts written under the provisions of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2)in JTPA regulations. This notice follows an extensive 7-month public discussionof performance-based contracting in JTPA, and careful consideration ofcomments received in response to a March 11, 1988, publication for commentof a paper describing the issues and options the Department was consideringprior to formulating policy.The publication of this proposed policy presents an important opportunityto revise previous thinking in this area of JTPA policy, and to draw uponthe considerable amount of work done by all partners in the JTPA systemin responding to the March issues/options paper. While there is by no meansa present consensus on the issues, there are, in the Department's view,emerging grounds for a policy interpretation that addresses both the Federalconcern for better conformance with statutory direction and the concernof State, local, and private sector partners for non-Federal managementprerogatives and the flexibility to innovate in the design and operationof training programs.The resultant proposed policy broadens the interpretation of appropriatetraining activities under this regulation to encompass both vocationallyspecific and remedial skills training, as long as both are designed tolead to placement in an occupational target. The Department has modifiedits thinking on the nature of payments to contractors prior to placement,in part to facilitate investment in higher-quality training for at-riskindividuals as well as to recognize legitimate pre-placement attainmentsthat can be the basis of earned payment under a performance-based contract.Finally, the proposed policy treats revenues in excess of costs accruedby public and private non-profit agencies through JTPA agreements in away to maintain the concept of agency gain from success concomitant withcontract risk, as long as the funds are used for an authorized programpurpose.Following the completion of the comment period on the proposed officialpolicy interpretation, DOL will study all comments received, make any necessaryadjustments to the statement of interpretation, and publish the final officialpolicy interpretation in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. At this time, it is anticipated that the effectivedate of the final policy interpretation will be July 1, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="84">Official Policy Interpretation of the Requirements for AcceptableFixed Unit Price, Performance-Based Contracts Written under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2)</ITAG>IntroductionThis notice presents the Department of Labor's proposed official interpretationof the requirements for contracts written with JTPA service providers pursuantto 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2). It also identifies a number of policy provisionsrecommended for adoption by States which are not found within the specificlanguage of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) and, therefore, are not required. Theserecommendations are, however, in the Department's judgment necessary andappropriate for the proper administration of fixed unit price, performance-basedcontracts given the nature of the JTPA system and of statutory design.The proposed official policy interpretation will follow the order of presentationin the March 11, 1988 publication of ``Policy Considerations in AdministeringJTPA Regulations on Fixed Unit Price, Performance-Based Contracts (53 FR7989).'' The three main areas are:<ITAG tagnum="15">_The nature of training activities properly chargeable under 20 CFR629.38(e)(2);</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Issues surrounding current practices in the JTPA system for makingpayments to contractors; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_The question of revenues in excess of costs (or ``profits'') realizedthrough agreements with public and private non-profit agencies.</ITAG>The statement of the proposed official policy interpretation will be precededby summary of the many comments received by the Department in responseto the March 11 issues/options paper, and by a listing of the principleswhich the Department followed in debating and formulating the proposedpolicy.Background on Performance-Based Contracting in JTPA On March 15, 1983, DOL published implementing regulations for programsunder the Job Training Partnership Act (48 FR 11081), which included theprovisions of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) governing the use of fixed unit price,performance-based contracts. These regulations were modified by section7 of the Carl Perkins Vocational Education Act of 1984, Pub. L. 95-524(June 15, 1985 JTPA Regulations, 50 FR 24764), incorporating a provisionof section 141(d)(3) of JTPA on training packages for youth. This section of JTPA regulations established conditions for contracts writtenfor training that were fixed unit price and specified the following performancecriteria for full payment:<ITAG tagnum="15"> Participants are to complete training; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Be placed; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_In the occupation trained for; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_At not less than the wage specified in the agreement.</ITAG>The source of this regulation was an administrative action on the partof DOL to transfer into JTPA an identical provision from the ComprehensiveEmployment and Training Act (CETA) regulations. The CETA regulation hadbeen adopted after the CETA amendments of 1978, to give flexibility tocertain private sector trainers to bid on a fixed price basis for performance-basedtraining contracts without being required to break out the administrativecost component of their fixed price total, which they considered to beproprietary information. Most CETA agreements remained cost reimbursable, although a number of jurisdictionsexperimented with contractual variations including minimum performancecriteria to earn reimbursement. Fixed unit price, performance-based contractingwas limited generally to more intensive occupational skill training tomeet known labor market needs in relatively higher-paying entry level jobs.Although the JTPA statute contained no discussion of this or any specificcontracting methodology, the belief was that performance-based contractingwas consistent with the overall approach of the statue, particularly inits emphasis on placement outcomes and private-sector involvement. Theassumption of the Department, clearly wrong in retrospect, was that performance-basedcontracting under JTPA regulations would go forward as it had under CETA,and expand modestly according to the new system's abilities to developadditional high-quality skills training. During the period of JTPA implementation a number of inquiries were raisedon the application of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2). The Department chose to respondto these specifically, and avoided generalized statements that might beseen to limit ongoing policy development by States, Service Delivery Areas(SDAs) and their private industry councils (PICs). However, these DOL responseswere circulated, and additional requests were made by JTPA program officialsfor the Department to clarify certain points of its answers. In August1983, DOL indicated that it was planning to issue a proposed policy letteron this subject. Six national organizations involved in training and employmentwrote the Department in September 1983, requesting that DOL refrain fromissuing a policy statement on the use of fixed unit price, performance-basedcontracts under this section of the regulations, fearing that Federal policy-makingwould have a disruptive rather than positive effect on the establishmentof new systems and relationships for delivery of JTPA services. In theirletter, the organizations invited DOL to revisit this policy area, aftermonitoring ``this and other transition issues and to base any subsequentpolicy interpretation upon real program experience with JTPA.'' DOL did not make further proposals for general guidance, and dealt withquestions and problems involving this regulation on a case-by-case basis.During the early spring of 1987, however, it became apparent that someFederal policy was seriously needed, in part to respond to instances ofproblems and possible abuse, and in part to spur the JTPA system to thinkthrough issues involved in proper administration of fixed unit price, performace-basedagreements, and in administration of JTPA procurement in general. Varyinglevels of formal policy had been developed throughout the JTPA system,and in some areas a vacuum existed which made poor procurement practices,loosely written agreements not conforming fully to 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2),and questionable administrative arrangements possible. In the interval since JTPA implementation, the use of performance-basedcontracting had grown steadily, and the Department perceived a major shiftwith the start of Program Year (PY) 1986 (July 1, 1986_June 30, 1987).Contracts written under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) so as to be chargeable 100percent to the training cost category had now become the predominant modefor service provider agreements under Title II-A. The Department recognizedthat due to its administrative adoption of this regulation, DOL had particularresponsibilities to ensure that performance-based contracting was beingused in a legitimate and fully supportable fashion. The strong focus ofthe JTPA legislation was on training_at least 70 percent of funds to beexpended at the SDA level_with definite limits placed in Section 108(a)and (b) on availability for administration and participant support. Useof 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) provisions without attainment of superior levelsof high-quality, high-wage entry level placements would leave the JTPAsystem vulnerable to serious national criticims. After a 6-month review to determine current practices in the JTPA systemand to analyze examples involving non-compliance with the regulations orotherwise questionable and problematic circumstances, the Department publishedTraining and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 3-87 on November 18, 1987.In the TEGL, DOL described a series of problems that had been identifiedwith fixed unit price performance-based agreements, enumerated types of``problem contracts,'' and asked for the cooperation of States, SDAs andPICs to examine local contracting practices and particularly compliancewith procurement codes. Following publication of the TEGL, DOL began a series of public discussionson performance-based contracting at meetings of national and regional groups,to establish a dialogue with all portions of the JTPA system. Internally,the Department completed its own review of all main issues and optionsfor policy guidance, regulatory interpretation, and/or new rulemaking.Rather than moving ahead at the time with a DOL policy statement, it wasdecided to prepare a paper for public review and comment which presented,in the Department's judgment, the issues which existed and the optionsin resolving questions. Accordingly, the paper ``Policy Considerationsin Administering JTPA Regulations on Fixed Unit Price, Performance-BasedContracts'' was released to public interest groups on February 22, 1988.A briefing was held for Congressional staff from House and Senate Committeeson February 23, and the paper was published for a 30-day comment periodin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on March 11. Comments on the March 1988 Issues/Options Paper A total of 209 separate letters or statements of comment was submittedto the Office of Job Training Programs, Employment and Training Administration(ETA), prior to the close of the comment period. Many comments were receivedfrom multiple sources, as commenters had also were received from multiplesources, as commenters had also sent copies to their Congressional delegations,State JTPA administrations, as well as to the Office of the Assistant Secretaryfor Employment and Training. While some commenters presented summary statementsof their views or positions in response to the issues, many commenterspresented detailed, point-by-point discussions, reflective of a considerablelevel of involvement with the subject matter. The Department remains impressedwith the level of effort and thought evidenced in the comment letters.Considering the volume of comments, what follows will necessarily be agreatly simplified and condensed overview of basic positions taken. Correspondence and position papers received following publication of TEGL3-87 were also included in DOL's comment review and analysis. In addition,a number of United States Senators and members of the House of Representativeshave written to transmit or endorse the comments of their constituents.General Overview The great majority of commenters would prefer for the Departemnt to issueno further policy guidance, interpretation, or regulations on the use ofperformance-based contracts in JTPA pursuant to 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2). Whilemost commenters concurred to some degree with DOL's analysis of problems,the majority felt these problems resulted from procurement system weaknesseswhich State and local action was in the process of correcting. System-wideproblems of interpretation involving 20 CFR 629.38 were not believed tobe substantial, and abuses were believed to exist only in isolated examples.These the Department could better pursue on a case-by-case basis, withoutburdening the rest of the JTPA system with more regulation. Commentersexpressed fears that DOL policy would destabilize their programs. PICsin particular were concerned that any new policy coming from DOL mightlimit the private-sector approaches being taken within their jurisdictions.A minority of commenters expressed a conditional level of support for DOLpolicy guidance. Some of these criticized DOL's `hands-off' approach atthe national level in prior years, feeling that earlier policy leadershipwould have prevented present problems and would have improved practices.A number of commenters found options they supported in several, but notall major areas described in the March 11 Notice. Finally a group of commentersrecognized that a national problem was posed by the approach taken to theJTPA cost limitations found in section 108 of the Act through the use of20 CFR 629.328(e)(2), without adequate controls to ensure that the deliverable_skillstraining resulting in specified placements_justified the departure of thesystem from the statutory cost limits. It is relevant to report that a body of the letters indicated confusionwhether the issues/options paper presented a series of actual DOL policydecisions. Similarly, other commenters thought that the requirements of20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) came directly from the Act. Nearly all commenters expressed belief that ETA should be providing technicalassistance on contracting methods. Training Activities Chargeable Under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) On the basic question whether there should be a definition of trainingactivities chargeable under this regulation, most commenters supporteda definition to be made by the State (using the Governor's authority todefine, pursuant to 20 CFR 627.1) or the PIC (since the PIC develops guidelinesfor skill training programs pursuant to section 107(d) of the Act). A groupof commenters in the Midwest saw the question answered by the current regulatorylanguage, ``placement in the occupation trained for,'' with training thereforeto be occupationally specific. A number of carefully presented agrumentswere given that non-occupationally specific remediation in basic literacyand math was more valuable in obtianing placements, since participantsmay have some occupational skills but lack general skills, or lack timeand funding for basic living expenses to enroll in longer-term training.Comments were offered in support of job search assistance (JSA)-only traininginterventions as allowable under andSection; 629.38(e)(2). Most commenters favored DOL guidance that training packages are acceptableunder the current regulations, but were opposed to a list of acceptableelements. Several commenters supported examples of acceptable trainingpackages, as long as such guidance was not inclusive and would allow State/localflexibility. On the matter of umbrella contracts, commenters appeared to be evenly dividedbetween endorsing the option that DOL policy indicate such contracts couldbe only written under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) if there was a method to ensurethat the costs of participants who do not receive training are allocatedamong the normal JTPA cost categories, and those who believe DOL shoulddeal with problem contracts on a case-by-case basis. A number of commenterswrote that eliminating umbrella, blanket, or ``comprehensive service contracts''is not a viable option, due to the needs of rural areas for a one-stopservice center, and the needs of target groups in urban areas for comprehensiveserivices. Some presented the view that such contracts can, with greatereffort expended, be constructed more tightly, be properly competed, withdeliverables clearly delineated and proposed costs evaluated for reasonablenessprior to award. Several comments dealt with tiered administrative structuresbelow the level of the SDA, and ``broker'' arrangements. Although the SDAmight retain the entire 15 percent available for its administrative expenses,its umbrella contractors may not themselves be actual or major serviceproviders; rather, each contractor in turn may write performance-basedcontracts with the actual service providers. Both ``tiers'' below the SDAmight be charged 100 percent to the training cost category under a localinterpretation of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2). There was not much controversy about the Department clarifying that trainingpackages for youth were acceptable, as long as such packages could be writtenfor the attainment of one or more youth competency skill areas or otheroutcomes specified by the PIC per section 106(b)(2) of the Act. This issuehad been included due to a technical question of the relationship betweennew DOL reporting requirements and acceptable contracts under andSection;629.38(e)(2) of the JTPA regulations. Beginning in PY 1989, DOL reportinginstructions require SDAs to report attainments for youth who have acquiredtwo or more skill areas, rather than one or more skill area attainmentsas in earlier years. Since SDAs anticipate linking with basic educationand vocational education programs for a part of youth competency training,the Department did not wish to preclude contracting arrangements for theprovision of only one youth competency skill area. Payments to Contractors A very small portion of the comment letters supported the Department'sinterpretation that andSection; 629.38(e)(2)(iii) of the regulations meantthat contracts should treat all incremental payments made prior to fullperformance/placement as a form of advance contingent on the placementresults, with payments to contractors not achieving full performance tobe either prorated among the normal cost categories or reimbursed. Commenterspointed out that DOL had not previously issued general guidance on thiskey point. Some believed that DOL has misread its own regulations, whichstipulate full payment for full performance, but do not exclude and thereforeimplicitly allow less than full payment for less than full performance.Others pointed out that incremental payments are customary in private sectorcontracts, where the performance of benchmarks earns payment. Finally,a major objection to DOL's presentation was that reimbursement of advancesby unsuccessful contractors would greatly increase risk and therefore unitprices. Proration of costs among the cost categories was not an acceptableoption to SDAs, who could not live with uncertainty and possible inflationof reportable administrative costs above planned levels. Unlike the incremental payments issue, there was diversity of opinion onthe question of guidance on the proportion of the full contract that shouldbe withheld from payment until completion of the placement phase. Approximatelyhalf of the commenters believe a holdback policy to be a contracts managementquestion, and should be adjusted for either short-term, or long-term andhigh-risk skills training. A number of PICs wrote of holdback policiesmore stringent than DOL's option of a 25 to 30 percent amount. Commenters were also divided on the value of Federal guidelines on acceptableplacement wage rates specified in agreements. A number of comments seemedto welcome guidance clarifying that placement wage rates may be specifiedaccording to State and SDA policies as an average rate for placements,or as a range of acceptable rates. Others wrote they saw no need for Federalpolicy in this area, given overall JTPA performance standards. A minorityof commenters argued in favor of establishing an acceptable floor levelor lowest-value for placement wage rates. Revenues in Excess of Costs Accrued by Public and Private Non-Profit AgenciesThe third option presented in the March 11, 1988, notice clearly had themost support_to take no Federal action in the short run to clarify theuse of ``profits'' earned by such agencies through performance-based contracts,but to deal individually with cases where excessive profits appear to havebeen earned. Many commenters recommended that DOL issue technical assistanceon suggested ways for SDAs to ``look beyond the unit price'' and identifythe potential for excessive profits. Several pointed out that an SDA payingan excessive amount of funds through a performance-based contract to eithera private-for-profit or a public or private non-profit entity must haveits procurement system reviewed. In contrast to SDAs, at the State level, a larger minority supported eitherthe first or second option described below. Option 1 was for Federal guidanceto indicate that revenues in excess of costs earned by public and privatenon-profit agencies under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) were subject to the InternalRevenue Service (IRS) and all other applicable limitations on use. Option2 went further, specifying that all such revenue was to be considered ``programincome,'' and was accountable under JTPA regulations at 20 CFR 629.32.In the main, Option 1 was preferred by those States supporting a Federalpolicy. Support for the third option (such revenues to be considered program income)came primarily from a relatively small number of commenters at the nationallevel and from independent non-State, non-SDA commenters. One respondentbelieved a compromise on this issue was a possible result, with publicagencies and non-profit organizations able to realize revenues in excessof costs for taking the risks, with this ``program income'' devoted insome way to improving or enlarging job training activities. DOL's Rethinking of Issues Involved in the Administration of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2),as a Result of Comments The review and analysis of comments made in response to the March publicationof the issues/options paper and the information gained during the publicconsultation process caused the Department of rethink its own basic assumptionsabout fixed unit price, performance-based contracts. The comments considerablyadvanced DOL's education on the actual ways the JTPA system does businessat the local level, how PICs view there central role in decisionmaking,and how the predominant reliance on performance-based contracting and thecost flexibility of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) has significantly increased theJTPA system's vulnerability if contracts written under this regulationare poorly awarded or administered. This third realization has lead the Department to reemphasize the criticalimportance of procurement practices in the proper administration of programs.Program directors and PICs should promote better adherence in the JTPAsystem to generally accepted standards for procurement, including competitionin selection and methods for analyzing the reasonableness of proposed costs.Developments in procurement which resulted from State and local reviewof procurement systems after the issuance of TEGL 3-87 should be followedup, for it is critical to JTPA that any improvements found to be neededbe implemented fully and promptly. DOL has responded to the information presented by commenters by decidingnot to tie the official interpretation of training under andSection; 629.38(e)(2)strictly to occupationally specific training, so as not to disturb a numberof valid skills remediation designs in use which lead to designated placements.Also, the Department has decided that the earlier question of whether placementoccurred in the specific ``occupation trained for'' or in a ``training-related''job was not important, as long as States and SDAs used good judgment ingiving full payment credit for placements obtained. Placement, however,should still be connected to the actual training provided and fall withina pre-determined occupational target (albeit generic) established in thecontract. DOL determined that JSA-only training interventions did not constitutea sufficient investment in participants to afford contractors and SDA'sthe cost and accounting flexibility of a contract chargeable 100 percentto the training cost category. All contracts written under andSection; 629.38(e)(2)must meet certain standards, including those written for multiple trainingsequences and/or comprehensive services.The Department has accepted arguments put forth on the validity of paymentsmade for the attainment of competencies prior to placement or other measurableperformance benchmarks as the basis of earned payments by contractors underandSection; 629.38(e)(2). DOL still believes that payments made prior toplacement should total less than actual contract costs up through the placementphase, so that sufficient incentive for performance ``rides'' on placement.While DOL recognizes that State/local flexibility is needed to make appropriateadjustments in contract terms, in general the holdback of the full fixedprice should be in the 25 to 30 percent range. Relatedly, the Department strongly recommends that each State establishguidelines on a threshold level of placement success that performance contractsmust reach in order to qualify for charging 100 percent of the costs tothe training cost category. Proper administration of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2)requires that the costs of contracts that fail in performance should beprorated among the normal JTPA cost categories of training, participantsupport, and administration, although under current regulations the definitionof such a threshold can only be recommended to States for action. Additional deliberation on the dilemma posed by free-use ``profit'' earnedby public and private non-profit agencies through the provision of JTPAservices has convinced the Department to propose that all revenues in excessof costs accrued by such agencies be considered program income, to be expendedfor a purpose authorized for the program. Finally, because the use of performance-based contracting is nearly prevasive,DOL recognizes that administration of requirements touches on most aspectsof JTPA planning and programmatic direction. The Department has decidedto rethink the application of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) in terms of 1988 circumstances,not its original 1983 assumptions. There has been a shift in labor forcenew entrants towards the Year 2000 workforce profile of increased percentagesof females, minority youth, and recently admitted foreign-born workersnot yet proficient in English. This suggests that the JTPA system needsto refocus performance-based contracts away from short term training, andmore towards longer-term, enriched program designs that can make the investmentnecessary in at-risk and harder-to-serve segments of the eligible populationfor these individuals to obtain employment and avoid welfare dependency.Properly administered, the requirements of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) can be usedto encourage programs and services which address the needs of the moreat-risk segments of the eligible population. Requests for proposals canspecify the types and duration of training interventions required and setSDA/PIC-determined target group service requirements, resulting in performance-basedagreements for longer-term, higher-cost training appropriate to the needsof the JTPA eligible population. Proposed Official Interpretation of the Requirements of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2)Basic Principles of the Department in Establishing an Official Policy Interpretation:<ITAG tagnum="15">_The Department of Labor's overall objective is to provide operationalguidance within the framework of the current 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) regulation,but proper administration of performance-based contracts calls for theestablishment of some new policies, which DOL will recommend for Stateadoption. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_There is no entitlement on the part of the system to the use of performance-basedcontracts per 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2). It is available only if all of the specificationsare met. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_The Department continues to maintain that properly written, performance-basedcontracts under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) are not required to separately reportor break out administrative costs for accounting purposes. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_In exchange for the advantage offered by the performance contractingmode, the JTPA system must accept that risk is an inherent feature, bothfor service providers and SDAs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Explicit instruction needs to be provided on the elements necessaryfor an acceptable performance-based contract. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_DOL is committed to maintaining the opportunity for rewards and incentivesfor successful operators, but recognizes that public and private non-profitagency excess revenue accruing from contracts must remain within the JTPAsystem. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_The new policy framework for preformance-based contracts should beundertaken within the context of current policy objectives for the JTPAsystem, namely: Increase the level of participation of at-risk populationsin the program; increase the quality of the training intervention; expandthe amount of basic skills training being provided; and thus improve thequality of placements for JTPA participants.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_The Department must undertake the establishment of new policy onperformance-based contracting collegially, making clear DOL objectivesand DOL's rethinking and reformulation of issues, with the goal that theJTPA system fully understand and accept DOL's objectives even if thereis not full agreement on all aspects of the Department's interpretation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_It is clear that technical assistance is needed for procurement ingeneral and specifically for the new performance-based contracting policy.This may include assistance to States in setting rules.</ITAG>States and SDAs should implement DOL's interpretations and policy guidanceregarding 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) within the framework of the principles statedabove.<ITAG tagnum="84">Elements of the Department's Interpretation</ITAG>I. Training Activities ChargeableA. Definition of allowable adult and youth training activities for thepurposes of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2):andbullet; Training must consist of a core of either occupational trainingor basic skills/remediation training, or both.andbullet; All training must be geared to make participants employment competentand must be tied to a specific or a general occupational target. This trainingneed not involve a specific job title, but can encompass a range of jobswith similar entry requirements.andbullet; Placement must be at or above the specific wage in the agreement,and reflect an appropriate entry wage rate for the specific or generaloccupational target, given the relative skill level of trainees. Again,this can mean a range of jobs. For example, the skills needed for a dataentry technician allow entry into jobs with different occupational titlesand types of companies.B. Clarification of the allowability of training packages for the purposesof 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2):Acceptable elements may include but are not limited to outreach, intake,skill assessment and employability development planning, participant services,basic skills development, counseling, pre-employment/work maturity training,job search assistance, and followup services, provided that a core of basicskills and/or specific occupational training per I.A. above is the primarypurpose of the contract. Also, the program must be designed for all participantsto receive the core training.C. Specifications for acceptable contracts:andbullet; In general, contracts are to be written in accordance with soundprocurement practices and applicable codes. This includes methods for assuringwherever possible competition for award, arm's length negotiation of contracts,and proposal review which verifies the reasonableness of proposed costs.andbullet; Each contract shall clearly list and separately price each trainingcurriculum to be provided. All curricula shall have a separate fixed unitcost.All elements constituting the training package must be clearly spelledout in the contract. This includes the course schedule for each element,the hours and/or the number of weeks of training, the expected number oftotal participants who would require the element, the policy regardingnon-completers and the measurable outcome.andbullet; The contract should clearly indicate the organization which isproviding the training, participant services and administration being chargedto the contract. Care should be given to assuring that only those administrativecosts attributable to the training are chargeable under the contract. However,DOL is in no way requiring that the actual performance-based contract documentseparately list administrative costs, or require a separate reporting ofadministrative costs included in the full unit prices.andbullet; Job Search Assistance designs. Services and participant sequencesthat do <T3>not </T3>involve core training per I.A. above such as JSA-only interventions,are not acceptable under the 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2).andbullet; Further, it is strongly recommended that States establish policiesfor performance-based contracts to be designed to accommodate and encourageservice to more at-risk populations. This might involve an additional adjustmentto the unit price to provide increased financial incentive for trainingand placing a more at-risk population.D. Allowability of Umbrella Contracts:All contracts, including umbrella, blanket, or comprehensive service contractsmust meet the requirements of elements I.A., B., and C. above in orderto qualify for the cost charging provisions under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2).The costs of fixed unit price, performance-based agreements which do notsatisfy these requirements are to be allocated among the normal JTPA costcategories of training, participant support, and administration.E. Clarification Regarding Training Package for Youth:Contracts may be written under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) for training packagesfor youth, which stipulate full performance as attainment of one or morePIC-recognized competency skill areas per the list of positive outcomesfound in section 106(b)(2) JTPA, or if the training results in employment.II. Payments to Contractors Under 20 CFR 639.38(e)(2)A. Full Payment. Full payment of the full unit price is contingent upon:andbullet; Completion of training;andbullet; Placement in the occupation trained for or within a general occupationaltarget;andbullet; At not less than the wage rate specified in the agreement.Further, the Department recommends that States/SDAs set a policy indicatingthis wage rate should reflect the entry level wage for the occupationaltarget.andbullet; The agreement must provide for a method to reduce payment in caseswhere individuals do not complete the training but do place successfullyper the contract, or complete the training and are placed below the specifiedwage level. For example, a participant in word processing drops out inthe fifth week of a 10-week training program, but obtains a training relatedjob within the general occupational target at or above the specified wage.Further, the Department recommends that State/SDA policies provide thatparticipants who leave before entering core training per I.A. above either<ITAG tagnum="15">_Cannot be the basis of any payment earned by the contractor; or</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Are only the basis for earned payments that are apportioned or proratedamong the regular JTPA cost categories, and not charged 100 percent totraining.</ITAG>B. Partial earned payments for attainment of performance benchmarks. TheDepartment has determined that in specific circumstances performance shortof full performance/placement can be the basis of earned payments for partialperformance when:andbullet; The performance is measurable and documented and includes trainingper I.A. above;andbullet; The payment schedule amount for any intermediate benchmark isnot more than the estimated costs of providing that increment of the plannedtraining. However, the subtotal of possible payment schedule amounts forall performance benchmarks prior to full performance/placements is to beclearly less than the point at which the contractor's costs are covered,in order to ensure the principle of contractor risk and to stimulate contractorperformance to earn full payment.andbullet; Costs associated with intake, enrollment and assessment activitiesalone without participation in core training are not to be the basis ofearned benchmark payments chargeable 100 percent to the training cost categoryper 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2).C. Advance Payments. All payments made to contractors prior to full performance/placementthat do not conform to the above requirements for benchmarks are to beconsidered advances contingent on the full performance/placement recordof the contract.D. Guidance on Payments to be Withheld Prior to Full Performance. Whetherpayments made to contractors prior to full performance/placement are advancepayments or partial earned payments for the attainment of performance benchmarks,in principle a significant portion of the total fixed price should be heldback until earned through placement. States and SDAs have latitude to adjustthe amount held back to accommodate longer-term and more intensive programsserving at-risk populations, recognizing the operational needs of contractorsfor funds. As a matter of general guidance, an amount equal to 25 to 30percent of the total contract cost would appear to be a prudent and significantholdback level, well below reimbursement of total contractor expenses,and insuring that contracts are consistent with the performance-based contractingconcept of risk prior to full performance.E. Threshold for Contract Performance in Order to Qualify for Provisionsat 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2).In the Department's consideration of payment issues, it was determinedthat there is a level of contract placement performance below which thecontract has failed. Failed contracts should not be afforded under State/SDApolicies the advantage of assigning all costs to training according tothe provisions of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2). Therefore, the Department stronglyrecommends that States and SDAs define a threshold level of placement performancebelow which a performance-based contract written under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2)would be determined to have failed. States and SDAs should establish proceduresfor allocation or proration of all costs of such failed contracts amongthe regular three JTPA cost categories. This threshold level should beappropriately specified, taking into account greater or lesser contractorrisk in terms of length, complexity of training, and the population tobe served by a contract.F. Direct Contracts, Versus Tiered Administrative Structures. Contractswhich qualify for the cost allocation provisions of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2)are contracts for the direct provision of training by an agency, institution,or business, and should never involve intermediary administrative entities.Such an entity, if needed, should be charged to the administrative costcategory. This element of DOL's interpretation does not preclude subcontractingby the training contractor of some specialized client services if thisis determined to be more effective and efficient, and is authorized byState/SDA policies and the contract document.III. Revenues in Excess of Costs, or ``Profits''  Public or private non-profit contractor revenues in excess of costs (whichhave been properly earned) are to be treated as program income pursuantto 20 CFR 629.32. Accordingly, these funds may be retained by the serviceprovider (or by the SDA or the Governor) to underwrite additional trainingor training related services pursuant to the project or program which generatedthem, consistent with the purposes of JTPA. As with other JTPA programincome, contractors are to maintain records which account for the use ofthese funds, in anticipation of possible audit.<T3>Conclusion  </T3>In the Department's view, fixed unit price, performance-based contractswritten under the provisions of 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) can, if properly administered,focus JTPA resources on strong training approaches that will result inquality placements. It is recognized that these contracts can also increasethe effective investment in the JTPA participant to bring about betterplacement outcomes than those obtained through other modes of contracting.Further, performance-based contracts can be written specifically to improvethe degree to which at-risk populations are helped through JTPA. For theseobjectives to be achieved, some JTPA administrators and PICs will needto move beyond preoccupation with ways to increase total funds availablefor administrative costs by artificially structuring every service provideragreement or sub-SDA administrative entity agreement as an agreement chargeable100 percent to training. Similarly, others will meet to reconsider approachesthat set over-inflated service provider agreement placement goals. Theseapproaches cause contracts to be written under 20 CFR 629.38(e)(2) primarilyto ensure that an SDA has a fail-safe method for achieving its overallperformance standards, without careful consideration of pressures on contractorsto cream the eligible population to obtain easier, less at-risk participantsand low cost placements.   Because the present day reliance on the performance-based contract modeis so pervasive, issues concerning State, SDA, and PIC basic program philosophiesand priorities must necessarily be weighed and mediated in administeringagreements, in addition to the technical considerations of procurement,contract content, and compliance with Federal requirements. This presentsa second and equally important level of challenge in designing the mostappropriate contracting approach in each State and SDA.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 2nd day of August 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Roberts T. Jones,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-17954 Filed 8-8-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-30-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>