<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88812-0084 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-12-88.f2.A1083</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">Job Training Partnership Act; Review of Experience</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Employment and Training Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice; request for comments..</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Employment and Training Administration of the Departmentof Labor is conducting a review of experience under the Job Training PartnershpAct and is requesting interested parties to submit written comments onissues related to the future quality and effectiveness of the program.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Written comments on the issues discussed in this noticeshall be submitted by mail, postmarked no later than September 26, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Send written comments to: Roberts T. Jones, Acting AssistantSecretary, Employment and Training Administration, Room S2308, 200 ConstitutionAvene, NW., Washington, DC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Lloyd Feldman, Director, Divisionof Planning, Policy, and Legislation, Office of Strategic Planning andPolicy Development, Employment and Training Administration, Room N5636,200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Telephone: (202) 535-0664(This is not a toll-free number).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2>Since the enactment of the Manpower Development and Training Act more thana quarter century ago, the United States Government has pursued a policyof active intervention in the labor market through employment and trainingprograms. During the ensuing years, the Nation's employment and trainingsystem has evolved through a succession of basic authorizing statutes andamendments e.g., the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA).On October 13, 1982, President Reagan signed into law the Job TrainingPartnership Act (JTPA), the most recent legislative expression of the Nation'sjob training policy. As in the case of earlier employment and traininglegislation, the drafters of JTPA sought to build upon past experience,retaining features that had proven effective and modifying or eliminatingthose that appeared to limit program effectiveness.The following basic features of JTPA represented major changes in the organizationof the program:andbullet; A shift in responsibility for program management from the federalto the State and local governments.andbullet; The assignment of a substantive role to the private sector inthe planning and oversight of the program.andbullet; An emphasis on training and related services for participantswith a consequent deemphasis on using the program to provide income maintenanceor subsidized employment.andbullet; The establishment of performance standards as a key operationalcomponent of the program.andbullet; Inclusion of machinery to increase the coordination of employmentand training with other human services at the state and local levels.andbullet; Emphasis on services for youth.With the completion, this year, of five years of operational experience,it was felt that the program had matured sufficiently and patterns of serviceand performance had been clearly enough established that it would be timelyto take stock of the experience to date and to analyze the basic policyissues which must be addressed in charting the future course of JTPA.Accordingly, DOL has decided to conduct a public review of the JTPA programwith an interim report planned for January 1989.The review will focus primarily on services for economically disadvantagedyouth and adults under Titles I and II-A of the Act. However, the scopeof the review will include services for dislocated worker (Title III),and disadvantaged youth enrolled in the summer employment program (TitleII-B). Activities under Title IV, particularly Indian and Native Americanprograms, will also be considered, where the issues addressed are relevantto these programs.The ultimate objective of the review will be to enhance the quality ofservices provided to JTPA enrollees and to explore the potential of theJTPA system to serve as a building block for a comprehensive human resourcedelivery system. While the results of the review may have implicationsfor the roles of the Federal Government, the States, locally-elected officialsand Private Industry Councils (PICs) in Service Delivery Areas (SDAs),the basic relationship of the partners in the delivery system will notbe a subject of the review.The purpose of this notice is to identify the specific issues which willform the core of the agenda for this review. A JTPA Advisory Committee,comprised of representatives of the JTPA system, public interest groups,community organizations, business, labor, education, veterans, and thegeneral public will address and provide advice on these issues. The issueswill also form the basis for discussion and comment at meetings held atthe State and local levels. The general public will be given an opportunityto react to the issues as a result of publication of this announcementin the <T4>Federal Register.</T4><ITAG tagnum="84">Experience Under The Program</ITAG>Since the program became operational in 1983, approximately 5 million personshave received services under JTPA, not including youth enrolled in theSummer Youth Employment Program (SYEP). Of these, about 90 percent wereserved under the two programs administered at the State and local level:Title II-A which provides grants to States and local areas to support locallyadministered training and employment programs and Title III which providesfunds to States to address problems of workers dislocation resulting fromplant closings and mass layoffs.Title II-A Grants to States and Local Areas<T3>Participant Characteristics.</T3> This title was intended primarilyto serve the economically disadvantaged and that trust is reflected inthe characteristics of the participants. Thus, the Act's requirement thatat least 90 percent of Title II-A participants be economically disadvantagedwas exceeded (93 percent in Program Year (PY) 1986 (July 1, 1986_June 30,1987)).In PY 1986, some 44 percent of the participants in Title II-A were under22 years of age; the Act requires that at least 40 percent of the fundsbe used for youth. Approximately 52 percent of the participants were femaleand 50 to 56 percent were high school graduates, while 27 percent weredropouts and 17 percent were still in school. On the basis of most characteristics for which data are available, persons,enrolled in the program are representative of the eligible population andthese data suggest that the program is targeting those in need. Thus, some22 percent of the program participants in PY 1986 were Aid to Familieswith Dependent, Children (AFDC) recipients as compared to 17 percent ofthe eligible population. Minorities made up half of the enrollment as comparedto 39 percent of the eligible population. The percentage of youth enrolledis twice their proportion of the eligible population. However, the educationlevel of enrollees, while not a perfect measure of competence, does suggestthat the program has enrolled those disadvantaged persons with a betterprognosis for success than the eligible population. Approximately 56 percentof all participants_and 73 percent of adults_were high school graduates,compared to 49 percent of the eligible population. Also, Hispanics_a groupthat has sufferd serious labor market problems_constituted ten percentof JTPA enrollment, but 13 percent of those eligible for the program. <T3>Service Proved. </T3>In PY 1986, 36 percent of the Title II-A participantswere in classroom training, 22 percent in on-the-job training (OJT), 19percent in job search assistance, 9 percent in work experience, and 14percent in ``other'' services (<T3>e.g., </T3>counseling and testing). The distribution of participantsamong these services tends to vary depending on their characteristics.For example, makes, older enrollees and the better educated tend to befound disproportionately in OJT; youth and minorities tend to be over representedin work experience activities. The median length of stay varies widelyamong the various kinds of services, from almost 20 weeks for classroomtraining to 14 weeks for participants in OJT and less than 4 weeks in jobsearch assistance. The average length of stay in the program was 18 weeks.Under JTPA there appears to have been a marked shift toward activitiesgeared to more immediate and direct placement, such as job search assistance.Together, job search assistance and ``other'' services account for aboutone-third of the JTPA enrollment as compared to the less than 10 percentof CETA participants who received direct referral and ``other'' in services.Approximately 22 percent of JTPA enrollees are in OJT programs_about doublethe rate under CETA. <T3>Program Outcomes. </T3>Of those terminationg from Title II-A duringPY 1986, 62 percent entered employment. Entered employment rates tendedto be higher for males (65 percent), high school graduates (71 percent)and lower for black participants (56 percent) and welfare recipients (54percent). Among the various program activities, the entered employmentrate ranged from 77 percent for job search assistance and OJT to 46 percentfor work experience. The rate for classrooms training was 52 percent. The average hourly wage for those entering employment was $4.72. Wage rateswere notably higher for males ($5.04), those with some post high schooleducation ($5.30) and lower for females ($4.49), black participants ($4.55),and welfare recipents ($4.57). By service provided, the highest averagehourly rate was achieved by those who were in classroom training ($5.03),followed by terminees from OJT ($4.87), job search assistance ($4.68),and participants in work experience ($4.16). The overall placement rateunder JTPA compares very favorably with that achieved under the earlierCETA program; about two-thirds of JTPA terminees placed as compared toone-third under the earlier program. (Data on retention following placementare not available). However, hourly wages for those placed in jobs haveincreased only marginally over those achieved in the preceding programsome eight years earlier; if adjusted for inflation, the average hourlywage is actually lower. <T3>Role of the Private Sector_</T3>One of the principal changes underJTPA was the substantive role provided for the private sector in planningand administering training and employment programs at the local level throughthe creation of private industry councils in each designated service deliveryarea. Currently, there are over 620 PICs, with some 16,000 members, includingan estimated 9,000 representatives of the business sector. Title III Dislocated Worker Program<T3>Participant Characteristics. </T3>Since Title III focuses on experiencedworkers, the characteristics of participants in the program are distinctlydifferent from those of Title II-A enrollees. Thus, in PY 1986, only 4percent of workers enrolled in Title III were under 22 years old (as comparedto 44 percent of Title II-A participants), while almost 90 percent werebetwen the ages of 22 and 54. Similarly, only one-third of Title III participantswere economically disadvantaged compared to over 90 percent of those inthe Title II program. Dislocated worker program participants tend to be relatively well educatedwith over 80 percent having at least a high school education. Reflectingthe eligible population of dislocated workers, enrollment in title IIIis predominately male (65 percent). Minorities account for 23 percent ofthe participants as compared to 19 percent of eligible dislocated workers.<T3>Services Provided. </T3>Under the the dislocated worker program, theprimary service provided is job search assistance with half of the participantsenrolled in this activity. Classroom training accounts for 26 percent ofthe enrollees, OJT for 12 percent and ``other'' services for 12 percent.The characteristic of participants in the various service components arefairly similar. The average length of stay in the title III program is20 weeks but varies by service provided with the longest duration in classroomtraining at 23 weeks, followed by about 15 weeks for both OJT and job searchassistance. <T3>Program Outcomes. </T3>Of some 140,000 participants who terminatedfor Title III dislocated worker programs in PY 1986, 69 percent enteredemployment. The entered employment rate tended to be higher for males (74percent) than for females (64 percent), black participants (60 percent)and welfare recipients (45 percent). Entered employment rates were particularlyhigh for those who had been in OJT programs (89 percent). The average hourly wage rate for terminees from Title III programs enteringemployment was $6.36. The rate was highest for those terminating from classroomtraining and job search assistance. Terminees from OJT had the lowest hourlywage rate.<ITAG tagnum="84">Issues For The Future</ITAG>The general objective of this review of JTPA is to determine how the qualityand effectiveness of the program can be enhanced and how the program canhelp in building a coherent local human resource delivery system. In carryingout the review, four general areas of inquiry will be pursued:andbullet; Whom should the program serve?andbullet; What services should be provided and how can the quality of servicesbe improved?andbullet; How can the management tools used in the program be enhanced?andbullet; Should JTPA be coordinated more closely with non-JTPA servicesand serve other national priorities? Should the public-private partnershipunder JTPA be broadened?The key issues in these areas of inquiry, briefly discussed below, willbe included in the review process. Public comment is particularly invitedon these issues. However, comments on related JTPA subjects, which maynot be specifically embraced by these subject areas, may also be submitted.<ITAG tagnum="84">Whom Should the Program Serve?</ITAG><T3>Eligibility for the Program and Targeting Policy. </T3>Eligibilityfor Title II-A of JTPA is generally limited to those who are economicallydisadvantaged, <T3>i.e., </T3>who meet income criteria issued by DOL. Up to 10 percentof the participants need not meet these income criteria if they have encounteredbarriers to employment. Title II-A also requires that not less than 40percent of each SDA's funds be spent on youth, and that school dropoutsand AFDC recipients be served on an ``equitable basis.''The limited resources available for JTPA programs cannot meet the needsof the entire eligible population. Estimates of the number of disadvantagedyouth and adults eligible under the income criteria approach 40 million.Therefore, of necessity, a priority for service must be established amongthese who are eligible. Within the parameters of the law, eligibility determinationis a local decision. JTPA directs SDAs to provide employment and trainingopportunities to those who can benefit from, and are most in need of, suchopportunities and to make efforts to provide equitable services among substantialsegments of the eligible population.Compared to the eligible population, Title II-A programs have served ahigher proportion of blacks, youth and AFDC recipients. However, the programshave served a lower proportion of Hispanics and those with less than highschool degree. The JTPA system has been criticized for failing to servethose most in need. It has been argued that SDAs tend to focus short-termservices on job ready individuals in order to achieve high placement rateswith low unit costs and thereby achieve ``success.'' For example, it hasbeen noted that the cost per placement for youth is less than half thenational standard. It has been suggested that, with a limited amount ofdollars, SDAs may choose to serve the largest possible number of eligibleindividuals by serving those that can be served at relatively low cost.Performance standards are often cited as the reason for JTPA not servinga more at-risk population. However, national JTPA performance standardsallow for local flexibility. They can be adjusted by Governors to reflectclient characteristics and local economic conditions. SDAs may also requestfurther adjustment for those with more serious employability problems.Others have taken the position that good management dictates that, withinthe eligible population, those selected for service should have the bestprognosis for success.The basic policy issue posed is who, within the economically disadvantagedpopulation, should be served under JTPA? andbullet; Should the program serve those disadvantaged individuals who facethe most serious barriers to employment because of inadequate basic skills,poor orientation to the demands of the workplace, physical or mental disabilities,and related problems? Or, should the program enroll those individuals whomeet the law's income test but are best equipped in terms of educationand attitude toward work to succeed in competitive employment? andbullet; What are the best measures of at-risk status or serious barriersto employment? Do they vary from group to group? andbullet; A policy decision on targeting has implications for the servicesto be provided. Serving those who are most disadvantaged in terms of verbal,quantitative and analytic skills as well as exposure to the disciplineof the workplace will require a broader range of services than servingthose who are more job ready. What is the optimum range and mix of serviceswhich should be provided for these individual subgroups of the disadvantagedpopulation? andbullet; Targeting policy choices will also have cost implications. Thebroader range of services required to achieve the employability of themost disadvantaged will result in high unit costs_and fewer persons servedat a given budget level_than will the lower unit costs associated withserving the least disadvantaged. What are the costs of serving variousdisadvantaged subgroups? How many individuals should be served at a givenbudget level? andbullet; What are the benefits and relative return on investment to societyin serving various subgroups of the disadvantaged population? andbullet; Policy decisions concerning who is to be served will also haveimplications for the outcomes which can be anticipated for those participatingin the program. A basic issue is the nature of the outcome, itself. UnderJTPA, the outcome anticipated for participants is increased employmentand earnings and reduced welfare dependency. An alternative_particularlyfor those subgroups with low basic skill levels_is to establish increasedcompetency levels as an acceptable outcome. In either case, the level ofsuccess which can be anticipated will be lower for those with more disadvantagedbackgrounds. For example, in PY 1986, of those Title II-A enrollees whowere high school graduates, approximately 71% were placed in jobs whereasonly 57% of those who were high school dropouts entered employment followingthe program. High school graduates were placed in jobs paying $4.88 anhour; dropouts' wages at placement were $4.52. What outcome measures shouldbe used for various subgroups of the population and what outcome levelsshould be anticipated for these subgroups? What changes should be made in performance standards to assure that theseoutcomes are adequately reflected? andbullet; In carrying out any changes in policy with respect to who is tobe served, what changes_if any_should be made in the law's eligibilityrequirements and targeting provisions for youth, school dropouts and AFDCrecipients? andbullet; Should the Act's provisions allowing up to ten percent of participantsto be non-disadvantaged individuals who encounter barriers to employmentbe revised? andbullet; What non-legislative, administration measures should be takento implement changes in eligibility/targeting policies? andbullet; Under either current or changed eligibility requirements, whatcriteria should be used at the operational level to select clients forthe program? <T3>Allocation Formula.</T3> Closely related to the issue of eligibilityfor the program and targeting policy is the question of the adequacy ofthe formula used to allocate funds Title II-A. If a change in eligibility/targetingpolicy is made, consideration should also be given to related changes inthe allocation formula. However, even under current policy, questions havebeen raised about the adequacy of the present formula.Currently, the formula allocates funds to States using three factors: One-thirdbased on the relative number of individuals residing in areas of substantialunemployment (over 6\1/2\ percent unemployed); one-third based on the relativeexcess number of unemployed (unemployed over 4\1/2\ percent); and one-thirdbased on the relative number of economically disadvantaged individuals.The same formula is used to allocate Title II-B (Summer Youth Program)funds, and to distribute State funds under both programs to the local level.The Administration has proposed legislation that would revise the TitleII-B allocation formula to better target resources to the population servedby that program. The new formula would allocate funds based on the relativenumber of disadvantaged youth residing in each State and Service DeliveryArea.In recent years, at congressional hearings and elsewhere, concerns havebeen raised that the JTPA allocation formula does not sufficiently directresources to where the eligible population is located. The current formulatargets resources heavily to areas with high adult unemployment. Unemploymentdata have been used for allocating employment and training funds becausethey provide one measure of relative economic hardship and are availableon a current basis. However, since many urban SDAs contain both pocketsof extreme poverty an very affluent areas with vigorous economies, employmentconditions in these areas may not be the best indicators of their relativeneed for resources for poor youth and adults. Moreover, cyclical changesin the economy may cause large funding swings under the current formulathat may be unrelated to the poverty situation in a local area. Researchsponsored by DOL has confirmed that the Title II-A allocation formula doesnot distribute resources in a fully equitable manner. In particular, itwas found that some regions of the country and central cities, where theeconomically disadvantaged population is heavily concentrated, receivea smaller share of State and local funding than their share of the eligiblepopulation would dictate.A serious information problem complicating this issue is the lack of currentdata on the relative number of economically disadvantaged individuals inSDAs. Currently, the decennial census is the only available source forthese data. With the passage of time, these data become less reflectiveof the distribution of low income individuals. On the other hand, collectionof these data on a more frequent basis would be extremely costly.The basic issue is whether the Title II-A allocation formula should bechanged to more accurately reflect the law's eligibility provisions, eitherunder the current statute or under new, revised eligibility criteria.andbullet; Should any of the current factors_economically disadvantaged,excess unemployment, or unemployment in areas of substantial unemployment_beeliminated?andbullet; Should any of these factors be modified? Should different weightsbe assigned to these factors?andbullet; Should new factors be added to the formula and, if so, which onesand what data sources should be used?andbullet; If the present factors are retained, should the data currentlyused to measure the relative number of economically disadvantaged individualsin SDAs be updated? How can this best be achieved and what would be thecost of an alternative to the current use of decennial census data, suchas more frequent surveys?andbullet; Should the delivery and funding of services to youth and adultsbe separated in the legislation with different funding allocation formulasdeveloped for each group?<ITAG tagnum="84">What Services Should be Provided and How can the Quality of Servicesbe Improved?</ITAG><T3>Nature and Quality of Services Provided.</T3> The law gives SDAs broaddiscretion in determining the range and mix of services to be providedto enrollees. A variety of factors enter into SDAs' decisions on the mixand duration of services selected. An important consideration is the natureof the clientele to be served. More disadvantaged individuals generallyrequire more comprehensive services, over a longer period of time, at highercosts, to become employable than do the less disadvantaged.A second consideration is the occupational objective of a training program;higher level skills usually require longer-term training. More intensiveremediation usually requires longer-term training as well. A third factoris the total number of clients to be served. With finite resources available,serving a larger number of enrollees in an SDA will reduce the unit cost_andpossibly, the quality_of training provided to individuals. Local decisionson the services to be provided also must rely on the availability of adequateservice deliverers. Finally, the existence of the performance standardssystem has influenced local service strategies although the extent of thatinfluence has been subject to debate.It has been argued that many SDAs have opted for short duration programs,geared to the least disadvantaged, resulting in maximum enrollment andhigh placement rates.The average length of stay in Title II-A in FY 1986 was 18 weeks. It hasbeen contended that programs of 4-5 months duration allow insufficienttime to prepare the truly disadvantaged for stable employment at good wagelevels.Others have taken the position that changes under JTPA_emphasis on performancestandards, the removal of training allowances; and the influence of thePICs_have all contributed to increased program efficiency under JTPA, thusenabling SDAs to achieve more cost-effective service, during shorter trainingperiods, than was possible under earlier legislation.In either case, if JTPA is to focus its services on the most disadvantagedmembers of the eligible population, it can be argued that the program shouldbe limited to basic skills and literacy training. Under this approach,specific occupational skills training would be the responsibility of publicand private vocational schools and employers.Conclusive evidence about the quality of JTPA services is lacking. Durationof training is only a rough proxy for program quality. However, the availabledata do suggest that there may be some grounds for concern about the servicescurrently being provided. Only one-third of Title II-A enrollees receiveclassroom training, generally the most substantive service area under JTPA.A larger proportion of enrollees_more than half_receive either on-the-jobtraining or low-cost job search assistance and related services. In general,the low cost per placement under Title II-A suggests that service qualitymay be less than optimal in many SDAs. The cost per placement has beenwell below the performance standard level: $2,905 for adults in FY 1986($4,374 standard). The cost per positive termination was $2,308 for youth($4,900 standard).The central issue to be addressed is whether changes are needed in thenature, mix and quality of services provided under JTPA.andbullet; A key element of this question is whether JTPA should continueto attempt to provide participants with specific occupational skills orshould the program focus on remediation, meeting the basic skills deficienciesof enrollees in reading, writing, mathematics and orientation to the workplace.This question particularly arises if a policy of reaching the most disadvantagedis pursued.andbullet; If a policy of remediation is to be pursued, should changes bemade in the nature of the outcomes anticipated and the associated performancestandards?andbullet; For example, increased levels of basic skills competency, ratherthan or in addition to placement, may become a more appropriate objectivefor the program.andbullet; Whether a program emphasis on either remediation or on specificskills training is elected, the policy on eligibility and targeting willhave implications for the range and cost of the services to be provided.As noted earlier, a decision to serve the most disadvantaged will requirea broader and more costly range of services than will be the case for thosein the eligible population who are best equipped for the job market. Whatprimary and supportive services should be provided_and at what cost_tosupport a policy of serving the most seriously disadvantaged and assuringtheir eventual placement in stable, well-paid employment?andbullet; What are the best measures of ``quality'' training_duration, competency-based,individually tailored, self-paced?andbullet; Should the Act's restrictions on the amount of funds which canbe used for supportive services be revised? Should the restriction be relaxedgenerally or only for specific subgroups in the eligible population? And,if it is to be limited to the latter, how should the eligible subgroupbe defined?andbullet; What policy and program approaches should be followed at the Federal,State and local levels to effect changes in the services provided to enrollees:Legislative changes; policy leadership; technical assistance; modificationof performance standards and the adjustment models; other courses of action?<T3>Payment of Stipends, Allowances and Bonuses. </T3>Within the generalarea of services improvement, concern has been expressed about JTPA's currentstrict limits on the payment of stipends, allowances or bonuses. The restrictionswere included in the law because of a perception that, under previous programs,individuals enrolled in order to receive training allowances and stipends,rather than to increase their employability. It was also felt that participantsunder JTPA would have other sources of financial support while in the program:Unemployment insurance; AFDC and other welfare benefits; and, in the caseof youth, financial assistance from their families.The law states that not more than 30 percent of each SDA's funds may bespent for the combined costs of administration and supportive services.The latter category includes expenditures for needs-based payments. Becausethere is a separate limit of 15 percent on administrative costs, this effectivelyplaces a limit of 15 percent on the needs-based payment/supportive servicecost category. The act allows a waiver of the supportive services costlimitations if specified conditions in a local area are met.The expenditure rates for supportive services have remained essentiallythe same since the implementation of JTPA: 11 percent for participant support,including needs-based payments. However, the actual figure may be highersince the cost of some supportive services are charged to ``training''under performance-based contracts. While national data are not collectedon requests for waivers of the cost limitations, it appears that few requestsfor such waivers have been filed.If it is decided to target the program on the hardest-to-serve, there isconcern that these ``at-risk'' individuals will not be able, or willing,to participate in JTPA programs unless stipends and allowances are availableto help them with living expenses while they are in training.Thus, it has been suggested that some liberalization of the restrictionson allowances, stipends and bonus payments is desirable. On the other hand,relaxing these restrictions means that funds may be diverted from trainingto pay for income support. An indirect consequence could be fewer personsserved.The basic issue is whether JTPA enrollees should receive stipends or allowanceswhile enrolled in the program.  andbullet; It had been assumed that individuals enrolled in Title II-A andTitle III programs would receive sufficient financial support from non-JTPAsources to allow them to enter and complete the program. Has this beenthe case? Or are there JTPA-eligible groups which have been discouragedfrom participating because they lack financial support from non-JTPA sources?Has the lack of financial support for participants forced program plannersto shorten the length of training and precipitated higher-than-anticipateddropout rates from the program? andbullet; If a policy decision is made to serve more severely disadvantagedclientele, should the current restrictions on payment of stipends and allowancesbe revised? If so, should payments be made to all participants or onlythose who can demonstrate financial need?  andbullet; What stipend/allowance levels should be established that wouldbe high enough to provide financial support but not draw individuals intothe program in order to receive the allowances?  andbullet; If the prohibition against stipends and allowances is retained,should the waiver provisions for supportive services/need-based paymentsbe relaxed?  andbullet; Should a system of bonus payments be established which would rewardparticipants for achieving specific levels of competency in the program? <T3>Performance Standards. </T3>JTPA requires that the Secretary of Laborestablish performance standards for each two-year program planning cycle.These performance standards are the centerpiece of JTPA's performance managementsystem and are designed to assure that the Act's objectives are being carriedout at the State and SDA levels.  The measures to be used in PY 1988 and 1989 include several that have beenused since the beginning of JTPA. Those measures are the entered employmentrates for adults, youth and welfare recipients, the average wage at placement,the youth positive termination rate, the cost per entered employment foradults and the cost per positive termination for youth.  For the first time since JTPA's inception, five new performance measureswere introduced for PY 1988 and 1989 to reflect prospective labor markets,recent program experience, rising skill requirements and to more closelyrelate performance standards to the basic objectives of the Act_increasedemployment and earnings of enrollees and reduced welfare dependency.  Three policy goals guided these performance standards revisions:  andbullet; To encourage increased service to individuals at risk of chronicunemployment, especially youth;  andbullet; To foster training investments which lead to long-term employability;and  andbullet; To increase basic skills and occupational competency-based trainingfor youth.  Since success in the labor market is directly related to basic skills attainment,a new measure of employability enhancement was added to the youth measure.This new youth measure emphasizes helping youth obtain competencies inbasic education and job specific skills to meet the requirements of a rapidlychanging workplace.  To foster long-term employability development, DOL introduced four newmeasures of long-term performance focusing on the employment, earningsand job retention of participants 13 weeks after termination.  Governors have the authority to make adjustments to national standardsfor each SDA to reflect both local economic conditions and special problemsaddressed by State policy or local programs. The Department provides anadjustment model to assist Governors and, within prescribed parameters,allows Governors to develop their own methods for adjusting standards tomeet local conditions. However, few States have made more than minimaladjustments. Most SDAs have also accepted performance standards prescribedby the States and assigned them to service providers with no adjustmentsfor the type of participants served or the services provided.  DOL has increased the Governors' flexibility by allowing the Governorsto chose eight of 12 performance standards to be used in judging SDA performancefor the period, PY 1988-1989, July 1, 1988-July 30, 1990. Based on pastexperience, some express concern about whether Governors will take fulladvantage of this flexibility to align State goals and performance standardsor whether performance standards will continue to be applied on a largelymechanical basis. Others question whether SDAs will take advantage of theflexibility to adjust standards based on the types of people served orspecial program services provided, or continue across-the-board upwardadjustments of SDA-established performance standards for local serviceproviders to ensure that the SDAs exceed standards.  Concern has also been expressed about the Governors' limited use of theirincentive grant authority under the Act's ``six percent set-aside'' provisionsthat emphasize rewarding SDAs' performance for exceeding standards. Ingeneral, the States have not fully used those provisions to achieve Stategoals in such areas as client targeting. Rewards can be_but are not typically_givento SDAs which serve particularly at-risk participants.  There are two basic issues which should be addressed with respect to performancestandards: the standards themselves and the management of the performancestandards system. As has been discussed in this notice, major policy changeswith respect to the groups to be served under the program have implicationsfor the nature and level of the standards which should measure performance. On the management side, the general policy issue raised is whether theFederal Government should be more active in assuring that the States andSDAs make more flexible and creative use of performance standards to achieveState and local policy objectives.  andbullet; Should States be better informed by the Federal Government abouttheir current flexibility in using incentive funds/additional standardsto better achieve State goals in such areas as client targeting or qualitytraining?  andbullet; Are the current statutory outcomes_emphasizing placements, retention,and costs_appropriate if JTPA is to serve a more disadvantaged population? andbullet; Would, for example, a measure of employability enhancement bemore appropriate for adults? Should there be other employability enhancementsbeyond current statutory outcomes for youth_for example, learning gainsor return to school for recent school dropouts?    andbullet; Should there be a Federal definition of youth employment competency?andbullet; Should there be other statutory outcomes for dislocated workers'programs beyond placement and retention in unsubsidized employment?andbullet; Should the States be given greater authority to use six percentset-aisde incentive funds to reward improvements in program quality, performance,and management?andbullet; Should the Federal Government provide more policy direction andtechnical assistance on how performance standards are to be utilized andhow adjustments can be made?andbullet; Should the Federal Government be given greater authority to collectprogrammatic and performance data to improve national performance measures?andbullet; Should the States be given greater authority to use the technicalassistance portion of the six percent set-aside for post-program data collectionand program evaluation?<ITAG tagnum="84">How Can the Management Tools in the Program Be Enhanced?</ITAG>JTPA provided for a basic redeployment of responsibility for the job trainingprogram among the Federal, State and local governments and business community.The past five years has been a period of adjustment to these new roles.This has been an ongoing process. Until 1986, for example, Federal managementhad been restricted largely to: Publishing regulations; making allotmentsto the States; establishing a performance-based management system; monitoringcompliance with the Act; and preparing an annual report to Congress. In1986, the Department established a ``proactive partnership'' with the States.This has included a procedure for DOL to provide policy guidance to theStates, a management review process to assist States in identifying problemareas, revisions in the performance management system, and limited technicalassistance.The Governor has continued to retain primary authority for issuing Statepolicy, designating SDAs, making substate allocations, establishing fiscalstandards and coordination criteria, reviewing and approving substate plans,selecting performance standards, establishing incentive and sanction policies,monitoring performance, and enforcing the provisions of the Act. The Governoris also responsible for providing technical assistance to enhance performanceat the SDA level.Operational responsibility is lodged at the SDA level. This includes developingplans, establishing groups targeted for service, selecting and fundingservice deliverers, and ensuring compliance.Frequently, concerns about specific program weaknesses under JTPA are coupledwith criticisms of the management of the program at the Federal, State,and local levels. While Federal policy guidance has been more forthcomingin recent years, it has been argued that further and more timely guidancefrom the Federal level would be desirable. Others propose that policy guidancefrom the Federal level should be buttressed by more aggressive monitoringand enforcement activities. The adequacy of the technical assistance andlabor market information provided by the Federal Government to the Statesand by the States to the SDAs have been cited as areas in which improvementis needed.This review does not envision changes in the basic relationships withinthe JTPA delivery system. However, within that structure, a central issueto be addressed is whether action is needed to improve the management ofthe system by the Federal, State and local government and private sectorpartners and, if action is needed, in which management areas it shouldtake placer.andbullet; How can the communication of Federal policy guidance to the Statesand from the States to the SDAs be improved, both in terms of precisionand timeliness?andbullet; Should technical assistance services in the program be strengthened?In which specific areas of program management would more technical assistancebe helpful?andbullet; Is more rigorous Federal financial and program oversight and enforcementneeded and in which management areas?andbullet; Is planning and program design carried out effectively at theSDA level? If not, what are the deficiencies and how can they be remedied?andbullet; Do the States and SDAs currently receive labor market informationwhich is adequate, in quality and timeliness to support effective programplanning? If better information is needed, what specific initiatives areneeded at the Federal, State and local levels to improve the availableinformation?andbullet; Are there problems of excessive staff turnover at the managementand staff levels in SDAs? If so, how can these problems be addressed?andbullet; What changes_if any_should be made in the current system of programdata collection and analysis?andbullet; In what ways can the program of Federal research and developmentand pilot and demonstration projects contribute to increasing the effectivenessof program management at the State and local levels?andbullet; In the area of financial management, should the Federal governmentprovide more detailed guidance in such areas as procurement and contractingpractices, including performance-based contracting, and audit resolution?<ITAG tagnum="85">Should JTPA be Coordinated More Closely with Non-JTPA Services andServe Other National Priorities? Should the Public-Private Partnershipunder JTPA be Broadened? </ITAG><T3>Coordination. </T3>JTPA stresses coordination at the State level andwith public and private agencies at the local level. Two statutory Statelevel coordination mechanisms are: (1) Representation of State educational,rehabilitation and public assistance agencies on the State Job TrainingCoordinating Council_the advisory board to the Governor charged with oversightof JTPA; and (2) the requirement that the States' planning document establishcriteria for local and State coordination with other public agencies orprograms. In addition, eight percent of total Title II-A funds that flowto a State must be spent, in part, to increase coordination with educationalactivities. A number of public agencies and local organizations sit on local PrivateIndustry Councils, since representation from education agencies, rehabilitationagencies, economic development agencies, and community-based organizationsis required by law. SDAs can, potentially, coordinate with vocational educationprograms at the secondary and post-secondary levels, adult education, vocationalrehabilitation, welfare agencies, social service and health agencies ina number of ways to provide supplemental or supportive services to JTPAenrollees. Such arrangements are also possible with other DOL-funded programs,such as Job Corps and the Employment Service. The decentralized nature of JTPA and other education, social service andhealth programs potentially allows for considerable flexibility at theState and local levels in coordinating separately-funded and administeredservices for persons with multiple needs. However, operationally, suchcoordination has been achieved in only a very few SDAs.  DOL has encouraged the JTPA system at the State and local level to coordinatewith education, social, health and other human resource programs and agenciesas part of a broader effort to enable the JTPA system to serve disadvantagedclients with multiple needs more effectively. For example, DOL and theDepartment of Health and Human Services are jointly funding projects todemonstrate how job training, education, social, and health services canbe effectively combined to address the needs of several target groups suchas at risk youth and families dependent on public assistance. DOL and theDepartment of Education (DOE) are jointly funding projects designed tolink DOE-funded literacy activities with job training for various targetgroups. Historically, effort have been made to coordinate employment and trainingprograms with human services funded by other Federal agencies. For a varietyof reasons_lack of uniformity in funding cycles, variations in eligibilityrequirements and other factors such as lack of flexibility, incentivesand leadership at all levels_these efforts have not proven successful.However, experience gained in recent demonstration projects and the clearintent of Congress as reflected in the language of JTPA and the Carl D.Perkins Vocational Education Act for example, suggest that renewed effortsshould be made in this direction.  The central issue to be addressed is whether, in the future, high priorityshould be assigned to linking services under JTPA with non-JTPA servicesin order to provide more comprehensive assistance to JTPA clients.andbullet; Which non-JTPA services_particularly those funded by other Federalagencies_should be linked administratively to employment and training programsunder Title II-A and III?andbullet; How can JTPA services be coordinated more effectively with economicdevelopment programs?andbullet; Which DOL-funded services can be more effectively linked withthe Title II-A and III programs; the Employment Service; Job Corps; unemploymentinsurance; other? andbullet; What are the best and most flexible administrative devices toachieve linkages: <T3>e.g.,</T3> a case manager system; central intake and referral to allservices; cross-referral among service agencies; pooling of funds and establishmentof a local human resources ``super-agency; a combination of these approachesor other approaches? andbullet; Should further coordination of services be achieved through legislativeaction of administratively? andbullet; If legislative action is desirable, what modifications are neededin other Federal statues which authorize related non-JTPA services?andbullet; If administrative action is appropriate, what types of actionat the Federal and State levels can be most effective in helping SDAs andPICs to achieve linkages at the local level: technical assistance; financialincentives; joint policy guidance to the field from DOL and other Federalagencies; other approaches? andbullet; Should States be encouraged to expand the responsibilities andmembership of the State Job Training Coordinating Councils with respectto program coordination? <T3>Meeting Other National Priorities.</T3> This review assumes that JTPAwill retain its basic objectives: Increasing the employment and earningsand reducing welfare dependency among economically disadvantaged and dislocatedworkers. However, JTPA_potentially_can serve other national objectives, at the sametime. For example, due primarily to demographic factors, the country isbeginning to experience labor shortages in specific occupations. Theseshortages are likely to intensify, at least through the year 2000. SpecificU.S. industries will be faced with increasing competitive pressure fromabroad. JTPA training could be geared to help address these national problemswhile also serving JTPA clientele. Training could be targeted to shortageoccupations and industries which need trained workers to compete more effectively.The underlying issue posed here is whether JTPA should continue to be limitedto the national objectives currently in the Act or be used to serve othernational priorities, particularly in the area of economic policy, as well.andbullet; Are there other national priorities_such as addressing labor shortagesand supporting export industries_which can be furthered by the JTPA programand, at the same time, enhance the employment prospects of disadvantagedand disclosed clients? Which additional national goals can best be servedby the JTPA program? andbullet; Which approaches should DOL follow to encourage States and SDAsto factor such national objectives into their planning: policy guidance,promotional/education efforts; technical assistance; financial incentives;other approaches? andbullet; Are legislative changes required? <T3>Broadening the Public/Private Partnership.</T3> In one form or another,the business community has played a role throughout the history of employmentand training programs. However, prior to the enactment of JTPA, that rolewas limited largely to training a small proportion of program participantsin OJT programs. With JTPA, the public-private partnership became a central feature of thejob training program. Through the PICs, business was given substantive,partnership responsibilities for planning, providing policy direction andoverseeing local JTPA programs. However, Congress signaled its intent that the PICs carry out a more extensiverole in the community. In amendments to the Wagner-Peyser Act and the CarlD. Perkins Vocational Education Act, the PIC was given responsibility toreview the planning for vocational education and the Employment Serviceat the local level. In addition, by requiring that the PIC be broadly representativeof local human service and economic development agencies, the Congressplaced the Councils in a position to extend the public-private partnershipto areas other than job training. At present, the PIC is the only Federally-supported entity at the locallevel that is both funded to provide a wide range of services and, at thesame time, structured to represent business, labor, education and othernon-Federal human services partners in the community. This unique combinationof program resources and broad organizational leverage at the local levelopens up the possibility for broadening the local public-private partnershipembodied by the PIC. To date, a number of individual PICs have extendedtheir scope of activity beyond JTPA services and have developed activeworking relationships with local school systems and social service agencies.The basic issue to be addressed is whether the public-private partnershiprepresented by the PIC should be extended to encompass other human andrelated services at the local level. andbullet; Which local human and economic services would benefit most fromPIC involvement: Public education; social services; economic development;mental health services; others? andbullet; What role should be envisioned for the PIC in these non-JTPA serviceareas: Link the services to JTPA activities; help assure coordination amongthe services generally; provide a business/labor market information perspective;review plans to reduce duplication of services; other functions? andbullet; Should the PIC membership be broadened to accommodate this widerrole in the community? andbullet; Will widening the partnership role of PIC over-extend the privatesector volunteer members of the councils? andbullet; Should PICs be encouraged to pursue a broader role in the communityunder current legislative authority or are amendments to JTPA and otherauthorizing statutes necessary? andbullet; How can extension of the local public-private partnership be carriedout most effectively, in concert with the locally-elected officials? <ITAG tagnum="6">Roberts T. Jones, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary of Labor. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: July 29, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-18230 Filed 8-11-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-30-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>