<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88727-0026 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-27-88.f2.A1025</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 27, 1988/ Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR PART 721</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[OPTS-50527A; FRL-3357-1]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Significant New Use Rules; Amendments to General Provisions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>EPA is promulgating amendments to the general provisionsof 40 CFR Part 721, under the authority of section 5(a)(2) of the ToxicSubstances Control Act (TSCA). The amendments clarify when manufacturers,importers, or processors must submit a significant new use notice and establisha procedure for obtaining EPA approval of alternative measures for controlof human exposure and release to the environment that are the equivalentto those specified in a significant new use rule (SNUR). The amendmentsalso establish a procedure for submission and review of significant newuse notices during the proposal period of significant new use rules.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>In accordance with 40 CFR 23.5 (50 FR 7271) this rule shallbe promulgated for purposes of judicial review at 1 p.m. Eastern time onAugust 10, 1988. This rule shall become effective on September 9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Michael M. Stahl, Acting Director,TSCA Assistance Office (TS-799), Office of Toxic Substances, EnvironmentalProtection Agency, Rm. EB-44, 401 M Street SW., Washington, DC 20460, Telephone:(202) 554-1404, TDD: (202) 554-0551.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This rule amends the 40 CFR Part 721,Subpart A_General Provisions that apply to all SNURs. The provisions clarifywhen manufacturers, importers, or processors must submit a significantnew use notice and establish a procedure for submission and review of significantnew use notices during the proposal period of SNURs. The provisions alsoprovide exemptions to the reporting requirements and establish a procedureunder which the Agency may allow the use of alternative measures for controlof human exposure and release to the environment that are equivalent tothose specified in a SNUR.The provisions in Part 721, Subpart A clarify existing general conditionsunder which recordkeeping and/or reporting may be required. The existingrecordkeeping and reporting requirements are not significantly changedby the clarifications contained in this rule. Therefore, the Agency hasdetermined that this clarifying rule does not impose any additional recordkeepingor reporting requirements on the public.Send comments regarding this rule to Chief, Information Policy Branch,PM-223, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street SW., Washington,DC 20460; and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Officeof Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503, marked ``Attention: DeskOfficer for EPA.''<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Authority</ITAG>Section 5(a)(2) of TSCA (15 U.S.C. 2604(a)(2)), authorizes EPA to determinethat a use of a chemical substance is a ``significant new use.'' EPA mustmake this determination by rule after considering all relevant factors,including those listed in section 5(a)(2). Once EPA determines a use tobe a significant new use, persons must, under section 5(a)(1)(B) of TSCA,submit a significant new use notice (SNUN) to EPA at least 90 days beforethey manufacture, import, or process the substance for that use.Persons subject to a SNUR must comply with the same regulations and proceduresas persons who must submit a premanufacture notice (PMN) under section5(a)(1)(A) of TSCA. In particular, these include the information submissionrequirements of sections 5 (b) and (d)(1), the exemptions authorized bysections 5(h) (1), (2), (3), and (5), and the regulations at 40 CFR Part720. Once EPA receives a SNUN, the Agency may take regulatory action undersections 5(e), 5(f), 6, or 7 to control the activities on which it hasreceived the notice. If EPA does not take action, section 5(g) requiresthe Agency to explain in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> its reasons for not taking action.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Summary of This Rule</ITAG>This rule amends 40 CFR Part 721, Subpart A_General Provisions. SubpartA contains the general provisions that apply to all SNURs. The provisionsset forth the requirements under which a manufacturer, importer, or processormust submit a SNUN to EPA. The provisions clarify who is responsible forreporting a significant new use and provide exemptions to the reportingrequirements. The provisions also provide a procedure under which EPA mayallow the use of alternative measures to control worker exposure to orenvironmental release of chemical substances. The amendments to 40 CFRPart 721, Subpart A_General Provisions are listed below:1. Certain sections are renumbered and applicable cross references arechanged.2. A manufacturer, importer, or processor is not required to submit a SNUNif such person can document one or more of the following for each recipientof a substance subject to a SNUR:(a) The recipient has been provided with notice of the SNUR.(b) The recipient knows of the SNUR.(c) It is technically or otherwise not feasible for the recipient to engagein the significant new use.3. A manufacturer, importer, or processor who intends to distribute a chemicalsubstance subject to a SNUR to a recipient for nonexempt purposes, andhas prior knowledge that the recipient intends to engage in a significantnew use of that substance without submitting a SNUN, must submit a SNUNto EPA before distributing that chemical substance to that recipient.4. A manufacturer, importer, or processor who is distributing a chemicalsubstance subject to a SNUR to a recipient, and obtains knowledge thatthe recipient is engaging in a significant new use and has not submitteda SNUN to EPA, must immediately cease distribution of the chemical substanceto that recipient and submit a SNUN, unless: (a) It can document that ithas notified (within 15 working days of the time it develops knowledgethat the recipient is engaging in a significant new use) the recipientand EPA in writing of the significant new use, and (b) the recipient hasinformed the manufacturer, importer, or processor, within 15 working days,in writing, that it will not engage in the significant new use. A copyof the recipient's reply must be sent to EPA enforcement authorities.5. Provisions for the TSCA section 5(h)(3) research and development (Randamp;D)exemption are added which mirror the Randamp;D exemption in the PMN rule(40 CFR 720.36; April 22, 1986, 51 FR 15096).6. A procedure is established whereby a person may obtain EPA approvalto manufacture or process a chemical substance for a significant new usebefore the promulgation date of the final SNUR. Under this advanced complianceexemption, EPA will accept and review SNUNs during the proposal period.7. A procedure is established under which EPA may allow use of alternativemeasures to control exposure to, or environmental release of, a chemicalsubstance without submitting a SNUN, if EPA determines that the alternativemeasures provide substantially the same degree of protection as the controlmethods specified in the SNUR for the chemical substance.8. An exemption is established whereby persons operating under and abidingby the terms of a consent order issued under section 5(e) of the Act willbe exempt from submitting a SNUN under provisions which are inconsistent.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Background</ITAG>On September 5, 1984 (49 FR 35001), the Agency promulgated at 40 CFR Part721, Subpart A_General Provisions that apply to all SNURs. Subsequent topromulgation of these provisions, the Agency received comments on certainsections of the promulgated rule. On April 22, 1986 (51 FR 15104), EPAproposed amendments to the general provisions. EPA received comments fromindustry and environmental groups on the proposed amendments. After considerationof these comments, 40 CFR Part 721, the Subpart A_General Provisions arebeing published in final form. On April 22, 1986, amendments were proposedfor the following sections: andSection;andSection; 721.180, 721.290, 721.615,and 721.975. These amendments are not being promulgated at this time butwill be amended as part of the overall review of SNURs. EPA also had proposeda new Subpart which would set forth hazard communication program for personssubject to SNURs. The hazard communication program will also be promulgatedat a later date.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Amendments</ITAG>A. Persons Who Must ReportSection 721.5 describes who must submit a SNUN. The provisions promulgatedon September 5, 1984, required each person who intended to manufacture,import, or process a chemical substance subject to a SNUR and intendedto distribute the substance in commerce to submit a SNUN. However, personssubject to andSection; 721.5 did not have to submit a SNUN if they: (1) Didnot have a reasonable belief at the time of commercial distribution thata customer intended to engage in a signficant new use without submittinga notice to EPA, and (2) were able to document that the customer was notifiedin writing of the SNUR.The Agency received comments requesting clarification of the responsibilityof manufacturers, importers, and processors to submit SNUNs as specifiedunder the provisions of section 5(a)(1)(B) of TSCA and andSection; 721.5(a)(2).This final rule amends andSection; 721.5 so that persons subject to paragraph(a)(2) do not have to submit a SNUN if they can document for each recipientof the substance one or more of the following:(1) They have provided the recipient with notice of the SNUR.(2) The recipient knows of the SNUR.(3) It is technically or otherwise infeasible for the recipient to engagein the significant new use.A comment received on the proposed amendment expressed concern that EPAshould clarify the scope of the requirement to notify ``recipients.'' Atissue was whether the rule would require manufacturers, importers, or processorsto notify persons who purchase the SNUR substance from their customersor competitors. The commenter argued that it would be extremely difficultto identify and contact all such ``recipients.'' The commenter suggestedthe Agency either substitute the term ``customer'' for ``recipient,'' ordefine the term ``recipient.'' To address this comment, the term ``recipient''has been specifically defined in the final rule in andSection; 721.3. TheAgency intends that the ``recipient'' is a person who obtains the substancedirectly from the manufacturer, importer, or processor. If the recipientis also a process of the substance, it would in turn have the same obligationwith respect to recipients.Another commenter suggested that the Agency delete andSection; 721.5(d) underwhich manufacturers and processors must terminate sales to recipients andinform EPA if they learn that the recipients are engaging in a significantnew use. The commenter argued that the requirements are not authorizedby TSCA, that they have the potential to unnecessarily disrupt ongoingcommercial activities and business relationships, and that the requirementto cease distribution to the recipient until after a SNUN has been submittedand reviewed is extremely harsh. The alternative suggested by the commenterwas that manufacturers and processors would document all instances of noncompliancewith SNUR provisions and work with customers to prevent a recurrence ofsignificant new use violations. Where serious or repeated violations cometo the manufacturer's, importer's, or processor's attention, they wouldhave the option of either terminating sales or notifying EPA. In the latterevent, the Agency would determine whether sales to the recipient shouldbe suspended.Under TSCA section 5, EPA has the responsibility to require compliancewith SNUR provisions and cannot delegate that responsibility to privatecitizens. However, to avoid unnecessary commercial disruption, the Agencyis amending andSection; 721.5(d) to allow the manufacturer, importer, orprocessor an opportunity to work with its customer/recipient if the manufacturer,importer, or processor finds that that person is engaging in a significantnew use without having submitted a SNUN. Under the revised andSection; 721.5(d),the manufacturer, importer, or processor must notify (within 15 workingdays of the time he/she develops knowledge that the recipient is engagingin a significant new use) in writing the recipient and EPA that the recipientis engaging in a significant new use. If, within 15 working days, the recipientstates in writing the he/she will not engage in the significant new use,commercial distribution to that person may continue uninterrupted. EPAenforcement authorities will check the recipient's actions to ensure thatthe significiant new use is not occurring. If upon inspection the Agencydetermines a significant new use is occurring, EPA will then determinewhether a SNUN must be submitted. It may be that EPA can work with therecipient to bring him/her into compliance. If the recipient does not comeinto compliance quickly, EPA will notify the manufacturer, importer, orprocessor. Upon receipt of this notice, the manufacturer, importer, orprocessor will be required to cease distribution to that recipient andwill not be able to resume such distribution until the manufacturer, importer,or processor submits a SNUN and the notice review period ends. Similarly,if, after receiving a written assurance from a recipient, the manufacturer,importer, or processor determines on its own that the recipient is engagingin a significant new use without submitting a SNUN, the manufacturer, importer,or processor is required to cease distribution to that recipient immediatelyand to notify EPA enforcement authorities. In that case also, such distributioncould not resume until the manufacturer, importer, or processor has submitteda SNUN and the notice review period has ended. Independent of these provisionsEPA reserves the right to take an enforcement action against any recipientwhich is a processor who has violated a SNUR.Finally, a commenter argued that if EPA insists upon retaining rigid recipienttermination requirements it should clarify when ``knowledge'' occurs. Thecommenter argued that such knowledge should be imputed to a company onlyif it comes to the attention of responsible officials capable of appreciatingits significance and that it is unrealistic to expect salespersons andother non-regulatory employees to identify and report deviations from SNURrequirements.EPA intends to use discretion to enforce andSection; 721.5. A company willbe considered to have ``knowledge'' that a recipient is engaging in a significantnew use when an employee of the company, who by the nature of positionor responsibility within the company should have knowledge of the SNURprovisions, becomes aware that the recipient is engaging in the significantnew use.<ITAG tagnum="84">B. Equivalency Determination</ITAG>Some SNURs designate manufacturing, processing, or use without specifiedcontrol measures as a significant new use. The Agency received commentsindicating that manufacturers, importers, and processors would like theflexibility to choose the type of protective controls to use for employeeexposure and environmental release. The commenters argue that the Agencyshould either set permissible exposure limits or performance based standards,and should not require specific types of personal protective equipment.While the Agency is interested in developing permissible exposure levels,such limits have not yet been developed and are not within the scope ofthis rulemaking.The Agency also received comments that its practice of specifying respiratorrequirements is in conflict with the Occupational Safety and Health Administrationpolicy that requires engineering controls be used where feasible. To addressthis problem, the Agency is adding a procedure in new andSection; 721.30which will allow manufacturers, importers, and processors to propose alternativecontrol measures for human exposure and environmental release. EPA willreview the proposed alternative control measures and make a determinationwhether they provide substantially the same degree of protection as themeasures specified in the SNUR. The procedure allows manufacturers, importers,and processors to use work practices or engineering controls rather thanspecific devices like respirators to control exposure.Commenters favored the equivalency provision, but questioned whether toomuch substantiation was required for such a finding. EPA has made the equivalencydetermination procedures as simple as possible. Section 721.30 requirespersons to demonstrate that their intended activities will provide substantiallythe same degree of protection to health and the environment as the measuresidentified in a SNUR. The Agency will review and make a determination uponsuch requests within 45 days. EPA view the requirements as reasonable andin the public interest. The alternative is for persons to submit a SNUNand wait 90 days for EPA review.C. Research and Development ExemptionThis rule specifies requirements for the Randamp;D exemption from SNURs undersection 5(h)(3) of TSCA. The Randamp;D exemption requirements establishedby this rule are essentially the same as the Randamp;D provisions in thePMN rule. Section 5(h)(3) of TSCA exempts from the PMN and significantnew use notification requirements small quantities of a substance usedsolely for Randamp;D, if the manufacturer, importer, or processor notifiespersons engaged in the Randamp;D of any health effects associated with thesubstance.Section 721.47 was drawn without substantive changes from the Randamp;D exemptionprovisions in the PMN rule. It is codified separately for SNURs ratherthan referenced in Part 721 to revise the exemption slightly to reflectSNUR requirements. Because of the similar nature of PMN and SNUR requirements,EPA believes it is important that the Randamp;D exemption for PMNs and SNURsbe consistent. Therefore, any substantive change in the SNUR exemptionwould require an equivalent change in the PMN rule. As part of the April22, 1986 promulation, EPA determined through notice and comment rulemakingthat the benefits of the provisions for the Randamp;D exemption in the PMNrule outweight the potenital disadvantages. This conclusion is also validfor the Randamp;D exemption requirements in andSection; 721.47.D. Exemptions<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Applicability of Proposed Rule to Uses Occurring Before Promulationof Final Rule</ITAG>In the preambles to previously proposed SNURs, the Agency has stated thatsection 5(a)(1)(b) of TSCA is best served by determining that a use isa significant new use as of the date of proposal. This interpretation ofsection 5 reflects the intent of Congress with regard to SNURs; if usesbegun during the proposal period of the SNUR were not considered to besignificant new uses, it would be difficult for the Agency to establishSNUN requirements because any person could defeat the SNUR by initiatinga proposed significant new use before the rule became final.A person may legally commence an activity designated as a significant newuse in a proposed SNUR. If that person wishes to continue the activityafter the SNUR is promulgated and becomes effective, they must stop, filea SNUN, and wait for EPA review of the notice before resuming the activity(assuming the Agency has not taken action under section 5(e) or 5(f) ofTSCA). However, it is not the intent of the Agency to unnecessarily disruptthe commercial activities of these persons. EPA therefore proposed thatsuch persons be allowed to comply with a SNUR before the rule is promulgated.If a company were to meet all of the conditions of advance compliance,as specified in the new andSection; 721.45(h) (proposed as andSection; 721.18(h))the person will be exempt from the requirements of the final SNUR for thoseactivities. It should be emphasized that EPA intends to use its full TSCAauthority to control the company's activities, should the Agency determinethat such activities will present an unreasonable risk of injury to humanhealth or the environment.The first requirement for advance compliance with a SNUR is to submit acomplete SNUN to EPA. The notice must contain all requisite SNUR data,with limitations described in the applicable proposed SNUR. Any personwho submits and advance SNUN for a subject chemical substance will be subjectto the general notification requirements of andSection; 721.25, except thatthe company will not have to submit the notice to the Agency at least 90days before it begins manufacturing, importing, or processing. However,should the final SNUR be promulgated prior to completion of the Agency'sreview, the company will be required to cease manufacturing, importing,or processing for the remaining portion of the 90-day period.A commenter was concerned that voluntary SNUN submitters (i.e., personsusing the advance compliance exception) may have to cease manufacturing,importing, or processing for the significant new use if the effective dateof the final SNUR occurs before the Agency's 90-day review of the voluntarilysubmitted notice is complete. The commenter suggested that EPA delay theeffective date of all SNURs until 90 days after publication to allow EPAto complete its review of notices voluntarily submitted at any time priorto the promulation date without a disruption of the commercial activitiesof those notice submitters.EPA is aware that, should the final SNUR be promulated and become effectiveprior to completion of the Agency's review, the person would be requiredto cease manufacturing, importing, or processing for the remaining portionof the 90-day review period. While EPA wants to keep commercial disruptionto a minimum and is aware of the fact that the events described by thecommenter are possible, the Agency's primary responsibility under TSCAsection 5(a)(2) is to develop SNURs quickly and ensure that no significantnew uses occur until EPA has reviewed the uses and taken appropriate action.If the Agency were to routinely delay the effective date of all SNURs itwould set up a situation where uses involving potentially significant levelsof exposure or environmental release could go on even longer before theycould be controlled under a SNUR. The Agency wishes to balance its concernfor exposure and release with its concern for regulatory impact.As a matter of policy, EPA favors and will continue to use a short timeperiod between the promulgation and effective dates of minor rules suchas SNURs. The Agency believes that the approach adopted in this final ruleprovides sufficient time for completion of the review period for voluntarySNUNs submitted in a timely manner (e.g., 90 days before the effectivedate). EPA will inform voluntary submitters of the possibility that thefinal SNUR will be promulagated and in effect before Agency review of theirSNUN is completed. This will allow these persons adequate time to plantheir activities accordingly. Agency review of voluntary SNUNs will becompleted as quickly as possible (up to 90 days) to minimize potentialdisruption of the submitter's commercial activities.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Section 5(e) Consent Order Exemption</ITAG>The Agency has added an exemption in andSection; 721.45(i) for persons operatingunder the terms of a TSCA section 5(e) consent order. If a term of a section5(e) order applicable to that person is inconsistent with a specific significantnew use identified in Subpart E of the part, abiding by the terms of thesection 5(e) consent order will exempt the person from submitting a SNUNfor that significant new use.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Economic Analysis </ITAG>Promulgation of these amendments will result in costs to both EPA and industry.However, as will be addressed below, the costs are not expected to be morethan without this final rule, and in some cases may be less. Where quantificationis possible, the costs associated with each final amendment are discussed.In some cases, only a qualitative discussion is possible. The costs ofthe relevant sections of previously proposed SNURs (in the absence of thefinal amendments) are also discussed. 1. <T3>Section 721.5 Persons who must report. </T3>Companies involved in themanufacture, import, or processing of a SNUR substance will incur costsof compliance with this section. The costs can range from those costs associatedwith a letter notifying a recipient of the existence of the SNUR, up tothe costs of submitting a SNUN ($1,400 to $8,000). Additional costs offiling a SNUN may be incurred (up to a 3.2 percent reduction in profitsdue to delays in manufacturing or processing for Agency review) and EPAcosts of regulatory follow-up, if any. The actual costs of notifying recipients of the existence of a SNUR areexpected to be minimal, for example, the cost of sending a letter to eachrecipient. The Agency believes that most companies will choose to documentthat recipients know of the rule via a notification letter as it is theleast costly alternative.2. <T3>Section 721.30 Equivalency determination. </T3>Based on comments toproposed SNURs which would require reporting for failure to employ specificworker exposure or environmental release controls, the Agency believesthat most companies seeking an equivalency determination will either possessor be able to covert to the alternative provisions or measures for whichthey are seeking an equivalency determination. In the absence of this amendment,such companies would either have to submit a SNUN ($1,400 to $8,000 perSNUN, plus up to 3.2 percent reduction in profits) and/or incur the costof complying with the controls or measures as specified in the SNUR.The costs to companies of this amendment will be the development costsof the data submitted to the Agency. This consists of a written justificationthat the alternative provisions provide at least the same degree of protection.The Agency cannot estimate the exact equivalency development costs at thistime. Other costs associated with the equivalency determination involvefiling the request for equivalency determination, and delay costs duringAgency review. The Agency expects the costs of filing the equivalency noticeto be equal to or less than the costs of filing a SNUN, since the informationrequired in a request for equivalency determination is less than that requiredin a SNUN. In addition, any potential loss in profits due to delays associatedwith Agency review would be less. Delay costs are estimated to be a 3.2percent reduction in profits due to delays in manufacturing and processingduring the 90-day Agency review of SNUNs. Delay costs associated with anequivalency determination would be half of the delay costs for a SNUN,or a 1.6 percent reduction in profits due to delays during the 45-day Agencyreview.Therefore, while the Agency cannot quantity the exact costs, the totalcosts are expected to be less for an equivalency determination than forsubmitting a SNUN. 3. <T3>Section 721.45(h) Advance compliance exemption. </T3>The proceduresfor advance compliance are generally the same as for any SNUN. The manufacturer,importer, or processor must submit a complete SNUN. The costs to the companyfor filing a SNUN are estimated to be between $1,400 and $8,000. However,this notice need not be submitted 90 days prior to commencing manufacture,import, or processing but can be submitted anytime between proposal andpromulgation of the SNUR. The major difference is that if the Agency negotiates with the companyto control or limit the significant new use, or does not ban the chemicalsubstance, the company can continue production of the chemical substancewithout interruption when the SNUR is promulgated, thereby avoiding anyloss in profits usually attributed to delays in manufactuing or processingduring Agency review. However, if the Agency's 90-day review of the SNUNis not completed by the effective date of the final SNUR, all significantnew use activities must cease for the remaining portion of the review period.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Rulemaking Record </ITAG>EPA has established a record for this rulemaking (docket control numberOPTS-50527A). The record includes basic information considered by the Agencyin developing this final rule. EPA will supplement the record with additionalinformation as necessary, and will identify the complete rulemaking recordby the date of promulgation. A public version of this record containingsanitized copies from which Confidential Business Information (CBI) hasbeen deleted is available to the public in the TSCA Public Docket Officefrom 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, except legal holidays. TheTSCA Public Docket Office is located in Rm. NE-G004, 401 M St., SW., Washington,DC. The record includes the following: 1. The proposed rule. 2. Public comments. 3. Response to comment document. 4. This final rule. 5. The economic analysis of this final rule. <ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Regulatory Assessment Requirements </ITAG>A. Executive Order 12291 Under Executive Order 12291, EPA must judge whether a rule is ``major''and therefore, requires a Regulatory Impact Analysis. EPA has determinatedthat this final rule is not a ``major rule'' because it will not have aneffect on the economy of $100 million or more, and it will not have a significanteffect on competition, costs, or prices. While there is no precise wayto calculate the total annual cost of compliance with this final rule,for the reasons discussed in this preamble, EPA believes that the costwill be low. This rule was submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) forreview as required by Executive Order 12291.B. Regulatory Flexibility Act  Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 605(b), EPA has determinedthat this final rule will not have a significant impact on a substantialnumber of small businesses. The Agency cannot determine whether partiesaffected by this final rule are likely to be small businesses. However,EPA believes that the number of small businesses affected by this finalrule will not be substantial even if all the potential new uses were developedby small companies.C. Paperwork Reduction Act  The information collection requirements contained in Subpart A have beenapproved by OMB under the provisions of the <T3>Paperwork Reduction Act, </T3>44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq. </T3>and have been assigned OMB control number (2070-0012). The provisions in Part 721, Subpart A clarify existing general conditionsunder which recordkeeping and/or reporting may be required. The existingrecordkeeping and reporting requirements are not significantly changedby the clarifications contained in this rule. Therefore, the Agency hasdetermined that this clarifying rule does not impose any additional recordkeepingor reporting requirements on the public.  Send comments regarding this rule to Chief, Information Policy Branch,PM-223, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street SW., Washington,DC 20460; and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Officeof Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503, marked ``Attention: DeskOfficer for EPA.''<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 721  </ITAG>Chemicals, Environmental protection, Hazardous substances, Recordkeepingand reporting requirements, Significant new uses.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: July 6, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Lee M. Thomas, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.  </ITAG>Therefore, 40 CFR Part 721 is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 721_[AMENDED]  </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 721 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>15 U.S.C. 2604 and 2607.</ITAG>2. Section 721.1 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope and applicability.  </ITAG>(a) This part identifies uses of chemical substances which EPA has determinedare significant new uses under the authority of section 5(a)(2) of theToxic Substances Control Act. In addition, it specifies procedures formanufacturers, importers, and processors to report on those significantnew uses. This subpart A contains general provisions applicable to thispart. Subpart B of this part identifies generic requirements for certainsignificant new uses cross referenced in specific provisions of SubpartE of this part. Subpart C of this part identifies generic reporting requirementsfor certain significant new uses cross referenced in specific provisionsof Subpart E of this part. Subpart E of this part identifies chemical substancesand their significant new uses.  (b) This Subpart A contains provisions governing submission and reviewof notices for the chemical substances and significant new uses identifiedin Subpart E of this part. The provisions of this Subpart A apply to thechemical substances and significant new uses identified in Subpart E ofthis part, except to the extent that they are specifically modified orsupplanted by specific requirements in Subpart E of this part. In the eventof a conflict between the provisions of this Subpart A and the provisionsof Subpart E of this part, the provisions of Subpart E of this part shallgovern.  (c) The provisions of Part 720 of this Chapter apply to this Part 721.For purposes of this Part 721, wherever the phrase ``new chemical substance''appears in Part 720 of this chapter, it shall mean the chemical substancesubject to this Part 721. In the event of a conflict between the provisionsof Part 720 of this chapter and the provisions of this Part 721, the provisionsof this Part 721 shall govern.  3. Section 721.3 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.  </ITAG>The definitions in section 3 of the Act, 15 U.S.C. 2602, and andSection;720.3 of this chapter apply to this part. In addition, the following definitionsapply to this part:  ``CAS Number'' means Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Number assignedto a chemical substance on the Inventory.  ``Customer'' means any person to whom a manufacturer, importer, or processordistributes any quantity of a chemical substance, or of a mixture containingthe chemical substance, whether or not a sale is involved.  ``Metalworking fluid'' means a liquid of any viscosity or color containingintentionally added water and used in metal machining operations for thepurpose of cooling, lubricating, or rust inhibition.  ``Powder or dry solid form'' means a state where all or part of the substancewould have the potential to become fine, loose, solid particles.  ``Principal importer'' means the first importer who, knowing that a chemicalsubstance will be imported for a significant new use rather than manufacturedin the United States, specifies the chemical substance and the amount tobe imported. Only persons who are incorporated, licensed, or doing businessin the United States may be principal importers.``Process for commercial purposes'' means the preparation of a chemicalsubstance or mixture containing the chemical substance, after manufactureof the substance, for distribution in commerce with the purpose of obtainingan immediate or eventual commercial advantage for the processor. Processingof any amount of a chemical substance or mixture containing the chemicalsubstance is included in this definition. If a chemical substance or mixturecontaining impurities is processed for commercial purposes, the impuritiesalso are processed for commercial purposes.``Process solely for export'' means to process for commercial purposessolely for export from the United States under the following restrictionson activity in the United States: Processing must be performed at sitesunder the control of the processor; distribution in commerce is limitedto purposes of export; and the processor may not use the chemical substanceexcept in small quantities solely for research and development.``Recipient'' means any person who purchases or otherwise obtains a chemicalsubstance directly from a person who manufacturers, imports, or processesthe substance.``Site'' means a contiguous property unit. Property divided only by a publicright-of-way is one site. There may be more than one manufacturing planton a single site.``Site-limited intermediate'' means an intermediate manufactured, processed,and used only within a site and not distributed in commerce other thanas an impurity or for disposal. Imported intermediates cannot be ``site-limited.''``Spray application'' means any method of projecting a jet of vapor offinely divided liquid onto a surface to be coated; whether by compressedair, hydraulic pressure, electrostatic forces, or other methods of generatinga spray.``Waters of the United States'' has the meaning set forth in 40 CFR 122.2.4. Section 721.5 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Persons who must report.</ITAG>(a) The following persons must submit a significant new use notice as specifiedunder the provisions of section 5(a)(1)(B) of the Act, Part 720 of thischapter, and andSection; 721.25:(1) A person who intends to manufacture, import, or process for commercialpurposes a chemical substance identified in a specific section in SubpartE of this part, and intends to engage in a significant new use of the substanceidentified in that section.(2) A person who intends to manufacture, import, or process for commercialpurposes a chemical substance identified in a specific section in SubpartE of this part, and intends to distribute the substance in commerce. Aperson described in this paragraph is not required to submit a significantnew use notice if that person can document one or more of the followingas to each recipient of the substance from that person:(i) That the person has notified the recipient, in writing, of the specificsection in Subpart E of this part which identifies the substance and itsdesignated significant new uses.(ii) That the recipient has knowledge of the specific section in SubpartE of this part which identifies the substance and its designated significantnew uses.(iii) That the recipient cannot undertake any significant new use describedin the specific section in Subpart E of this part.(b) A person described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section must submita significant new use notice if that person has knowledge at the time ofcommercial distribution of the substance identified in the specific sectionin Subpart E of this part that a recipient intends to engage in a designatedsignificant new use of that substance without submitting a notice underthis part.(c) A person who processes a chemical substance identified in a specificsection in Subpart E of this part for a significant new use of that substanceis not required to submit a significant new use notice if that person candocument each of the following:(1) That the person does not know the specific chemical identity of thechemical substance being processed.(2) That the person is processing the chemical substance without knowledgethat the substance is identified in Subpart E of this part.(d)(1) If at any time after commencing distribution in commerce of a chemicalsubstance identified in a specific section in Subpart E of this part aperson described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section has knowledge thata recipient of the substance is engaging in a significant new use of thatsubstance designated in that section without submitting a notice underthis part, the person is required to cease supplying the chemical substanceto that recipient and to submit a significant new use notice for that chemicalsubstance and significant new use, unless the person is able to documenteach of the following:(i) That the person has notified the recipient and EPA enforcement authorities(at the address in paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section), in writing within15 working days of the time the person develops knowledge that the recipientis engaging in a significant new use, that the recipient is engaging ina significant new use without submitting a significant new use notice.(ii) That, within 15 working days of notifying the recipient as describedin paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section, the person received from the recipient,in writing, a statement of assurance that the recipient is aware of theterms of the applicable section in Subpart E of this part and will notengage in the significant new use.(iii) That the person has promptly provided EPA enforcement authoritieswith a copy of the recipient's statement of assurance described in paragraph(d)(1)(ii) of this section. The copy must be sent to the Director, Officeof Compliance Monitoring (EN-342), Environmental Protection Agency, 401M St. SW., Washington, DC 20460.(2) If EPA notifies the manufacturer, importer, or processor that the recipientis engaging in a significant new use after providing the statement of assurancedescribed in paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section and without submittinga notice under this part, the manufacturer, importer, or processor shallimmediately cease distribution to that recipient until the manufacturer,importer, or processor or the recipient has submitted a significant newuse notice under this part and the notice review period has ended.(3) If, after receiving a statement of assurance from a recipient underparagraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section, a manufacturer, importer, or processorhas knowledge that the recipient is engaging in a significant new use withoutsubmitting a notice under this part, the manufacturer, importer, or processormust immediately cease distributing the substance to that recipient andnotify EPA enforcement authorities at the address identified in paragraph(d)(1)(iii) of this section. The manufacturer, importer, or processor maynot resume distribution to that recipient until any one of the followinghas occurred:(i) The manufacturer, importer, or processor has submitted a significantnew use notice under this part and the notice review period has ended.(ii) The recipient has submitted a significant new use notice under thispart and the notice review period has ended.(iii) The manufacturer, importer, or processor has received notice fromEPA enforcement authorities that it may resume distribution to that recipient.(e) Any significant new use notice relating to import of a substance mustbe submitted by the principal importer.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.6 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 721.11]</ITAG>5. Section 721.6 is redesignated as andSection; 721.11, and the entire sectionis revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability determination when the specific chemical identity isconfidential.</ITAG>(a) A person who intends to manufacture, import, or process a chemicalsubstance which is described by a generic chemical name is Subpart E ofthis part may ask EPA whether the substance is subject to the requirementsof this part. EPA will answer such an inquiry only if EPA determines thatthe person has a <T3>bona fide </T3>intent to manufacture, import, or process the chemicalsubstance for commercial purposes.(b) To establish a <T3>bona fide </T3>intent to manufacture, import, or process a chemicalsubstance, the person who intends to manufacture, import, or process thechemical substance must submit the following information in writing tothe Office of Toxic Substances, Document Control Officer, TS-790, 401 MSt. SW., Washington, DC 20460: ATTN: SNUR <T3>bona fide</T3> submission.(1) The specific chemical identity of the chemical substance that the personintends to manufacture, import, or process.(2) A signed statement that the person intends to manufacture, import,or process the chemical substance for commercial purposes.(3) A description of the research and development activities conductedto date, and the purpose for which the person will manufacture, import,or process the chemical substance.(4) An elemental analysis.(5) Either an X-ray diffraction pattern (for inorganic substances), a massspectrum (for most other substances), or an infrared spectrum of the particularchemical substance, or, if such data do not resolve uncertainties withrespect to the identity of the chemical substance, additional or alternativespectra or other data to identify the substance.(c) If an importer or processor cannot provide all the information requiredin paragraph (b) of this section because it is claimed as confidentialbusiness information by the importer's or processor's manufacturer or supplier,the manufacturer or supplier may supply the information directly to EPA.(d) EPA will review the information submitted by the manufacturer, importer,or processor under paragraph (b) of this section to determine whether thanperson has shown a <T3>bona fide</T3> intent to manufacture, import, or process the chemicalsubstance. If necessary, EPA will compare this information either to theinformation requested for the confidential chemical substance under andSection;710.7(e)(2)(v) of this chapter or the information requested under andSection;720.85(b)(3)(iii) of this chapter.(e) If the manufacturer, importer, or processor has shown a <T3>bona fide</T3> intent to manufacture, import, or process the substanceand has provided sufficient unambiguous chemical identity information toenable EPA to make a conclusive determination as to the identity of thesubstance, EPA will inform the manufacturer, importer, or processor whetherthe chemical substance is subject to this part and, if so, which sectionin Subpart E of this part applies.(f) A disclosure to a person with a <T3>bona fide</T3> intent to manufacture, import, or process a particularchemical substance that the substance is subject to this part will notbe considered public disclosure of confidential business information undersection 14 of the Act.(g) EPA will answer an inquiry on whether a particular chemical substanceis subject to this part within 30 days after receipt of a complete submissionunder paragraph (b) of this section.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 721.20]</ITAG>6. Section 721.7 is redesignated as andSection; 721.20, and the entire sectionis revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.20 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Exports and imports.</ITAG>Persons who intend to export a chemical substance identified in SubpartE of this part, or in any proposed rule which would amend Subpart E ofthis part, are subject to the export notification provisions of section12(b) of the Act. The regulations that interpret section 12(b) appear at40 CFR Part 707. Persons who import a substance identified in a specificsection in Subpart E of this part are subject to the import certificationrequirements under section 13 of the Act, which are codified at 19 CFR12.118 through 12.127 and 127.28. The EPA policy in support of the importcertification requirements appears at 40 CFR Part 707.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.10 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 721.25]</ITAG>7. Section 721.10 is redesignated as andSection; 721.25, and the entire sectionis revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.25 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Notice requirements and procedures.</ITAG>(a) Each person who is requuired to submit a significant new use noticeunder this part must submit the notice at least 90 calendar days beforecommencing manufacture, import, or processing of a chemical substance identifiedin Subpart E of this part for a significant new use. The submitter mustcomply with any applicable requirement of section 5(b) of the Act, andthe notice must include the information and test data specified in section5(d)(1) of the Act. The notice must be submitted on the notice from inAppendix A to Part 720 of this chapter and must comply with the requirementsof Part 720, except to the extent that they are inconsistent with thisPart 721.(b) If two or more persons are required to submit a significant new usenotice for the same chemical substance and significant new use identifiedin Subpart E of this part, they may submit a joint notice to EPA. Personssubmitting a joint notice must individually complete the certificationsection of Part I of the required notification form. Persons who are requiredto submit individually, but elect to submit jointly, remain individuallyliable for the failure to submit required information which is known toor reasonably ascertainable by them and test data in their possession orcontrol.(c) EPA will process the notice in accordance with the procedures of Part720 of this chapter, expect to the extent they are inconsistent with thisPart 721.(d) Any person submitting a significant new use notice in response to therequirements of this Part 721 shall not manufacture, import, or processa chemical substance identified in Subpart E of this part for a significantnew use until the notice review period, including all extensions and suspensions,has expired.8. By adding a new andSection; 721.30 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.30 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">EPA approval of alternative control measures. </ITAG>(a) In certain sections of Subpart E of this part, significant new usesfor the identified substances are described as the failure to establishand implement programs providing for the use of either: specific measuresto control worker exposure to or release of substances which are identifiedin such sections, or alternative measures to control worker exposure orenvironmental release which EPA has determined provide substantially thesame degree of protection as the specified control measures. Persons whomanufacture, import, or process a chemical substance identified in suchsections and who intend to employ alternative measures to control workerexposure or environmental release must submit a request to EPA for a determinationof equivalency before commencing manufacture, import, or processing involvingthe alternative control measures. (b) A request for a determination of equivalency must be submitted in writingto the Office of Toxic Substances, Document Control Officer, TS-790, 401M St. SW., Washington, DC 20460: ATTN: SNUR Equivalency Determination,and must contain: (1) The name of the submitter. (2) The specific chemical identity of the substance. (3) The citation for the specific section in Subpart E of this Part whichpertains to the substance for which the request is being submitted. (4) A detailed description of the activities involved. (5) The specifications of the alternative worker exposure control measuresor environmental release control measures. (6) An analysis justifying why such alternative control measures providesubstantially the same degree of protection as the specific control measuresidentified in the specific section in Subpart E of this part which pertainsto the substance for which the request is being submitted. (7) The data and information described in andSection;andSection; 720.50 (a)and (b) of this chapter unless such data and information have already beensubmitted to the Office of Toxic Substances, EPA. (c) Requests for determinations of equivalency will be reviewed by EPAwithin 45 days. Determinations under this paragraph will be made by theDirector, Office of Toxic Substances, or designee. Notice of the resultsof such determinations will be mailed to the submitter. (d) If EPA notifies the submitter under paragraph (c) of this section thatEPA has determined that the alternative control measures provide substantiallythe same degree of protection as the specified control measures identifiedin the specified section of Subpart E of this part which pertains to thesubstance for which the request is being submitted, the submitter may commencemanufacture, import, or processing in accordance with the specificationsfor alternative worker exposure control measures or environmental releasecontrol measures identified in the submitter's request, and may alter anycorresponding notification to workers to reflect such alternative controls.Deviations from the activities described in the EPA notification constitutea significant new use and are subject to the requirements of this part.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 721.35]</ITAG>9. Section 721.13 is redesignated as andSection; 721.35, and the entire sectionis revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.35 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Compliance and enforcement. </ITAG>(a) Failure to comply with any provision of this part is a violation ofsection 15(1) of the Act (15 U.S.C. 2614). (b) Using for commercial purposes a chemical substance which a person knewor had reason to know was manufactured, imported, or processed in violationof this part is a violation of section 15(2) of the Act (15 U.S.C. 2614).(c) Failure or refusal to permit access to or copying of records, as requiredby section 11 of the Act, is a violation of section 15(3) of the Act (15U.S.C. 2614). (d) Failure or refusal to permit entry or inspection, as required by section11 of the Act, is a violation of section 15(4) of the Act. (e) Violators of the Act or of this part may be subject to the civil andcriminal penalties in section 16 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 2615) for each violation.The submission of false or misleading information in connection with therequirement of any provision of this part may subject persons to penaltiescalculated as if they never filed a notice. (f) Under the authority of sections 7 and 17 of the Act, EPA may: (1) Seek to enjoin the manufacture, import, or processing of a chemicalsubstance in violation of this part. (2) Act to seize any chemical substance which is being manufactured, imported,or processed in violation of this part. (3) Take any other appropriate action. 10. Section 721.17 is redesignated as andSection; 721.40, and the entiresection is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.40 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Recordkeeping. </ITAG>Any person subject to the requirements of this part must retain documentationof information contained in that person's significant new use notice. Thisdocumentation must be maintained for a period of 5 years from the dateof the submission of the significant new use notice. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.19 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 721.45]</ITAG>11. Section 721.19 is redesignated as andSection; 721.45, and the entiresection is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.45 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Exemptions. </ITAG>The persons identified in andSection; 721.5 are not subject to the notificationrequirements of andSection; 721.25 for a chemical substance identified inSubpart E of this part, unless otherwise specified in a specific sectionin Subpart E, if: (a) The person has applied for and has been granted an exemption for testmarketing the substance for a significant new use identified in SubpartE of this part in accordance with section 5(h)(1) of the Act and andSection;720.38 of this chapter. (b) The person manufactures, imports, or processes the substance for asignificant new use identified in Subpart E of this part in small quantitiessolely for research and development in accordance with andSection; 721.47.(c) The person has applied for and been granted an exemption under section5(h)(5) of the Act. (d) The person manufactures, imports, or processes the substance only asan impurity. (e) The person manufactures, imports, or processes the substance only asa byproduct which is used only by public or private organizations that(1) burn it as a fuel, (2) dispose of it as a waste, including in a landfillor for enriching soil, or (3) extract component chemical substances fromit for commercial purposes. (f) The person imports or processes the substance as part of an article.(g) The person manufactures or processes the substance solely for exportand, when distributing the substance in commerce, labels the substancein accordance with section 12(a)(1)(B) of the Act. (h) The person submits a significant new use notice for the substance priorto the promulgation date of the section in Subpart E of this part whichidentifies the substance, and the person receives written notificationof compliance from EPA prior to the effective date of such section. Thenotice submitter must comply with any applicable requirement of section5(b) of the Act. The notice must include the information and test dataspecified in section 5(d)(1) of the Act and must be submitted on the noticeform in Appendix A to Part 720 of this chapter. For purposes of this exemption,the specific section in Subpart E of this part which identifies the substanceand andSection;andSection; 721.1, 721.3, 721.11, 721.35, and 721.40 apply;after the effective date of the section in Subpart E of this part whichidentifies the substance, andSection; 721.5 applies and andSection; 721.20continues to apply. EPA will provide the notice submitter with writtennotification of compliance only if one of the following occurs: (1) EPA is unable to make the finding that the activities described inthe significant new use notice will or may present an unreasonable riskof injury to health or the environment under reasonably foreseeable circumstances.(2) EPA and the person negotiate a consent order under section 5(e) ofthe Act, such order to take effect on the effective date of the sectionin Subpart E of this part which identifies the substance. (i) The person is operating under the terms of a consent order issued undersection 5(e) of the Act applicable to that person. If a provision of suchsection 5(e) order is inconsistent with a specific significant new useidentified in Subpart E of this part, abiding by the provision of the section5(e) order exempts the person from submitting a significant new use noticefor that specific significant new use. 12. By adding a new andSection; 721.47 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 721.47 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conditions for research and development exemption. </ITAG>(a) A person who manufactures, imports, or processes a chemical substanceidentifies in Subpart E of this part for a significant new use identifiedin Subpart E of this part is not subject to the notification requirementsof andSection; 721.25 if the following conditions are met: (1) The person manufactures, imports, or processes the substance for thesignificant new use in small quantities solely for research and development.(2) The manufacturer, importer, or processor notifies all persons in itsemploy or to whom it directly distributes the chemical substance, who areengaged in experimentation, research, or analysis on the chemical substance,including the manufacture, processing, use, transport, storage, and disposalof the substance associated with research and development activities, ofany risk to health, identified under paragraph (b) of this section, whichmay be associated with the substance. The notification must be made inaccordance with paragraph (c) of this section. (3) The chemical substance is used by, or directly under the supervisionof, a technically qualified individual. (b)(1) To determine whether notification under paragraph (a)(2) of thissection is required, the manufacturer, importer, or processor must reviewand evaluate the following information to determine whether there is reasonto believe there is any risk to health which may be associated with thechemicals substance:  (i) Information in its possession or control concerning any significantadverse reaction by persons exposed to the chemical substance which mayreasonably be associated with such exposure.(ii) Information provided to the manufacturer, importer, or processor bya supplier or any other person concerning a health risk believed to beassociated with the substance.(iii) Health and environmental effects data in its possession or controlconcerning the substance.(iv) Information on health effects which accompanies any EPA rule or orderissued under section 4, 5, or 6 of the Act that applies to the substanceand of which the manufacturer, importer, or processor has knowledge.(2) When the research and development activity is conducted solely in alaboratory and exposure to the chemical substance is controlled throughthe implementation of prudent laboratory practices for handling chemicalsubstances of unknown toxicity, and any distribution, except for purposesof disposal, is to other such laboratories for further research and developmentactivity, the information specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this sectionneed not be reviewed and evaluated. (For purposes of this paragraph (b)(2),a laboratory is defined as a contained research facility where relativelysmall quantities of chemical substances are used on a pro-production basis,and where activities involve the use of containers for reactions, transfers,and other handling of substances designed to be easily manipulated by asingle individual).(c)(1) The manufacturer, importer, or processor must notify the personsidentified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section by means of a containerlabeling system, conspicuous placement of notices in areas where exposuremay occur, written notification to each person potentially exposed, orany other method of notification which adequately informs persons of healthrisks which the manufacturer, importer, or processor has reason to believemay be associated with the substance, as determined under paragraph (b)(1)of this section.(2) If the manufacturer, importer, or processor distributes a chemicalsubstance manufactured, imported, or processed under this section to personsnot in its employ, the manufacturer, importer, or processor must in writtenform:(i) Notify those persons that the substance is to be used only for researchand development purposes.(ii) Provide the notice of health risks specified in paragraph (c)(1) ofthis section.(3) The adequacy of any notification under this section is the responsibilityof the manufacturer, importer, or processor.(d) Quantities of the chemical substance, or of mixtures or articles containingthe chemical substance, remaining after completion of research and developmentactivities may be:(i) Disposed of as a waste in accordance with applicable Federal, State,and local regulations, to the extent the disposal activity is not identifiedas a significant new use for the substance in Subpart E of this part, or(2) Used for a commercial purpose, to the extent the use is not identifiedas a significant new use of the substance in Subpart E of this part.(e)(1) Persons who manufacture, import, or process a chemical substanceunder this section must retain the following records:(i) Copies of or citations to information reviewed and evaluated underparagraph (b)(1) of this section to determine the need to make any notificationof risk.(ii) Documentation of the nature and method of notification under paragraph(c)(1) of this section including copies of any labels or written noticesused.(iii) Documentation of prudent laboratory practices used instead of notificationand evaluation under paragraph (b)(2) of this section.(iv) The names and addresses of any persons other than the manufacturer,importer, or processor to whom the substance is distributed, the identityof the substance, the amount distributed, and copies of the notificationsrequired under paragraph (c)(2) of this section.(2) [Reserved.]<ITAG tagnum="20">(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number2070-0012.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-16888 Filed 7-26-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 1560-50-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>