<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881014-0168 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-14-88.f2.A1016</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 199 / Friday, October 14, 1988/ Rules and Regulations <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Food Safety and Inspection Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">9 CFR Parts 71, 78, 85, 309, 310, and 320 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 88-055] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Swine Identification </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCIES:</T2> Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA, andFood Safety and Inspection Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The United States Department of Agriculture (the Department)is adding to its existing identification and recordkeeping requirementsfor swine new provisions to mandate that all swine in interstate commercebe identified and that records concerning the swine identification be maintained.Expanding requirements, so that all swine in interstate commerce are identifiedand records of their identification maintained, will allow the Animal andPlant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) of the Department to trace a swinedisease to its source much more efficiently than was possible before theserequirements became effective. APHIS needs to be able to locate sourcesof infection in order to eradicate certain diseases and stop them fromspreading. Expanding identification and recordkeeping requirements forswine in interstate commerce will also allow the Food Safety and InspectionService (FSIS) of the Department to determine more easily the source ofmeat that is adulterated with drug and other chemical residues at levelshigher than the allowed tolerance. FSIS needs to be able to locate thesesources of contamination in order to better keep the United States meatsupply free of meat that could harm the health of the American public.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE:</T2> November 14, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Dr. W.E. Ketter, Regulatory Communicationsand Compliance Policy Staff, VS, APHIS, USDA, Room 828, Federal Building,6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, 301-436-5863; or Dr. DouglasL. Berndt, Director, Slaughter Inspection Standards and Procedures Division,Meat and Poultry Inspection Technical Services, FSIS, USDA, Room 4444,P.O. Box 96464, Washington, DC 20090-6464, 202-447-3219.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>On February 3, 1988, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)published a proposal (53 FR 3146-3156, Docket number 87-103) to amend itsregulations to require all swine in interstate commerce to be identifiedand to require records concerning the swine identification to be maintained.That document explained, in detail, how and why the proposed regulationswere developed. For the reader's convenience, we would like to summarizesome of that material. The Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) of the USDA, under the FederalMeat Inspection Act (FMIA) (21 U.S.C. 601, <T3>et seq.</T3>), has responsibility for ensuring that meat and meat foodproducts in interstate commerce are wholesome and not adulterated or misbranded.One program the agency conducts is the National Residue Program, designedto help prevent products that are adulterated with residues of drugs andother chemicals, such as pesticides and industrial contaminants, from beingdistributed in commerce. There are not enough FSIS personnel to test every animal or carcass forpossible adulteration with chemical residues, and even if there were, itis not practical to retain every carcass until test results are known.This fact was an important consideration in establishing the National ResidueProgram. Also, the cost of testing all animals or carcasses and holdingthem for test results would be prohibitive. Therefore, a system wherebyFSIS can predict which animals or carcasses are most likely to be adulteratedhas been needed to help the agency more accurately choose animals and carcassesfor blood and tissue sample testing, use its personnel more efficiently,more effectively enforce its regulations, and more effectively keep adulteratedmeat out of the nation's food supply. To do this, FSIS needs a system in which all swine in interstate commercearriving at slaughter are identified and in which a record of the previousownership and location of each swine is available. Then, when FSIS locatesan adulterated carcass, the animal from which the carcass is derived canbe traced back through marketing channels. Tracing animals allows officialsto locate other animals that are likely to yield adulterated meat. However,prior to the effective date of these regulations/amendments, the identificationrequirements for swine did not provide a means for all swine in interstatecommerce to be traced through marketing channels. Another agency within the Department, the Animal and Plant Health InspectionService (APHIS), is responsible, in part, for protecting the health ofUnited States livestock and poultry. In order to fulfill this responsibility,APHIS has promulgated regulations requiring animals moving in interstatecommerce to be tested for disease and inspected for pests, requiring certainanimals moving in interstate commerce to be identified, and otherwise governingthe interstate movement or commerce of livestock and poultry in the UnitedStates. Millions of livestock are slaughtered every year in the United States.Many of these animals are moved interstate to slaughter. If any of themare found to be infected with certain diseases, APHIS attempts to tracethe route the animals took through marketing channels to arrive at slaughter.In that way, APHIS can find out where diseased animals were located, whenthey were there, and what other animals came in contact with them. Eachanimal that a diseased animal came in contact with is exposed and may itselfbecome infected, and may in turn have the capability of infecting otheranimals. Therefore, if APHIS is to successfuly control and eradicate certainlivestock diseases in this country, it must be able to trace individualanimals. Prior to the effective date of these amendments, APHIS had some regulationsrequiring identification of swine moved in interstate commerce. However,not all swine were covered, and the system did not provide a means forall swine in interstate commerce to be traced through marketing channels.Therefore, as the first step towards ensuring that information is availableto allow tracing of swine, the Department published a proposal to amendthe regulations in Title 9, Code of Federal Regulations, to expand theidentification and recordkeeping requirements relating to swine. The proposalaffected only regulations promulgated and enforced by APHIS or by FSIS.The proposal was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on February 3, 1988, at 53 FR 3146-3156. At thattime, the Department requested written comments on the proposal. The comment period closed April 4, 1988; we received 184 comments. Theywere from state and federal government agencies, trade organizations, corporations,and individuals. Six stated, without elaborating, that they were in favorof the proposed regulations. One stated, without elaborating, that theywere against the proposed regulations. Another 3 comments were receivedwhich did not respond to the proposed regulations. The remaining 174 lettersmade comments and suggestions. The comments were received indicate general support for some system toidentify swine in the United States, both for disease control purposesand to help ensure an unadulterated meat supply for consumers. However,most of the comments expressed concern about one or more aspects of ourproposed regulations. We will individually discuss these issues below,by subject. <ITAG tagnum="84">Comments</ITAG>Residues Numerous comments referred to the problem of residues in pork and porkproducts. Many suggested that rather than setting up a regulatory systemto allow USDA representatives to locate the source of adulteration, problemdrugs such as sulfa drugs should simply be banned by the Department. Thesedrugs are regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). That Agency,not the USDA, is responsible for approving or disapproving the use of animaldrugs such as sulfa drugs and enforcing their proper use. Therefore, USDAdoes not have the direct authority to take the regulatory action suggestedby these comments. Definition of ``Interstate Commerce'' The proposed regulations require all swine ``in interstate commerce'' tobe identified. Many commenters stated that the proposed definition of ``interstatecommerce'' is vague. A careful reading of their comments suggests thatthey in fact did understand the definition, but were confused because thedefinition is different from the meaning of ``interstate commerce'' wehave used in previous regulations. Therefore, though we are not changingthe proposed definition in response to these comments, we would like toexplain further, and give examples, of what ``interstate commerce'' means.We proposed to define ``interstate commerce'' as:<ITAG tagnum="21">Trade, traffic, transportation, or other commerce between a placein a state and any place outside of that state, or between points withina state but through any place outside of that state. (See andSection; 71.1,definition of ``Interstate commerce'')</ITAG>We explained in the background information to the proposed regulations(see 53 FR 3151) that the proposed definition of ``Interstate commerce''is intended to cover as many swine as possible under the animal quarantinelaws and the Federal Meat Inspection Act, including those swine in foreigncommerce that are imported into the United States.'' We also stated (see53 FR 3152) that:<ITAG tagnum="21">[u]nder the proposed swine identification requirements, individualswine may need to be identified even if they are not immediately beingmoved interstate. This is because the proposed regulations are based onthe broadest possible definition of ``interstate commerce'' under the animalquarantine laws and the federal Meat Inspection Act. Transactions and movementsoccurring prior to, during, and after an interstate transaction or movementwould be included as long as the commerce in the swine continued. For example,if a swine is sold and the buyer and seller are in different states, thatswine would be required under the proposed regulations to be identifed,whether or not it moves interstate. That is because the transaction itselfwould be in ``interstate commerce,'' as the Department proposes to definethat term. Prior and subsequent movements and transactions would also bein interstate commerce, as long as the swine remain in commerce.</ITAG>Here are other examples: (1) If the seller and buyer are both in state X, but the buyer is actingfor a corporation in state Y, the swine purchased would be in interstatecommerce whether or not if ever moved outside of state X. <T3>Reason:</T3> The financial transaction involved a seller in one stateand or buyer in another state. (2) If seller and buyer are both in state X, but send swine to state Yfor slaughter, the swine would be in interstate commerce. <T3>Reason:</T3> The swine have moved interstate. (3) If the seller and buyer are both in state X, but the swine is in stateY, the swine would be in interstate commerce even if it never moved outsideof state Y. <T3>Reason:</T3> The financial transaction is one state involved swinein another state. If there is a series of transactions involving the same swine, the individualtransactions may or may not be ``in interstate commerce,'' depending uponwhether the character of the swine (feeder, breeder, or slaughter animal)changes over the course of the transactions, the length of time betweentransactions and the intent of the buyer in each transaction. This meansthat if one transaction in a series is clearly in ``interstate commerce,''other transactions occurring before or after it in the same, unbroken series,may also be considered to be ``in interstate commerce.'' Every situationmust be considered individually. However, to help clarify how we will applythese concepts, here are some examples: (1) Seller, buyer, and feeder pig are all in state X. Immediately afterthe feeder pig is purchased by the buyer, the buyer sells it to a broker,also in state X. The broker immediately sells the feeder pig to a buyerin state Y. <T3>All</T3> three transactions would be in interstate commerce. <T3>Reason:</T3> The final transaction involved a buyer and seller in twodifferent states. This transaction was therefore in interstate commerce.However, it was merely the last transaction in an unbroken series of transactions.During the course of the transactions, the swine was not held by any buyerfor more than a minimal period of time, the swine did not change characterduring the course of the transactions (i.e. it remained a feeder pig; itdid not grow enough to become a breeding or slaughter animal), and theintent of the buyers all appears to have been to sell the animal quicklyfor an immediate profit. Therefore, the pig would be considered to haveentered interstate commerce at the time of the first transaction. (2) Seller, buyer, and feeder pig are all in state X. The buyer holds thefeeder pig in state X for a substantial period of time until it is largeenough to slaughter. The buyer sells it, as a slaughter animal, to a brokerin state X, who immediately sells it to a packing plant in state Y. Inthis situation, only the second and third transactions are in interstatecommerce; the first transaction is not. <T3>Reason:</T3> The buyer in the first transaction kept the feeder piga substantial period of time, in this case until it changed character andbecame a slaughter animal. Holding the swine for this length of time breaksthe series of transactions involving the interstate commerce concerningthat swine. Whether an animal is held for a sufficient period of time tochange its character and break its interstate commerce is a factual questionwhich must be addressed on a case-by-case basis. However, the second transactionis in interstate commerce because the buyer, a broker in the same state,does not intend to hold the animal, but sells it immediately across thestate line to a packing plant. We received one comment asking us to consider the potential effect of theregulations on the ``delivery procedures'' for swine purchased under futurescontracts. The commenter pointed out that very few swine are actually delivered,that is, moved from buyer to seller, under futures contracts. We have carefullyconsidered this issue. Our regulations will apply to all swine in interstatecommerce. If swine purchased under futures contracts are in interstatecommerce, they will be subject to the regulations in the same manner asall other swine in interstate commerce. However, the regulations can beapplied only to <T3>specific</T3> swine. If a futures contract specifies a certain numberof swine, but not their source, owner, location, or other information whichindicates which specific swine are involved, the identification and recordkeepingrequirements cannot be applied. At the time specific swine are selected,these requirements can be applied; if the swine are in interstate commerce,they will have to be identified and records made and maintained as requiredby the regulations. Whether the swine are in interstate commerce or notwould be determined as explained above. Delivery of the swine would beone of the factors considered. Identification Exemption for Farrow-to-Finish Swine Our proposal included provisions requiring all swine in interstate commerce,except farrow-to-finish swine, to be individually identified. Under theproposal, farrow-to-finish swine would be required instead to be identifiedby lot. (See andSection; 71.19(c)(1)-(5).) Many comments stated that allswine, without exception, should be required to be individually identified.Various reasons were given: exemptions would be unfair to small producersbecause they could not take advantage of them, and would therefore incurhigher marketing costs than large producers; exemptions would be unfairto auction markets and stockyards, which could lose business because producerswould be encouraged to bypass them and sell their swine directly to packers;and exemptions would be unfair simply because all swine should be subjectto the same rules regardless of the situation. We have carefully considered all the comments on this issue. We have decidednot to make any changes in the proposed identification exemption for farrow-to-finishswine. Our goal in implementing these regulations is to ensure that swinecan be traced through marketing channels when necessary, whether to locatethe source of adulterated meat or diseased swine or to locate swine whichcould carry disease. We proposed to exempt farrow-to-finish swine fromthe individual identification requirements only if they were handled, fromfarrowing to slaughter, in a manner ensuring that they could be tracedto their source. Our proposed handling requirements included requirementsthat they be maintained as a group, be moved directly from producer toslaughter, and never be commingled with other swine. We believe these requirementsalone will allow us to trace these animals through marketing channels.We do not intend, and cannot justify, imposing unproductive and unnecessaryrequirements. Requiring farrow-to-finish swine to be individually identifiedwould add nothing to our ability to trace swine through marketing channels.Therefore, we are making no changes in the regulations on the basis ofthese comments. One comment asked how low-weight swine in a farrow-to-finish lot of animalswould be handled, because packers reject swine below a certain minimumweight. Another commenter remarked that some animals in a farrow-to-finishlot might become separated from the others. Under our regulations, noneof these swine would qualify for the farrow-to-finish exemption becausethey would not meet all the requirements of that exemption. Therefore,they would have to comply with the other requirements of the regulationsand be individually identified. This would be true of any swine that doesnot meet the requirements for the farrow-to-finish exemption, for whateverreason. Exemption of Other Swine We received many comments suggesting various types (feeders, breeders,market animals, slaughter hogs, sows, boars, etc.) of swine that we shouldor should not require to be identified. We are not making any changes basedon these comments. As we have explained, we need to be able to trace allswine back through marketing channels, and we therefore are requiring allswine in interstate commerce to be identified. We have attempted though,in designing these regulations, to minimize their impact by requiring individualidentification only when we believe it is necessary. If we determine inthe future that additional swine can be exempted from the individual identificationrequirements without defeating the purpose of the regulations, we willconsider amending the regulations. We also received 1 comment suggesting we allow trucks to carry unidentifiedswine from more than one owner at the same time, if the swine from eachowner are kept separate on the truck. We have carefully considered thisand have decided not to make any changes in the regulations. We doubt thatit would be practical to keep groups of swine completely separate on atruck. Even if it were practical, without additional requirements, suchas requiring the swine to be individually identified immediately on arrivalat their destination, the chances of the swine being commingled with otherswine, intentionally or accidentally, would be very great. If this happened,the purpose of the regulations, to allow tracing of swine back throughmarketing channels, would be defeated. Handling Farrow-to-Finish Swine at Slaughter The proposed rule stated that farrow-to-finish swine would not need tobe individually identified if certain conditions were met. One of the conditionswas that the swine be ``slaughtered one after another, as a group, andnot mixed with other swine at slaughter.'' (See andSection; 71.1(c)(5).)Some comments were received stating that this was not practical at mostslaughtering establishments unless the ``slaughtering line'' was sloweddown, and slowing the line would increase costs. We have considered thesecomments and decided to amend the proposed regulations to provide, as analternative, that farrow-to-finish swine may be individually identifiedat slaughter. Applying individual identification at the slaughterhousewould not slow the slaughter line, but would allow us to trace the swine.Therefore, we are amending andSection; 71.19(c)(5) to add this option. Who Applies Identification Many commenters stated that the proposed regulations were unclear as towho would be responsible for identifying swine. Others stated that we shouldspecify who must apply identification. Some commenters stated that truckdrivers who haul swine should not be responsible for ensuring that theswine are identified. As we stated in our proposal, it is vital that swine are identified anda record kept of the identification and other information. Without bothidentification and recordkeeping, tracing swine back through marketingchannels is impossible. (See 53 FR 3150.) However, it is not importantwho applies the identification, only that it be on the swine. For thisreason we did not propose to require any specific person to apply it. However,because it is so important that the swine be identified and a completerecord kept, we did propose to make every person who handles swine in interstatecommerce responsible for the identification. Our requirement reads:<ITAG tagnum="21">Each person who buys or sells, for his or her own account or as theagent of the buyer or seller, transports, receives for transportation,offers for sale or transportation, or otherwise handles swine in interstatecommerce, is responsible for the identification of the swine * * * (andSection;71.19(a)(2))</ITAG>This includes truck drivers and every other person who handles swine ininterstate commerce. This requirement does not mean that all persons ``responsiblefor the identification of the swine'' are required to apply identificationto the swine. If identification is already on the swine, the person isonly required to make and keep a record of that, and other, information(see andSection; 71.19(e)(1).) If no identification is on the swine, theperson can either apply it themselves or refuse to handle the swine unlesssomeone else applies the identification. Several comments were received suggesting we simplify our proposed regulationsto require all producers to individually identify all their swine, whetheror not the animals were or ever would be in interstate commerce. Some commenterssuggested that each producer in the United States be assigned a confidentialidentification number to use on all their swine. We are making no changesin the regulations based on these comments. Though the suggested change_torequire producers to apply identification_would simplify the requirements,the Department does not have the statutory authority to impose such a rule.FSIS's authorizing statutes give that agency no authority over live animalsprior to their arrival at slaughter. APHIS's statutory authority extendsonly to interstate, not intrastate, commerce. (See, for example, 21 U.S.C.111, giving APHIS authority ``to prevent the introduction or disseminationof the contagion of any contagious, infectious, or communicable diseaseof animals and/or live poultry from a foreign country into the United Statesor from one State or Territory of the United States or the District ofColumbia to another.'') Under this limited authority, if livestock arenot in interstate commerce, we cannot regulate them. There are some livestockin the United States that never enter interstate commerce. If we requiredproducers to identify all their stock, as suggested by the commenters,regardless of whether the animals are in interstate commerce, we wouldbe exceeding our authority because we would be requiring animals in intrastatecommerce, not in interstate commerce, to be identified. Several commenters suggested that our proposed regulations would not ``allow''producers to identify their own hogs. We believe these commenters misreadour proposal. The proposal places no restrictions on who may place identificationon swine. It is true that certain identification devices are issued onlyto certain persons. For example, certain metal eartags are issued onlyto accredited veterinarians and state and federal representatives. However,a swine owner can, if he or she wishes, arrange at any time to have anaccredited veterinarian or state or federal representative place metaleartags on his or her swine. A swine owner can also, if he or she wishes,personally place any other type of approved identification on his or herswine whenever they wish.When Identification is AppliedSome commenters suggested that instead of requiring swine to be identified``in interstate commerce,'' we require them to be identified at the ``firstpoint of concentration'' in marketing channels, at sale, at the ``pointof origin,'' or at some other specific, uniform time or place. We are notmaking any changes in the regulations based on these comments. As explainedabove, APHIS only has authority to regulate in interstate commerce. Swinecan be moved to the ``first point of concentration'' or sold without everentering interstate commerce. We therefore cannot regulate swine on thisbasis alone. Also, we intend these regulations to have the broadest possiblecoverage. The requirement that swine ``in interstate commerce'' be identifiedeffectively requires the largest possible number of swine to be identified,within our statutory authority. It also effectively requires swine to beidentified as early as possible in marketing channels. Any other requirementas to time or place of identification would narrow the coverage of theregulations and defeat their purpose.Identification Devices and MarkingsNumerous comments were received which dealt with our proposed list of approvedswine identification. Some commenters believe some of the identificationdevices listed will not be satisfactory in actual use. Other commenterssuggested devices to add to the proposed list.We are not making any changes in the proposed list of approved means ofidentification based on these comments. We agree with the commenters whostated that all the listed means of identification have flaws. We agreethat tattoos are not always legible; we agree that backtags and eartagssometimes come off. These failings are in fact the reason why we proposedto limit the use of certain devices to the situations where we believethey will be satisfactory. For example, we would not allow backtags tobe used except on swine moving to slaughter. Reason: Backtags generallystay on long enough for swine to move from stockyard to slaughter, butnot longer. We believe the proposed list of swine identification includesall devices now available to be used in the situations where they are themost practical. We also believe the regulations provide enough differenttypes of swine identification to allow all swine in interstate commerceto be identified, regardless of their situation. For these reasons, weare not making any changes in the proposed list of approved swine identification.We anticipate that new and better identification devices will be developedin the future. In fact, several commenters suggested that machine-readablebar code tags could be used. We are not aware of existing tags of thissort that are practical for use on swine. However, we want to be sure thatour regulations always allow the best available identification to be used.For this reason, we included in our proposed regulations basic requirementsfor submitting new identification devices and methods to the Departmentfor approval and inclusion in the regulations. These requirements appearat andSection; 71.19(g). After the effective date of these regulations, thesecommenters and other persons can apply to the Department to have identificationmethods and devices added to the list of approved swine identification.One commenter stated that the regulations should prohibit tampering withidentification on swine. Such a prohibition was proposed and is in thefinal regulations at andSection; 71.19(f).TattoosTattoos were the specific identification devices most often mentioned bycommenters. They are also the device most likely to be used to identifyswine. Many commenters suggested that a four-character tattoo be allowed.The proposed rule allowed only a six-character tattoo approved by VeterinaryServices. (See andSection; 71.1, definition of ``Veterinary Services approvedtattoo'' and andSection; 71.19(b)(3).)We have carefully considered these comments and decided to amend the regulationsto allow, in addition to the proposed six-character tattoo, the use offour-character tattoos. (See new andSection; 71.19(b)(3).) Four-charactertattoos are currently the industry standard, and they are successfullyand widely used. We see no reason not to allow their continued use. Itappears that we can trace swine through marketing channels if they aremarked with either a four-character tattoo or a six-character tattoo.Fee for Applying IdentificationAnother issue raised by commenters was the cost of applying individualidentification to swine. Commenters pointed out that it costs money toidentify swine_there is the cost of the identification device itself andthe cost of paying someone to apply it. Many commenters suggested thatanyone applying identification to swine should be authorized to chargea fee for performing the service. Twenty-five cents was suggested by mostas being reasonable. Many commenters stated that there should be a uniformfee.We agree that applying identification to swine costs money. However, neitherFSIS nor APHIS has the authority to set a fee or to authorize anyone tocharge a fee for applying identification.What Records Need to the KeptMany commenters objected to our proposal to require everyone handling swinein interstate commerce, or applying official eartags or backtags to swine,to keep a record of all serial numbers and other approved means of identificationappearing on the swine. (See proposed andSection;andSection; 71.19(d)(1)(iii),71.19(e)(1)(i), 78.33(d)(l)(iii), and 78.33(e)(l)(i).) The commenters statedthat such extensive record keeping was not necessary, that some of theidentification might not be legible and it would take too much time toread and record all the identification on the swine.We agree that identification on swine is not always legible. We also agreethat it would take time to read and record all identification on a swine.We intended, by proposing this requirement, to ensure that there wouldalways be adequate information available to allow us to trace swine backthrough marketing channels to their source. Although having a record ofall identification appearing on a swine would be best, it is not absolutelynecessary. What is absolutely necessary is that each individual swine canbe linked to its previous step in the marketing chain. Then, even if aswine is repeatedly bought and sold or moved from location to location,it can be traced back through the entire chain. This can be accomplishedif each person who handles the swine keeps a record of swine identificationwhich links the animal to the person from whom they purchased or otherwiseobtained it, i.e., the previous step in the chain. Based on these facts,we have decided to amend our proposal to require that each person handlingswine in interstate commerce keep a record of the serial numbers and otherapproved means of identification appearing on the swine that is adequateto identify each swine to the person from whom it was purchased or otherwiseobtained. (See amended andSection;andSection; 71.19(e)(1)(i) and 78.33(e)(1)(i).)These sections will now require a record of ``[a]ll serial numbers andother approved means of identification appearing on the swine that areneeded to identify the swine to the person from whom it was purchased orotherwise obtained.'' We are also amending andSection;andSection; 71.19(d)(1)and 78.33(d)(1) to require persons applying USDA swine backtags and officialeartags to record the ``serial numbers or other approved means of identificationappearing on the swine that are necessary to identify the swine to itsowner and location.'' We are also amending these sections to clarify thatthey require persons applying USDA swine backtags and official eartagsto record the numbers of the tags they are applying. These changes willensure that all persons handling swine in interstate commerce and all personsapplying USDA swine backtags and official eartags maintain similar recordswhich will allow the swine to be traced through marketing channels.We are also amending proposed andSection; 320.1(b)(1)(ix), which requirescertain persons ``engaged, for commerce, in the business of slaughteringany swine for use as human or animal food'' to maintain records of ``allthe serial numbers and other approved means of identification appearingon the swine.'' We are amending this section to require that these personsmaintain records of ``all serial numbers and other approved means of identificationappearing on all test swine selected at ante-mortem inspection by FSISrepresentatives for residue testing.'' Under this amended regulation, packersand others will be required to keep a record of the individual identificationappearing only on a few swine, rather than on all swine, as we originallyproposed. This will reduce the recordkeeping required. However, it willensure that all the information we need to trace swine back through marketingchannels is available when needed. We may need to trace an animal backthrough marketing channels for two reasons: Either the meat from the animalis adulterated or the animal is diseased. Obtaining test results for residuestakes time, and the carcass of the animal tested will have left the packerbefore the test results are available. However, lesions and other alteredtissue suggestive of disease can be detected while the carcass is stillat the packer. The amended regulations will ensure that the identificationinformation on all animals is available when needed. For animals testedfor residues, identification information will remain available for twoyears and test samples can be identified to the swine from which they cameduring that time period. For animals found to show signs of disease, identificationinformation will remain available, on the carcass, throughout post-mortemexamination (see current andSection; 310.2(a) and new andSection; 310.23(a))and the carcass can be immediately identified to the swine from which itcame. For all swine, the packer or other recordkeeper must maintain recordsidentifying the swine back to the seller and source. (See new andSection;320.1(b)(1)(ix).)Recordkeeping FormSeveral commenters suggested that a specific form be developed for keepingswine identification records. We are making no changes in our proposedregulations based on these comments. We have intentionally not adopteda new form for this purpose because we do not believe it is necessary ordesirable. There are already numerous forms which persons handling swinein interstate commerce must maintain. Any of them can be used to keep arecord of identification information. An additional form would simply increasethe amount of paperwork. Also, we need only the information; it is irrelevantfor our purposes where it is recorded or the format used. Therefore weare leaving the choice of format and document to the recordkeeper. If itbecomes apparent after the regulations are effective that a specific formis needed, we will design one.Length of Time to Keep RecordsOur proposed regulations required that records be kept of swine identification.The proposed regulations also stated that the records would have to bekept for 2 years. (See andSection; 71.19(e)(2).) Many commenters stated that2 years was too long a period of time.We have considered these comments and have decided to make no changes inthe regulations. As we stated in our proposal, we chose a 2-year periodbecause that period of time ``conforms with standard business practicesin the industry, under which records of sale, delivery receipt, transferof ownership, and other matters are commonly retained for at least 2 years.''(53 FR 3151) We still believe requiring records to be kept for some otherperiod of time would be unnecessarily confusing.Cost of Compliance, GeneralMany commenters stated that it would be costly, both in dollars and intime, to comply with the proposed regulations by applying identificationand keeping records. We agree that complying with the regulations willinvolve some costs. However, we believe some expense is justified to helpensure that consumers are protected from adulterated meat and meat foodproducts and to help protect livestock from disease. We believe the regulationswe have designed are the least expensive means of achieving these goals.Liability for LossesMany commenters raised the question of liability for losses if an animalis found at slaughter to be diseased or its meat adulterated. This issueis not within the jurisdiction of APHIS or FSIS.Miscellaneous CommentsWe received many comments containing only general statements that the proposedregulations were ``unfair'' or ``impractical'' or need more study, thatthey constituted unwarranted government interference with free enterpriseor did not go far enough to regulate the marketing of swine, that theywould not guarantee food safety, that they would aggravate existing problems,or that we need other regulations to solve the problems we uncover throughthese regulations. We are not making any changes based on these comments.We have attempted to design effective regulations that will have minimalimpact on the swine industry. If in practice we determine ways in whichthe regulations can be improved, we will propose to amend them at thattime.Several commenters addressed the issue of inspections. Several stated thatbefore we conduct an inspection we should give the person whose recordswe intend to inspect advance notice of the inspection. Several other commentersstated that we should only conduct inspections during the normal businesshours of the business involved, rather than between 8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.,Monday through Friday, as we proposed. We have carefully considered thesecomments, and determined that no changes in the proposed regulations arenecessary at this time. We do not believe that advance notice of inspectionsis necessary or desirable. If a business is operating, the records shouldbe available as a matter of routine. Also, we believe giving advance noticewould, to some extent, defeat the purpose of the regulations. With regardto the times for inspection, we are aware that not all persons requiredto keep records under these regulations are open for business or availableat all times during the hours provided in the regulations. We will attempt,as much as possible, to conduct inspections during the hours these personsare normally available. Our inspectors are aware of the normal businesshours of the businesses in their area. We do not anticipate that theseprovisions will cause any difficulties in practice. If, however, we findthat this is not true, we will consider amending the provisions.Several commenters stated that records of swine ownership and movementshould be kept confidential. We are not making any changes in the regulationsbased on these comments. Under these regulations, we do not have controlor possession of any of the documents on which these records are kept.Therefore we cannot control access to them. Also, as pointed out in ourproposal (53 FR 3153), many swine in the United States were already subjectto identification and documentation requirements prior to the effectivedate of these regulations. We are not aware of any problems concerningthe confidentiality of that information. Therefore we do not anticipateany problems concerning the confidentiality of information required underthese regulations.One comment stated that there is a conflict between the meaning of theterm ``Veterinary Services approved tattoo,'' included in these regulationsconcerning swine identification, and the ``official AV (adult vaccination)tattoo'' referred to in andSection; 78.1 of the APHIS regulations concerningbrucellosis in cattle (9 CFR Part 78). We do not believe there is any conflict.The tattoo for swine must conform to the official National Tattoo System.This is an established system, designed and operated by APHIS, for identifyingswine. These tattoos consist of 3 letters and 3 digits. The tattoo referredto in Title 9, Part 78, which is used only on cattle, consists of a digit,then the U.S. Registered Shield and ``V'', then another digit.A comment was received which suggested we list ear notches used by breedingstock companies as approved identification for swine. The regulations asproposed included as approved identification only ear notches recordedin the book of record of a purebred registry association. We are makingno changes in the regulations based on this comment. Ear notches recordedin the book of record of purebred registry associations are recognizedindustry-wide as standard, traceable identification. APHIS allows themto be used as identification under other portions of its regulations. (See9 CFR Parts 78 and 85) However, ear notches used by breeding stock companiesare not recognized industry-wide, there is no uniform system for designatingthe notches to be used, no central clearing house for keeping a recordof them, and they are not easily traced. However, as explained above, theregulations we are proposing include provisions for adding new means ofidentification to the list of approved identification for swine. Ear notchesused by breeding stock companies could be considered under these provisions.(See andSection; 71.19(g).)We received 2 comments asking if swine imported into the United Stateswould be covered under the regulations. Yes, swine entering the UnitedStates will be covered under these regulations. These swine are in interstatecommerce under our definition of that term.We received numerous comments asking how we intend to enforce these regulations.FSIS and APHIS will enforce these regulations as they enforce their otherregulations. Inspectors and other personnel routinely visit farms, auctionmarkets, and stockyards, and inspection on a daily basis slaughtering facilitiesin order to enforce these agencies' regulations. Inspections will continue.When violations of these swine identification and recordkeeping regulationsare found, these agencies will handle them as they do violations of theirother regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Miscellaneous Changes</ITAG>We are making several minor nonsubstantive changes for the purposes ofclarity.We are also correcting one section of our proposed regulations. Section78.33(d), as proposed, incorrectly implied that accredited veterinariansare not assigned serial numbers of United States Department of Agricultureswine backtags or of Veterinary Services approved tattoos. This is nottrue. It is also inconsistent with proposed andSection; 71.19(d), which correctlystated that United States Department of Agriculture swine backtags andVeterinary Services approved tattoos are issued to anyone, including accreditedveterinarians, who applies for them. Therefore, we are correcting andSection;78.33(d) to clarify that accredited veterinarians are issued serial numbersof United States Department of Agriculture swine backtags and VeterinaryServices approved tattoos.<ITAG tagnum="84">Executive Order 12291 and Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>The Department is issuing this rule in conformance with Executive Order12291, and has determined that it is not a ``major rule.'' Based on informationcompiled by the Department, it has been determined that this rule willhave an effect on the economy of less than $100 million; will not causea major increase in costs or prices for consumers, individual industries,federal, state, or local government agencies, or geographic region; andwill not cause a significant adverse effect on competition, employment,investment, productivity, innovation, or on the ability of United States-basedenterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or exportmarkets.A copy of the Department's cost analysis of this rule is available forpublic inspection in Room 1143, USDA_South Building, 14th Street and IndependenceAvenue, SW, Washington, DC between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Mondays throughFridays, except holidays.We are required, by the Regulatory Flexibility Act, to determine whetherthese regulations will have a significant economic effect on a substantialnumber of small entities. The entities we must consider are organizations,businesses, and government entities. ``Small'' entity is defined by SmallBusiness Administration (SBA) regulations (see 13 CFR 121.2.)Organizations and government entities, with extremely rare exceptions,will not be affected by these regulations. Only certain businesses thathandle swine in interstate commerce must comply with these regulations.They will be producers, auctions, dealers, and other marketing entities,transporters, and meat packers. However, many of these businesses willnot be affected by these regulations. As explained in our cost analysisof the regulations (hereinafter referred to as the cost analysis), thesetypes of businesses must already comply with other regulations. In manycases, by complying with existing regulations, these businesses are effectivelycomplying with these regulations. For them, no new activities will be required.In addition, many swine producers, marketers, transporters, and packerswill not need to comply with these regulations because they are not handlingany swine in interstate commerce.The businesses which will be affected by the regulations vary in size.Some of them are ``small entities,'' as defined by SBA regulations.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ SBA regulations define small ``meat packing plants'' andsmall businesses processing ``sausages and other prepared meat products''as those with fewer than 500 employees (see 13 CFR 121.2, Final rule SizeStandards by SIC Industry, SIC numbers 2011 and 2013.) SBA regulationsdefine small ``wholesale livestock'' businesses as those with fewer than500 employees (see 13 CFR 121.2, Final Rule Size Standards by SIC Industry,SIC #5154). SBA regulations define small ``local trucking without storage''and ``trucking, except local'' businesses as those with less than $12.5million annual revenue (see 13 CFR 121.2, Final Rule Size Standards bySIC Industry, SIC numbers 4212 and 4213.) SBA regulations define a small``agricultural production-livestock (except beef cattle feedlots (custom)and chicken eggs)'' business as a business with annual revenue of lessthan $100,000 (see 13 CFR 121.2, Final Rule Size Standards by SIC Industry,SIC # 0212-0291.)These regulations will impact on businesses in two primary ways: (1) Byrequiring swine to be identified; and (2) by requiring businesses to keeprecords. Unfortunately, the only statistics relevant to the effect theseregulations will have on businesses concern swine, not businesses handlingswine. However, after studying the statistics available to us, we haveconcluded that these regulations will not have a significant effect ona substantial number of small entities.As explained in our cost analysis, approximately 72.8% of swine slaughteredin the United States are classified as ``farrow-to-finish'' swine. Producers,marketers, truckers, and slaughterers of farrow-to-finish swine may besmall businesses. Under our regulations, ``farrow-to-finish'' swine thatmeet certain criteria are exempt from the identification requirements.We believe virtually all ``farrow-to-finish'' swine will meet these criteria,and therefore will be exempt from the identification requirements of theseregulations. In addition, businesses handling ``farrow-to-finish'' swinewill not have to meet any new recordkeeping requirements under these regulations.Therefore, the effect on these entities, whatever their size, will be zero.Also as explained in our cost analysis, approximately 21.1% of swine slaughteredin the United States are classified as ``feeder pig/finishing''. Underour regulations, the estimated <T3>maximum </T3>cost added by these regulations per swine for feeder pig/finishingis $0.00 for farms, $0.21 for truckers, $0.08 for marketers, and $0.04for packers. We believe these costs are insignificant.Together, these two categories of swine comprise 93.9% of all swine slaughteredin the United States. The remaining 6.1% of slaughter swine is made upof sows, stags, and boars. Of these swine, sows and boars are not affectedby these regulations. This is because they must already meet the requirementsof other regulations (see 9 CFR Parts 78 and 85), and in meeting thoserequirements they are complying with the requirements of these regulations.Stags sold for slaughter comprise an extremely small portion of all swinesold for slaughter, and some of them are not in interstate commerce andtherefore not affected by these regulations.Not all swine are marketed or moved as slaughter swine; many are marketedas feeder pigs. Feeder pigs are immature swine ready for fattening to slaughterweight. After sale for feeding, these swine typically remain at one locationuntil they are of slaughter weight. Because these swine are kept in oneplace long enough to change their character from feeder pigs to slaughterswine, they may not be considered to be ``in interstate commerce,'' asthat term is defined in these regulations. Feeder swine not in interstatecommerce are not affected by these regulations. Therefore, the businessesproducing them, marketing them, and transporting them are not affectedby these regulations. This is true whether or not they are ``small entities.''In summary, we know that both large and small entities produce, market,transport, or slaughter swine. It appears that a substantial portion ofthese entities are large entities and therefore not covered by the RegulatoryFlexibility Act. We also know that, of the small entities which produce,market, transport, or slaughter swine, some portion will not be affectedby these regulations because they are either already in compliance or becausethey will not be required to comply. We also know that the effect on thosesmall entities which are affected by the regulations is minimal. For thesereasons, we have concluded that these regulations will not have a significanteconomic effect on a substantial number of small entities.<ITAG tagnum="84">Executive Order 12372</ITAG>These programs/activities under 9 CFR Parts 71, 78, and 85, are listedin the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance under No. 10.025 and aresubject to the provisions of Executive Order 12372, which requires intergovernmentalconsultation with state and local officials. (See 7 CFR Part 3015, SubpartV.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>In accordance with section 3507 of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980(44 U.S.C. 3501, <T3>et. seq.,</T3>) the information collection provisions that are includedin this rule have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget(OMB) and given OMB control number 0579-0047.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>9 CFR Part 71Animal diseases, Livestock and livestock products, Poultry and poultryproducts, Quarantine, Transportation.9 CFR Part 78Animal diseases, Cattle, Hogs, Quarantine, Transportation.9 CFR Part 85Animal diseases, Livestock and livestock products, Quarantine, Transportation.9 CFR Part 309Ante-mortem inspection.9 CFR Part 310Post-mortem inspection.9 CFR Part 320Records, Registration, Reports.Accordingly, Parts 71, 78, 85, 309, 310, and 320 are amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 71_GENERAL PROVISIONS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 71 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>21 U.S.C. 111-113, 114a, 114a-1, 115-117, 120-126,134b, 134f; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(d).</ITAG>2. Section 71.1 is amended by adding the following definitions in alphabeticalorder:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 71.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Accredited Veterinarian. </T3>A veterinarian who is approved by theAdministrator, in accordance with Part 161 of this Chapter, to performofficial animal health work of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Servicespecified in Subchapters, A, B, C, and D of this Chapter; and to performwork required by cooperative state-federal disease control and eradicationprograms.<T3>Area Veterinarian in Charge. </T3>The veterinary official of VeterinaryServices, who is assigned by the Administrator to supervise and performthe official animal health work of the Animal and Plant Health InspectionService in the state concerned.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Interstate commerce. </T3>Trade, traffic, transportation, or othercommerce between a place in a state and any place outside of that state,or between points within a state but through any place outside of thatstate.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Official eartag. </T3>An identification eartag approved by VeterinaryServices as being tamper-resistant and as conforming to the nine-characteralpha-numeric National Uniform Eartagging System, which provides uniqueidentification for each animal.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Premises of origin. </T3>The farm or other premises where the animalsare farrowed and remain until moved in interstate commerce.<T3>Purebred registry association. </T3>A swine breed association formedand perpetuated for the maintenance of records of purebreeding of swinespecies for a specific breed whose characteristics are set forth in constitutions,by-laws, and other rules of the association.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>State animal health official. </T3>The state official responsible forlivestock and poultry disease control and eradication programs.<T3>State representative. </T3>An individual employed in animal healthwork by a state or a political subdivision thereof and authorized by suchstate or political subdivision to perform the function involved.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>United States Department of Agriculture swine backtag. </T3>A backtagissued by Veterinary Services for use on swine, which conforms to the eight-characteralpha-numeric National Backtagging System and uniquely identifies eachindividual swine.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>Veterinary Services approved tattoo. </T3>A tattoo, conforming to thesix character alpha-numeric National Tattoo System, which provides uniqueidentification for each herd or lot of swine.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 71.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>3. In andSection; 71.1, the definition of ``State'' is revised to read asfollows:<T3>State. </T3>Any of the 50 states, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the District of Columbia,and any territories and possessions of the United States.4. In Part 71, a new andSection; 71.19 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 71.19</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of swine in interstate commerce.</ITAG>(a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, no swine maybe sold, transported, received for transportation, or offered for saleor transportation, in interstate commerce, unless they are individuallyidentified by means of identification approved by the Administrator andlisted in paragraph (b) of this section. All swine shall remain so identifiedwhile they are in interstate commerce.(2) Each person who buys or sells, for his or her own account or as theagent of the buyer or seller, transports, receives for transportation,offers for sale or transportation, or otherwise handles swine in interstatecommerce, is responsible for the identification of the swine as providedby this section.(b) Means of swine identification approved by the Administrator are:(1) Official eartags, when used on any swine;(2) United States Department of Agriculture swine backtags, when used onswine moving to slaughter;(3) Veterinary Services-approved tattoos, and 4-character tattoos, whenused on swine moving to slaughter, except sows and boars as provided inandSection; 78.33 of this title;(4) Ear notching when used on any swine, if the ear notching has been recordedin the book of record of a purebred registry association; and(5) Ear tattoos when used on any swine, if the ear tattoos have been recordedin the book of record of a purebred registry association.(c) Swine that are kept as a group are not required to be individuallyidentified when in interstate commerce if:(1) They were born on the same premises;(2) They were raised on the same premises where they were born;(3) They are moved in a group directly to a slaughtering establishmentfrom the place where they were raised;(4) They are not mixed with swine from any other premises, between thetime they are born and the time they arrive at the slaughtering establishment;and(5) They are slaughtered one after another, as a group, and not mixed withother swine at slaughter; or approved identification is applied to theswine after entry into the slaughtering establishment.(d) Serial numbers of United States Department of Agriculture swine backtagsand Veterinary Services-approved tattoos will be assigned to each personwho applies to the state animal health official or the Area Veterinarianin Charge for the state in which that person maintains his/her or its placeof business. Serial numbers of official eartags will be assigned to eachaccredited veterinarian or state or federal representative who requestsofficial eartags from the state animal health official or the Area Veterinarianin Charge, whoever is responsible for issuing official eartags in thatstate. Persons assigned serial numbers of United States Department of Agricultureswine backtags, Veterinary Services-approved tattoos, and official eartagsmust:(1) Record the following information on a document:(i) All serial numbers applied to the swine;(ii) Any other serial numbers and approved identification appearing onthe swine that are needed to identify the swine to its previous owner andlocation;(iii) The street address, including the city and state, or the township,county, and state, of the premises where the approved means of identificationwere applied; and(iv) The telephone number, if available, of the person who owns or possessesthe swine.(2) Maintain these records at the person's place of business for 2 years;and(3) Make these records available for inspection and copying during ordinarybusiness hours (8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) upon requestby any authorized employee of the United States Department of Agriculture,upon that employee's request and presentation of his or her official credentials.(e)(1) Each person who buys or sells, for his or her own account or asthe agent of the buyer or seller, transports, receives for transportation,offers for sale or transportation, or otherwise handles swine in interstatecommerce, must keep records relating to the transfer of ownership, shipment,or handling of the swine, such as yarding receipts, sale tickets, invoices,and waybills upon which is recorded:(i) all serial numbers and other approved means of identification appearingon the swine that are necessary to identify it to the person from whomit was purchased or otherwise obtained; and(ii) the street address, including city and state, or the township, county,and state, and the telephone number, if available, of the person from whomthe swine were purchased or otherwise obtained.(2) Each person required to keep records under this paragraph must maintainthe records at his/her or its place of business for at least 2 years afterthe person has sold or otherwise disposed of the swine to another person,and for such further period as the Administrator may require by writtennotice to the person, for purposes of any investigation or action involvingthe swine identified in the records. The person shall make the recordsavailable for inspection and copying during ordinary business hours (8a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) by any authorized employee ofthe United States Department of Agriculture, upon that employee's requestand presentation of his or her official credentials.(f) No person may remove or tamper with any approved means of identificationrequired to be on swine pursuant to this section while it is in interstatecommerce, except at the time of slaughter as provided in 9 CFR 309.16(e).(g) Written requests for approval of swine identification devices and markingsnot listed in paragraph (b) of this section should be sent to the Administrator,Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, United States Department ofAgriculture, Hyattsville, Maryland 20782. If the Administrator determinesthat the devices and markings will provide a means of tracing swine ininterstate commerce, a proposal will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> to add the devices and markings to the list ofapproved means of swine identification.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 78_BRUCELLOSIS</ITAG>5. The authority citation for Part 78 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>21 U.S.C. 111-114a-1, 114g, 115, 117, 120, 121, 123-126,134b, 134f; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(d).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 78.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>6. In andSection; 78.1, the definition of ``United States Department of Agriculturebacktag'' is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>United States Department of Agriculture swine backtag. </T3>A backtagissued by Veterinary Services for use on swine, which conforms to the eight-characteralpha-numeric National Backtagging System and uniquely identifies eachindividual swine.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>7. In andSection; 78.33, paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) are revised to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 78.33</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Sows and boars.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) Sows and boars may be moved in interstate commerce for purposes otherthan slaughter or breeding without restriction under this subpart, if theyare identified as required by andSection; 71.19 of this chapter.(d) Serial numbers of United States Department of Agriculture swine backtagsand Veterinary Services-approved tattoos will be assigned to each personwho applies to the state animal health official or the Area Veterinarianin Charge for the state in which that person maintains his or her placeof business. Serial numbers of official eartags will be assigned to eachaccredited veterinarian or state or federal representative who requestsofficial eartags from the state animal health official or the Area Veterinarianin Charge, whoever is responsible for issuing official eartags in thatstate. Persons assigned serial numbers of United States Department of Agricultureswine backtags, Veterinary Services approved tattoos, and official eartagsmust:(1) Record the following information on a document:(i) All serial numbers applied to the swine;(ii) Any other serial numbers and approved identification appearing onthe swine that are needed to identify the swine to its owner and location;(iii) The street address, including the city and state, or the township,county, and state of the premises where the approved means of identificationwere applied; and(iv) The telephone number, if available, of the person who owns or possessesthe swine.(2) Maintain these records at the place of business for 2 years; and (3) Make these records available for inspection and copying during ordinarybusiness hours (8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) upon requestby any authorized employee of the United States Department of Agriculture,upon that employee's request and presentation of his or her official credentials.(e)(1) Each person who buys or sells, for his or her own account or asthe agent of the buyer or seller, transports, receives for transportation,offers for sale or transportation, or otherwise handles swine in interstatecommerce, must keep records relating to the transfer of ownership, shipment,or handling of the swine, such as yarding receipts, sale tickets, invoices,and waybills, upon which are recorded:(i) All serial numbers and other approved means of identification appearingon the swine that are necessary to identify it to the person from whomit was purchased or otherwise obtained; and(ii) The street address, including the city and state, or the township,county, and state, and the telephone number, if available, of the personfrom whom the swine were purchased or otherwise obtained.(2) Each person required to keep records under this paragraph must maintainthese documents at his/her or its place of business for at least 2 yearsafter the person has sold or otherwise disposed of the swine to anotherperson and for such further period as the Administrator may require bywritten notice to the person, for purposes of any investigation or actioninvolving the swine identified in the records. The person shall make therecords available for inspection and copying during ordinary business hours(8 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) by any authorized employeeof the United States Department of Agriculture, upon that employee's requestand presentation of his or her official credentials.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 85_PSEUDORABIES</ITAG>8. The authority citation for Part 85 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>21 U.S.C. 111, 112, 113, 115, 117, 120, 121, 123-126,134b, 134f, CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(d).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 85.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>9. In andSection; 85.5, paragraphs (a)(3), the phrase ``identification tag,tattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each swine being moved'' is revised to read ``identification of theswine as required by andSection; 71.19 of this chapter'', and the phrase``individual identification required by this paragraph'' is revised toread ``identification required by andSection; 71.19 of this chapter''.10. In andSection; 85.5, paragraph (b)(5), the phrase ``identification tagtattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each animal being moved'' is revised to read ``identification of theswine as required by andSection; 71.19 of this chapter''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 85.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>11. In andSection; 85.6, paragraph (b)(2), the phrase ``identification tag,tattoo, earnotch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each animal being moved;'' is revised to read ``identification of theswine required by andSection; 71.19 of this chapter;''.12. In andSection; 85.7, paragraph (b)(3)(i)(B) is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 85.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Interstate movement of swine not vaccinated for pseudorabies and notknown to be infected with or exposed to pseudorabies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) * * *(3) * * *(i) * * *(B) The swine are identified at the approved livestock market to the farmof origin by the identification required by andSection; 71.19 of this chapter.13. In andSection; 85.7, paragraph (b)(3)(ii), the phrase ``an earnotch recognizedby a breed associated [sic.], identification tag, tattoo, or similar identification,''is revised to read ``a means of identification required by andSection; 71.19of this chapter,''.14. In andSection; 85.7, paragraph (c)(2), the phrase ``identification tag,tattoo, ear notch recognized by a breed association, or similar identificationof each animal being moved;'' is revised to read ``identification requiredby andSection; 71.19 of this chapter;''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 85.11</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>15. Section 85.11 is removed.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 309_ANTE-MORTEM INSPECTION</ITAG>16. The authority citation for Part 309 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 34 Stat. 1260, 79 Stat. 903, as amended. 81 Stat. 584.84 Stat. 91, 438; 21 U.S.C. 71 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 601 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 33 U.S.C 1254, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>17. Section 309.16 is amended by adding a new paragraph (e) to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 309.16</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Livestock suspected of having biological residues.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e) The name of each and all person(s) who sold or consigned each swineto the establishment shall be made available by the establishment to anyProgram employee or other authorized employee of the United States Departmentof Agriculture upon that employee's request and presentation of his orher official credentials. Swine identification, by means approved by theAnimal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA, under Part 71 of thistitle, must be maintained throughout post-mortem inspection, in accordancewith andSection; 310.23(a) of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 310_POST-MORTEM INSPECTION</ITAG>18. The authority citation for Part 310 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 34 Stat. 1260, 79 Stat. 903, as amended. 81 Stat. 584.84 Stat. 91, 438; 21 U.S.C. 71 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 601 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 33 U.S.C. 1254, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>19. The table of contents is amended to add, in numerical order, ``310.23Identification of carcasses and parts of swine.''20. A new andSection; 310.23 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 310.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of carcasses and parts of swine.</ITAG>(a) The identification of the carcasses and parts of swine identified inaccordance with Part 71 of this title shall be made available to the inspectorupon the inspector's request throughout post-mortem inspection.(b) If the establishment fails to provide required swine identification,the inspector shall order the retention of swine caracasses at the establishmentuntil the completion of tests to confirm that the carcasses are not adulterated.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 320_RECORDS, REGISTRATION, AND REPORTS</ITAG>21. The authority citation for Part 320 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 34 Stat. 1260, 79 Stat. 9903, as amended. 81 Stat.584. 84 Stat. 91, 438; 21 U.S.C. 71 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 601 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 33 U.S.C. 1254, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>22. Section 320.1(b)(1) is amended by adding a new paragraph (ix) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 320.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Records required to be kept.</ITAG>(b) * * *(1) * * *(i) * * *(ix) In the case of a person belonging to the class specified in paragraph(a)(1), and engaged, for commerce, in the business of slaughtering anyswine for use as human or animal food, the name and address (includingthe city and state, or the township, county, and state) of each personfrom whom the person belonging to the class so specified purchased or otherwiseobtained each swine, and the telephone number, if available, of the personfrom whom the swine were purchased or otherwise obtained, and all serialnumbers and other approved means of identification appearing on all testswine selected at antemortem inspection by FSIS representatives for residuetesting.<ITAG tagnum="21">Done at Washington, D.C., this 11th day of October, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert Melland, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-23758 Filed 10-12-88; 11:56 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-34-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>