<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88518-0063 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-18-88.f2.A1062</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Western Area Power Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Record of Decision for the California-Oregon Transmission Project</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Western Area Power Administration, DOE.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Record of decision. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Department of Energy (DOE), Western Area Power Administration(Western), has made the decision to participate in the construction, operation,and maintenance of the California-Oregon Transmission Project (COTP). Western's decision is based on the information contained in the draft,supplement to the draft, and final environmental impact statements (EIS)that were issued for the project (DOE/EIS-0128). The decision is also basedon the information contained in Bonneville Power Administration's (BPA)Intertie Development and Use (IDU) final EIS. With two exceptions, the COTP would be constructed along the environmentallypreferred route as described in the final EIS and presented briefly below.Western plans to construct facilities for the upgrading of two existing230-kilovolt (kV) transmission lines to a single 500-kV transmission linebetween the Olinda Substation and the Sacramento River Delta area, constructapproximately 20 miles of new 500-kV transmission line between the SacramentoRiver Delta area and the Tracy Substation, and construct the associatedsubstation facilities near Olinda, Maxwell, and Tracy, California. Otherfacilities for the COTP will be constructed by the Transmission Agencyof Northern California (TANC) and by BPA. Western has adopted the mitigation measures for the COTP that are listedin the final EIS and has committed to adopt a mitigation compliance andmonitoring plan that will ensure that the measures are integrated intothe proposal. In addition, any unforeseen site-specific mitigation requirementsidentified during the construction phase will be addressed by Western andcoordinated with the appropriate Federal, State, and local agencies. While Western is not planning to participate in the financing, construction,operation, or maintenance of the Los Banos-Gates and Pacific Northwest(PNW) Reinforcement Project and has no decision making authority with regardto these projects, the three projects were considered in one EIS becauseof the interrelationships among them. Decisions on these projects willbe made by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) and BPA, respectively.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Mr. David G. Coleman, Area Manager,Sacramento Area Office, Western Area Power Administration, 1825 Bell Street,Suite 500, Sacramento, CA 95825, (916) 978-4418.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Title III of the Energy and Water DevelopmentAppropriations Act for Fiscal Year 1985 (Pub. L. 98-360) authorized theSecretary of Energy, through Western, to ``construct or participate inthe construction of such additional facilities as he deems necessary toallow mutually beneficial power sales between the Pacific Northwest andCalifornia.'' The proposal was developed by a group of California publicand private utilities and Western through a Memorandum of Understanding(MOU) that provides the framework for development of the projects. The purposes of the proposed actions are to expand the bidirectional capabilityof the Pacific Northwest-Pacific Southwest Intertie transmission systemand to help serve California's need for economical power, the Pacific Northwest'sdesire to sell surplus power, and the need for maintaining and increasingthe reliability of the existing transmission system. The COTP will addapproximately 1,600 megawatts (MW) of additional transfer capability betweenthe Pacific Northwest and California. The COTP, Los Banos-Gates TransmissionProject, and PNW Reinforcement Project would add to and strengthen theexisting high voltage transmission links between California and the PacificNorthwest. These projects would provide for greater access to Northwestpower surpluses, facilitate more efficient use of power resources, providegreater resource diversity, and enhance transmission system reliability.One provision of the COTP MOU is that Pacific Gas and Electric Company(PGandamp;E) provide power transfers between the existing Tesla Substationand southern California for certain participants. Earlier PGandamp;E studiesof both the existing and future transmission needs between the Tesla Substationand southern California indicated that a new 500-kV line and supportingfacilities would be the most appropriate and economical means for PGandamp;Eto meet the contractual obligations of the COTP MOU. These facilities becameknown as the Los Banos-Gates Transmission Project. PGandamp;E has since studiedthe Los Banos-Gates power flow requirements and believes it can meet itscommitments under the MOU to provide firm bidirectional transmission withoutconstructing the Los Banos-Gates Project at this time. The PNW Reinforcement Project is a proposal by BPA, Pacific Power and LightCompany, and Portland General Electric Company to construct new and modifyexisting transmission lines and supporting facilities in southern Washingtonand Oregon. This project was identified as a result of studies of futuretransmission needs associated with increased power flows on the Intertiesystem. Although the three projects have different sets of sponsors, all are relatedto the exchange of approximately 1,600 MW of additional power between thetwo regions. Because of this interrelationship, the three projects wereconsidered together in one EIS to promote an assessment of the cumulativeimpacts and a coordinated process. In addition, the EIS was jointly preparedwith TANC as an environmental impact report (EIR). The EIR was used byTANC to fulfill its requirements under the California Environmental QualityAct. Western's participation is necessary because the COTP, as proposed, involvesthe upgrading of approximately 170 miles of Western's Shasta-Tracy/Cottonwood-TracyTransmission Line from two 230-kV circuits to a single 500-kV circuit.As compensation for the use of the Federal facilities, the Federal governmentwill receive 6.25 percent, or 100 MW, of capacity in the proposed projectto serve Federal agencies, including the DOE laboratories and fish andwildlife refuges. This capacity will be in addition to Western's existingcapacity on the two 230-kV lines that would be replaced. Western's purposesand needs for participating in the COTP are to provide access to economicalNorthwest power for the Federal agencies, to obtain greater reliabilityfor its entitlement on the existing Pacific Alternating Current (AC) Intertielines and the interconnected transmission grid as a whole and to promoteefficient use of power resources. The COTP, Los Banos-Gates Project, and PNW Reinforcement Project includeconstructing new and modifying existing 500-kV and 230-kV AC transmissionfacilities in northern and central California, Oregon, and in southernWashington. The proposed actions for the COTP are summarized below. <ITAG tagnum="84">Description of the Proposed Action </ITAG>1. Facilities The proposal is to construct and operate approximately 340 miles of transmissionlines, three substations, a series compensation station, communicationfacilities, and to modify two existing substations. Specifically, the proposedactions are: Construct a new substation at site E3 near the California-Oregon borderalong the existing Malin-Meridian 500-kV AC Transmission Line to serveas the northern terminus for the COTP and interconnection point with thePacific Northwest transmission system. Presently, it is planned that thissubstation will be constructed by BPA. Construct a new 500-kV AC transmission line (approximately 146 miles long)from the California-Oregon border area substation to the proposed OlindaSubstation near Redding, California. Construct the Olinda Substation at site GP4 south of Redding near the interconnectionof Gas Point Road and Happy Valley Road and relocate approximately 1 mileof existing 230-kV transmission line right-of-way (ROW). Upgrade an existing double-circuit 230-kV AC line (approximately 170 mileslong) owned by Western, to a single-circuit 500-kV AC line from the proposedOlinda Substation to the Sacramento River Delta area. Construct the Maxwell Series Compensation Station at site SC3 near thetown of Maxwell, California. Construct approximately 20 miles of new 500-kV AC transmission line fromthe Sacramento River Delta area to the existing Tracy Substation. Construct a new 500-kV AC double-circuit link (approximately 6 miles long)between the Tracy Substation and the area of the Tesla Substation. Thisline will be connected to the existing Tesla-Los Banos Number 2 500-kVline, creating the Tracy-Tesla and Tracy-Los Banos 500-kV TransmissionLines. Expand the Tracy Substation to include a 500-kV substation and replacesix 230-kV circuit breakers in the existing Tracy Substation. Approximately1 mile of existing 230-kV transmission lines will be rerouted to make roomfor the new substation. Modify the Tesla Substation to replace two 230-kV circuit breakers, relaying,and other equipment. Modify existing and construct new microwave communication system facilitiesin central and northern California and southern Oregon. Modify the existing Cottonwood Substation to replace three 230-kV circuitbreakers. The transmission lines for the COTP will be supported on steel structuresthat will be designed and constructed to meet State and national standards.Several types of structures will be used depending on the line configurations,engineering factors, and mitigation needs. These types include single-circuitlattice, double-circuit lattice, single-circuit tubular, single pole andH-frame, double-circuit tubular, and upgrade towers. On the upgraded single-circuitlattice towers, steel support members will be added to the main body ofthe existing 230-kV double-circuit lattice towers, and the top will berebuilt to support the new 500-kV AC conductors and provide adequate electricalclearances. Structures will typically be 125-180 feet tall. 2. Proposed Route North D of the four northern alternatives discussed in the draft EIS andSouth B of the three southern alternatives, represented both the environmentallypreferred and project preferred alternatives. Route segments discussedin the supplement to the draft EIS were options within alternatives NorthD and South B. The environmentally preferred and project preferred routebetween Olinda Substation and Tracy Substation is the upgrade of Western'sexisting double-circuit 230-kV AC line to 500-kV AC. The selected routesegments, traveling from the Oregon Border to Tracy Substation are:<ITAG tagnum="20">Southern Oregon switching station site E3, North 1, N-10G, N-10J,N-10K, N-10L, N-10M1, N-10M2(A1), N-10M2(A), North 2B, N-10Alt5(B), N-10Alt5(D),N-10Alt5(C), N-7Alt1(A), N-7Alt1(B), North 3J, N-8A(3), N-8C, North 4,N-8Alt2(A), N-9A, N-9C, N-9D, N-9G, N-9J, N-9N, N-90, N-9Q, N-13A, OlindaSubstation site GP4, S-1A, Maxwell Series Compensation Station Site SC3,S-8B, S-8C, S-8Alt1, S-8E1(A), South 1, S-8Alt3, S-8K, Tracy Substationsite T1, S-9D, S-9G, South 2.</ITAG>Alternative D in the northern section was selected as the environmentallypreferred alternative primarily because it minimizes impacts to timberlands,emphasizes route segments on public lands where resource impacts are similar,and minimizes impacts to earth, water and vegetation resources, and criticalwildlife species and their habitats. Alternative D was selected as theproject preferred route because it satisfies transmission system reliabilityrequirements provided that a fuels management plan and fire response planis developed in conjunction with the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) and implementedfor the area between the existing Intertie and the preferred route. TheUSFS indicated that the area east of the North 3J corridor has a feasibleroute location that will minimize resource impacts while meeting geologicconcerns. Should a superior location be found near North 3J during finaldesign, the lead agencies will work with the USFS to identify, review,and approve the new location. The Western upgrade is environmentally preferable to any alternative routebetween Olinda and the Sacramento River because any alternative involvingconstruction of a new line in a new ROW would cause more environmentalimpacts than the upgrade. This route was selected as the project preferreddue to environmental, economic, and engineering considerations, as explainedin the EIS. Alternative B in the southern section was identified as the environmentallypreferred alternative because it minimizes impacts to developed and plannedland uses. Alternative B was selected as the project preferred route becauseenvironmental impacts are minimized while separation from the existingIntertie is maximized to the extent practical. Comments received on the draft EIS led to the identification of new routingoptions for portions of the preferred route for the COTP, which were consideredin a supplement to the draft EIS issued in July 1987. The major concernsexpressed in the comments included concerns about visual impacts on propertyand the possibility of resultant impacts to property values; concerns aboutimpacts to agricultural crops and agricultural practices, such as aerialapplication of chemicals and irrigation systems; concern for collisionof waterfowl and raptors with the transmission lines; recommendation thatpublic lands rather than private land be used whenever possible; concernfor effects on prime timberlands; doubt of the need for separation of theproposed project from the existing Intertie lines; concern for the economicsof the project; concern over recent scientific literature indicating possiblecorrelations between electromagnetic fields and human health; and the needfor more specificity in the mitigation measures. The route option comparisonsare discussed in detail in section 1.2.2 of the final EIS. The followingchanges to the routing were made: A new site (E3) for the southern Oregon substation would have fewer impactson agricultural lands and is less visible from the town of Malin, Oregon. Alternative route North 1 is a 9.7-mile route option located to the eastof the original project preferred route. The North 1 route option avoidsa private airstrip and avoids more agricultural land. Route segment N-10M2(AI) avoids an area managed by the USFS for old-growthhabitat and a tree plantation. Route N-10M reduces impacts to prime timberland when compared to the originalpreferred route. The original preferred route (N-10Alt5) offered greatertransmission system reliability due to lower probability of fires and othercommon-mode types of outages because it provided greater separation fromthe existing Intertie. The USFS has strongly maintained that reliance oncenterline separation without consideration for fire suppression activitieswould not significantly reduce forest fire-caused outages. The USFS hasstated that it will help develop a fuels management and fire response planfor the COTP. N-10M was reconsidered as a feasible alternative based onthe commitment from the USFS. Route North 2B would require less extensive access road construction andrepresents additional separation from the existing Intertie. It is thepreferred route for reasons of increased system reliability. The North 3J option reduces impacts to USFS timber sale areas and spottedowl management areas. The USFS indicated that the area east of the North3J corridor (east of Little Meadows) has a feasible route location thatwill minimize resource impacts while meeting geologic concerns. Shoulda better location be found near North 3J during the final design, Westernwill work with the USFS to identify, review, and approve the location.The North 4 route avoids a small residential community, is further fromthe Roaring Creek Rancheria, and reduces visual impacts. The South 1 routing option was identified in response to concerns of landownersalong the original preferred route. The new route reduces the severanceof parcels and avoids development along Sand Mound Slough. The southernsection of this route also avoids crossing Woodward Island, where accessfor construction and maintenance would be difficult. Selection of South 1 resulted in the identification of a new segment, S-8Alt3.This segment is preferred to segment S-8J, which it replaces, because itis shorter and minimizes impacts to agricultural uses. The South 2 route is preferred to the original preferred route becauseit takes advantage of more compatible land uses and avoids an elevatedroad crossing of the Interstate Highways 580/205 interchange. This routetakes advantage of two existing public ROW's for part of its length. The environmentally preferred alternatives were selected as the projectpreferred route with the exception of one area in the Tulelake basin andone area near Bear Mountain. In the Tulelake basin, the environmentallypreferred route (N-10 Alt.4) was found to have prohibitively high costscompared to slight environmental benefits and was judged to be infeasiblefrom an economic perspective. In the Bear Mountain area, it was found thata more extensive access road system and construction efforts on North 2Cmade the comparison with North 2B so close that one is not clearly environmentallybetter than the other. In this and other areas, environmental impacts alongthe selected route can be reduced through implementation of mitigationmeasures. These are noted in table 1.1.2-1 in the final EIS. The following routes were considered but were not selected as part of theproject proposal. An analysis of their impacts and more detailed reasonsfor their rejection are found in section 1.2.2 of the final EIS. The John Cross Alternative and variations of it were rejected because theyeither would greatly decrease system reliability, were not economical,or both. The California Department of Fish and Game proposal was rejected becauseof engineering concerns and because there were no potentially significantimpacts to bald eagles identified along the selected route with the implementationof mitigation. The underground crossing of the Intertie was rejected based on concernsfor reliability of the transmission system. Locating east of the existing Interties into Nevada was rejected basedon economic considerations and because it would not meet the purpose ofthe proposed project.  Locating along the PGandamp;E pipeline was rejected because of concerns withreliability since crossing of the existing Interties would be required.The Rio Vista to Tracy alternative was rejected because of concerns withlack of access for construction, waterfowl habitat, and increased costsdue to increased length and special foundation requirements. Locations west of the upgraded portion were rejected based on increasedenvironmental impacts and increased costs. Interstate Highway 5 to Tracy was eliminated due to increased environmentalimpacts and higher costs. The Modoc National Forest Intertie relocation suggestion was rejected sinceit is an extreme and costly measure in light of the timber impacts to theModoc National Forest. The Hearst alternative and Forest Service segments in the Grizzly Peakarea were rejected because portions of these suggestions involve steep,unstable slopes that are susceptible to landslides and surface erosionin the Devil's Canyon area. The new Antioch route was rejected based on engineering considerationsand because the location would have required crossing the Intertie lines_asituation that is unacceptable from a systems reliability viewpoint. The Henwood proposal was eliminated due to concerns with system reliabilityand project cost. The Beebe proposal was rejected based on increased environmental impacts.3. Right-of-Way Acquisition Contracts for ROW's or additional easements will be negotiated with theindividual landowners. Between the proposed Olinda Substation and the SacramentoRiver Delta area, Western has an approximately 125-foot wide easement forits existing double-circuit 230-kV transmission line. Because the proposalinvolves installing a 500-kV line in an easement designed for a double-circuit230-kV line, additional rights for construction of a 500-kV line will haveto be acquired, but no additional ROW width will be needed with the exceptionof some areas of minor relocations of structures. In those parts of theproposed project where a new transmission line will be constructed (i.e.,between the southern Oregon substation and the Olinda Substation, and fromthe Sacramento River Delta area to the Tracy Substation) new ROW's willbe needed. Easement rights for access road ROW's will be acquired overcertain existing roads and trails to assure continuity of access to thetransmission line. 4. Construction Practices During the construction of the transmission line and supporting facilitiesthere are several phases of work including, but not limited to, surveying,clearing, construction of access roads, foundation installation, allocationof materials along the construction route, structure modification, conductorstringing, conductor pulling site restoration, and final clean-up. Figure2.1-4 of the draft EIS shows the installation of the transmission lineconductors. Volume 3A, appendix A discusses the operations in greater detail.5. Operation and Maintenance Practices The proposed line will be energized and operated at a nominal voltage of525-kV, plus or minus 5 percent. Changes in power flow will cause minorfluctuations in the actual operating voltage. System dispatchers in powercontrol centers will direct the day-to-day line scheduling and equipmentoperation by supervisory control to operate, maintain, and protect thesystem. Circuit breakers will operate automatically in an emergency toensure the safety of the system. Land use activities within the transmission line ROW will be permittedwithin the terms of the easement. Farming and grazing are generally encouragedwithin the ROW if appropriate precautions are observed. Incompatible activitiesnot permitted within the ROW include constructing buildings, drilling wells,and other activities that compromise safety or hinder Western's maintenanceactivities. Various techniques will be used within the ROW to control or eliminatevegetation that could interfere with reliable service. The ROW will notbe clear-cut; as much vegetation will be left as possible. Techniques includehand and mechanical cutting as well as selective application of approvedherbicides. The management objective, type of vegetation present, adjacentland use and development, and impacts of the control technique will beconsidered in selecting the most appropriate method to use at each facilityand along each ROW segment. Herbicides will not be used on Federally-ownedlands, consistent with current Federal court restrictions, but may be usedon other lands in cooperation with the landowners. A maintenance program will be established to ensure continued reliableservice of the transmission system. The proposed transmission line structures,access roads, and ROW's will be inspected on foot, in vehicles, or aircraft one to six times per year. Emergency repairs will be made if thetransmission line is damaged and requires immediate attention. Maintenancecrews of generally less than ten persons would use a variety of equipmentto effect repairs, including hand tools, trucks, aerial lift trucks, cranes,and other equipment. 6. Mitigation All practicable means to avoid or minimize environmental harm from theselected alternative have been adopted. The mitigation measures that havebeen adopted are listed in section 1.1.5 of the final EIS. These measureswill be incorporated into the proposed action through a Compliance MonitoringPlan that is being developed by the project in cooperation with the landownersand managers. Western is committed to adopt the provisions of the plan.The plan will be prepared during project design to include engineeringdesigns and construction plans. It will be developed through additionalconsultation with state and Federal agencies that will be involved in monitoringits implementation. Implementation of the Compliance Monitoring Plan will be assured throughseveral measures. First, the lead agencies will ensure that the applicablemitigation measures are included in the construction contracts. The constructioninspectors will verify that the mitigation measures are implemented andwill have the authority to enforce the measures by redirecting activitiesof the construction contractor to the extent necessary to meet the mitigationrequirements included in the construction specifications. Second, bothWestern and TANC, as lead agencies under the National Environmental PolicyAct of 1969 (NEPA) and the California Environmental Quality Act will monitorthe implementation of the mitigation measures. Third, cooperating and responsibleagencies and other local, State, and Federal agencies may also monitorthe implementation of the mitigation measures under their jurisdiction.Details of the coordination and reporting mechanisms for this monitoringwill be included in the Compliance Monitoring Plan. <ITAG tagnum="84">Alternatives Considered but not Selected </ITAG>1. No Action Selection of the no-action alternative would mean that the COTP, Los Banos-Gates,and PNW Reinforcement Project would not be constructed. Consideration ofthe no-action alternative was not limited to assessment of the consequencesof foregoing the three projects. If the projects are not built and if theutilities presently participating in them do not act in concert to constructan alternative 1,600 MW resource, these utilities may meet their powerrequirements through independent development of other resource alternatives.Selection of the no-action alternative could lead to a number of individualactions by the many different participating utilities to obtain power fromother resources. It is also noted that the plans used in the economic analysiswithout the three projects, already included all of the anticipated energyand capacity planned to be available from Qualifying Facilities. At present, California utilities in the aggregate have substantial amountsof excess generation capacity, primarily in the form of older and lessefficient oil and gas-fired units. Due to construction lead times as wellas regulatory factors, it is assumed that if the projects were not constructed,California load growth over the short term would likely be accommodatedby more extensive use of such units (i.e.. more extensive use than wouldbe justified on economic grounds if the projects were in place). In theshort term, publicly owned utilities may be expected to increase powerpurchases from their investor-owned utility (IOU) wholesale power suppliersuntil planning, permitting, and construction of the alternative resourcescan be completed. The IOU's, in the short term, would likely burn moreoil and gas both to meet their own load growth and to meet the increasedwholesale power sales requirements of the publicly-owned utilities. Increasedreliance on the use of inefficient oil and gas burning units would resultin higher costs to California ratepayers and could result in impacts toair quality. In the longer term, other alternatives that might be independently or collectivelypursued would include development of pumped-storage hydroelectric projects,thermal plants, the installation of combustion turbines, construction ofother transmission alternatives, and joint participation with other utilitiesin the development of out-of-state coal projects. Comparisons of thesetransmission and generation alternatives is included in Volume 1, sections2.5.1.1 and 2.5.2.1 of the draft EIS for the COTP. For both the publicly owned utilities and the IOU's, a principal advantageof constructing the proposed projects, that would be foregone with selectionof the no action alternative, is the opportunity for exchanges with thePacific Northwest to capitalize on seasonal diversity between the two regions.Because California's load peaks in the summer, and the Northwest loadsare sharply winter-peaking, there are significant opportunities for thetwo regions to share in the economic advantages of seasonal exchanges.Additionally, since the projects would be constructed on an ROW separatedfrom that of the existing Intertie, the reliability of power supply fromthe Northwest would be significantly increased. Construction of the projects is expected to significantly enhance the reliabilityof the Western Systems Coordinating Council (WSCC) area transmission systems.The prospects for outages and the resulting impacts will continue if theprojects are not constructed. Further, the transfer capability of the existingIntertie presently constrains the amount of Northwest energy that can beabsorbed in California during daily peak periods. The construction of theproposed projects would alleviate such constraints and provide added benefitsfrom the use of Northwest energy delivered during the California utilities'onpeak period. Any alternative project should provide these types of opportunitiesby providing generation or connection to generation resources. The publicly-owned utility participants in particular would need alternativepeaking resources, both as reserves for existing thermal units and as backupresources for existing hydro projects during adverse water years. It ismost likely that such needs would be met in the short term with combustionturbines if the proposed projects were not constructed. The estimated extentof the use of combustion turbines as part of a complete utility resourceplan with and without the proposed projects is presented in Volume 1, section2.5.2.1 of the draft EIS. It is also conceivable that in the absence ofthe proposed project, increased loads would occasion diminished servicereliability and increase reliance on high cost emergency actions. The most likely long-term alternative resource for meeting California'sbaseload requirements in the absence of the proposed projects would bethe development of out-of-state coal resources. This alternative, however,raises considerable uncertainty regarding the ability to obtain regulatoryapprovals, including those needed for construction of the transmissionfacilities needed to transmit power from out-of-state to California loadcenters. The use of out-of-state coal capacity as part of an overall utilityresource plan with and without the proposed projects is discussed in Volume1, section 2.5.2.1 of the draft EIS. None of the alternatives that the individual utilities would rely on ifthe no-action alternative were selected, would have the economic advantagesof regional exchanges with the Northwest. Further, none of the power supplyalternatives identified are economically superior to the proposed projects.In the absence of the proposed projects, increased reliance on burningfossil fuels may produce significant negative impacts on air quality. Additionally,the oil embargo of 1973 has shown that world oil prices and supplies arestrongly influenced by actions of a relatively few oil-exporting countrieswho have the ability to sharply reduce oil supplies and increase prices.Consequently, the more extensive use of oil and gas may subject Californiaratepayers to significant uncertainties regarding future supplies and pricesof these fuels. The no-action alternative would have fewer environmental impacts than theproposal in the short term. By not constructing the proposed projects,the short-term impacts would be associated primarily with air quality sincethere would be increased reliance on burning fossil fuels for power generation.There would be no direct impacts to other resources such as vegetation,wildlife, visual, or archaeological since no new construction would beexpected in the short term. In the longer term, however, selecting theno-action alternative would mean that the participating utilities wouldundertake other transmission construction projects or would participatein the construction of other generation resources that would each haveenvironmental impacts. 2. Transmission Alternatives  Two transmission projects were quantitatively considered as potential alternativesto the proposed action. One is a proposal to upgrade the existing 500-kVPacific AC transmission Intertie lines between California and the PacificNorthwest. The second would replace the COTP with a second DC line andpossibly eliminate the need for some of the capacity of the Los Banos-GatesProject. Both are based on the concept of adding transmission capabilityto allow additional northwest power purchases. <ITAG tagnum="81">AC Transmission </ITAG>An alternative to constructing the 146 miles of new line in the northernsection of the Project is to upgrade the two existing 500-kV Pacific ACIntertie lines to provide two 2,400 MW AC lines, an increase of 800 MWon each line. This alternative was determined to be infeasible based oneconomic, physical, and reliability problems. Such a line could, in theory,provide a potential increment of 1,600 MW of Intertie transmission capabilityequivalent to the capability of the proposed COTP. This transmission capabilitywould increase access to load-following generation resources as well asbaseload resources. Increasing the existing two-line capability by 1,600 MW without providinga separate corridor would further aggravate the system reliability problemin the WSCC area. If each of the existing Intertie lines is increased fromthe present 1,600 to 2,400 MW of capability, an outage of one line wouldresult in the loss of 2,400 MW of transmission capability as compared tothe loss of 1,600 MW of capability in the event of an outage of one lineof the existing system. Concentrating this much power in two adjacent transmissionlines would not meet the WSCC's reliability criteria. As a result, theadded transmission capability would not provide the same transfer ratingcapability as the COTP. The transfer capability would also be reduced whenpower flows across other pathways of the WSCC's system (i.e., from Arizonato California or from Colorado/Utah to Arizona/New Mexico) are above certainlevels. Aside from the reliability issue, the cost of upgrading the existing lineswould be substantially higher than the cost of the COTP. Additional costswould be accrued due to required changes in tower configuration, conductorsizes and other hardware changes, substation modifications, lost revenuesdue to interruptions of power transactions during construction, replacementof lost power by use of gas-fired generation, and the need for additionalROW's. <ITAG tagnum="81">Direct Current (DC) Transmission </ITAG>Several DC transmission concepts have been considered that would increasethe transmission capability between the Pacific Northwest and California.Each of these would increase access to load-following as well as baseloadgeneration resources. Economic studies indicated that each of these alternativeswould be less feasible than the COTP. A DC line connecting essentiallythe same Oregon and California points as the COTP was qualitatively analyzed,and a second DC line from Oregon through Nevada to the Southwest and SouthernCalifornia was quantitatively analyzed along with a trans-Sierra line connectingnorthern California to the second DC line.  A DC line is well-suited to the transmission of bulk power over long distancesbetween two points. One major concern over the DC option is the cost ofeach converter station that would be needed to change DC to AC. This expenseis a factor that limits the ability to interconnect such a line with therequired multiple points of delivery for the COTP and was a major causefor rejection of this option. A 500-kV AC line can readily accommodatethe multiple interconnection points. For this reason, in addition to substantiallyhigher costs of the DC option, lack of operating experience in multipletap DC commercial systems, and lack of any environmental advantages, theoption of a DC line from Oregon through California was eliminated. A second DC line routed through Nevada and interconnecting the PacificNorthwest with southern California, similar to the existing DC Intertie,was also considered and compared to the proposed actions. The second DC line alone would not meet the objectives of the COTP forall of the participating utilities. The COTP was compared to the secondDC line in two manners: (1) The prorata share of the COTP for the southernCalifornia participants was compared to an equivalent capability of thesecond DC line; and (2) the COTP costs were compared to the estimated costsfor a combined second DC line and Trans-Sierra crosstie that would servethe central and northern California participants. The proportionate cost of a second DC line that would be borne by the Californiautilities under either option is greater than their costs of the COTP.On a capital cost basis alone, the second DC line offers fewer economicbenefits than the COTP. A second DC line would have environmental impactscomparable to those discussed for the proposed action. 3. Parallel Existing Intertie Lines The COTP represents a major addition to the bulk transmission system ofCalifornia as well as to the western North American transmission systemsthat link 14 States, the Canadian provinces of British Columbia and Alberta,and Baja California Norte, Mexico, which form the WSCC. Since the proposedprojects would be a major integrated portion of the system in the WSCCarea, system reliability is one of the important criteria for guiding theselection of the configuration. Routing of the proposed lines must be doneto avoid a situation in which an outage of three 500-kV AC lines couldbe a credible event. Constructing the third 500-kV AC line close to thetwo existing lines or terminating the line at the same substation (suchas at the Malin or Round Mountain substations) would degrade the reliabilityof the interconnected transmission system because it would increase thepotential for a single event-induced failure that would result in the lossof all three 500-kV lines. Insufficient system reliability might requirederating of the proposed line by the participating utilities in order tomeet WSCC standards. All utilities that construct new projects are responsiblefor planning and constructing facilities that do not jeopardize systemreliability. Reliability was the major issue that determined the infeasibilityof this alternative. Project studies indicate that placing the new line on the eastern sideof the existing Pacific AC Intertie lines would require that the COTP linecross over the existing lines twice north of the Olinda Substation. Simultaneousunexpected outages of the COTP line and one of the existing Malin-RoundMountain 500-kV lines could lead to overloading of the other existing Malin-RoundMountain line. Eight possible solutions to the overload problem were considered,but none were found to be acceptable due to either economics or increaseddependency on new and more complex remedial action schemes for the WSCCinterconnected systems. To ensure that the required level of regional system reliability is met,special precaution has been taken to provide adequate distance betweenthe route proposed for the COTP line in the eastern corridor and the existinglines. Construction of a new Intertie route so that a three-line outageis not credible was a major consideration for corridor selection. 4. Underground Construction The primary factors that were considered in comparing underground and aboveground transmission were the relative costs of construction and maintenance,and the environmental impacts. Prohibitive cost and lack of proven technologyfor the size of the proposed transmission line were the major factors thatresulted in rejection of underground construction. <ITAG tagnum="81">Nontransmission Alternatives </ITAG>If a new transmission link from California to the Pacific Northwest wasnot built, increased energy exchanges due to seasonal diversity would notoccur. Resources would then be required to provide the capacity and energyneeded in each region. The nontransmission alternatives that were consideredin order for the California utilities to meet the amount and type of utilitysystem needs that would be provided by the proposed action are discussedin detail in section 2.5.2 of the draft EIS, as are the reasons why eachwould not meet the project purpose and need and were, therefore, rejected.The nontransmission alternatives considered but rejected are: generationalternatives including combustion turbine generation, combined cycle generation,out-of-state coal generation, increased Southwest purchases (economy energy),cogeneration and small power production projects, refurbishments and lifeextensions for existing generation facilities, pumped-storage hydroelectriccapacity for peaking, and conservation and load management.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Integration With Other Requirements </ITAG>1. Floodplains/Wetlands Statement of Findings Appendix E (section 1.1.5) of the final EIS contains detailed informationon the locations of crossings of wetlands and floodplains by the proposedaction. The potential for avoiding most of these during final siting andconstruction of the facilities is high and is the preferred method of mitigatingpotential impacts. A floodplains/wetlands assessment is contained in section6.1.1 of the draft EIS and additional information is provided on page 1.1.6-2of the final EIS. Construction of the new line between the Sacramento Riverand the Tracy Substation will require construction activities in the floodplainsof the Sacramento and San Joaquin River Deltas. Avoidance of constructionin these floodplains is not practicable. Alternatives to locating the facilitieswere analyzed during the environmental studies. These alternatives arediscussed in the draft, supplement to the draft, and final EIS. The proposedfacilities will conform to all applicable State or local floodplain protectionstandards. Mitigation measures adopted that would reduce impacts to floodplainsand wetlands are presented in sections 1.1.5 and 1.1.6 of the final EIS.2. Other Requirements A detailed discussion of integration of requirements for cultural resourceprotection, endangered species protection, and other local, State, andFederal requirements can be found in section 6.0 of the draft EIS and section1.1.6 of the final EIS. Western's obligations under the provisions of Section7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, and under section106 of he National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, havenot been completed. These requirements will be completed prior to construction.<ITAG tagnum="81">Relationships With Associated Projects </ITAG>Western's decision to participate in the COTP was made after considerationof the impacts associated with actions addressed in BPA's IDU EIS. Thefinal IDU EIS was issued on April 15, 1988. Appendix D of Volume 3A ofthe draft EIS for the COTP contained a summary of the draft IDU EIS. Section1.5.4 of the final COTP EIS contained a summary of the results of analysesconducted for the final IDU EIS. Western was a cooperating agency in theIDU EIS preparation. Decisions on the Los Banos-Gates Project will be made by PGandamp;E as theproject proponent, and by the CPUC as the State agency responsible forregulating the IOU's. The CPUC will consider the information in the COTPEIS in its decision on whether to issue a Certificate of Public Convenienceand Necessity for the project. The CPUC will address the final configurationand route for the Los Banos-Gates Project. Decisions on the PNW Reinforcement Project and BPA's participation in theCOTP will be made by BPA, based on the environmental information containedin the COTP EIS, IDU EIS, and the Bureau of Land Management's Eugene-MedfordEIS. BPA will issue a record of decision that will address the final configurationof the PNW Reinforcement Project and adopted mitigation measures. The decisionby BPA on whether to allow the interconnection of the COTP with their facilitiesin the Pacific Northwest Intertie system will also be addressed in theirrecord of decision.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued at Golden, Colorado, April 22, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William H. Clagett, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-11087 Filed 5-17-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6450-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>