<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88715-0092 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-15-88.f2.A1091</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">Docket No. 87-57]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Wyeth Hardy Worley, D.D.S.; Revocation of Registration</ITAG>On June 24, 1987, the Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of DiversionControl, Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), issued an Order to ShowCause to Wyeth Hardy Worley D.D.S. (Respondent) of Bossier City, Louisianaproposing to revoke his DEA Certificate of Registration AW338660, and denyany pending applications for renewal of that registration. The statutorypredicate for the Order to Show Cause was that Respondent's continued registrationwith DEA was inconsistent with the public interest as evidenced by (1)his failure to maintain inventory and dispensing records of controlledsubstances, (2) his failure to maintain all DEA order forms, (3) his excessivepurchases of controlled substances, including Desoxyn, a stimulant drugnot dispensed by dentists in legitimate practice, and (4) his personalabuse of controlled substances.Respondent, through counsel, requested a hearing by letter dated July 16,1987. The matter was docketed before Administrative Law Judge Francis L.Young. Following prehearing filings, a hearing was held in New Orleans,Louisiana on November 17, 1987. Judge Young issued his opinion and recommendedruling, findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision on March 25,1988. Respondent filed his proposed findings of fact, conclusions of lawand argument on April 7, 1988, approximately a month after the due datefor filing. On April 22, 1988, Respondent filed a document in the natureof exceptions entitled Memorandum in Opposition to Findings of Fact andConclusion of Law and Decision of Administrative Law Judge. On May 10,1988, Respondent filed another document which was entitled Respondent'sExceptions to Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision of theAdministrative Law Judge. Government counsel filed a response to Respondent'sexceptions on May 16, 1988. On May 24, 1988, the Administrative Law Judge transmitted the record inthis matter to the Administrator. In the letter of transmittal, the AdministrativeLaw Judge advised the Administrator that he had reconsidered his opinionin light of Respondent's proposed findings of fact, conclusions of lawand argument, and concluded that no changes in his opinion or recommendationwere necessary. The Administrative Law Judge also informed the Administratorthat Respondent had attached various documents to his post-hearing filingswhich were in the nature of evidentiary material. Since this material wasproffered after the time for submitting such evidentiary documents hadpassed, the Administrative Law Judge did not consider those documents.The Administrator, having considered the record in its entirety, herebyenters his final order in this matter pursuant to 21 CFR 1316.67. The Administrative Law Judge found that Respondent had a 20-year historyof controlled substance abuse, which included abuse of Desoxyn and Dilaudid.Respondent ordered large quantitites of controlled substances for officeuse in 1984, 1985, and 1986. In 1985 Respondent was investigated by theLouisiana State Police because of his unusually large purchases of ScheduleII controlled substances, including Desoxyn, a stimulant drug containingmethamphetamine. This is not a drug used by dentists in legitimate dentalpractice. The Lousiana State Police referred their investigative findingsto the Vice-President of the Louisiana State Board of Dentistry. The Vice-Presidentof the dental board told Respondent to cease dispensing Desoxyn and writeprescriptions for his patients if necessary. Respondent continued to purchaselarge quantities of Desoxyn.In January 1987, DEA Diversion Investigators went to Respondent's Officeto inspect his records and stocks of controlled substances. Respondenttold investigators he had no inventory or dispensing records. He also toldthe investigators that he intended to take all the controlled substanceson hand with him to Mexico the following day for use in his work with theIndians. Respondent indicated that he transported controlled substancesto Mexico on many occasions in order to treat the Indians, and had no recordsof the controlled substances he took out of the country. Respondent wasnot registered by DEA as an exporter nor did he file any of the requireddeclarations or permits prior to exporting controlled substances. The Administrative Law Judge further found that Respondent ws addictedto Dilaudid and Desoxyn and was admitted to a treatment program, of hisown volition, in February 1987. Respondent left this program against medicaladvice and was admitted to another program in Louisiana. He successfullycompleted 90 days of intensive treatment. As of the date of the hearing,Respondent was following the course of his aftercare monitoring program.The Administrative Law Judge concluded that Respondent failed to meet hisburden of showing that he could be trusted with a DEA Registration. Respondent'speriod of recovery had been less than a year at the time of the hearing.This is in contrast to a 20 year history of controlled substances abuse.In addition, the Administrative Law Judge noted that Respondent's explanationof the extent of his drug use did not account for the very large quantitiesof Desoxyn he purchased. Since this drug has no legitimate use in dentistry,such large purchases lead to the conclusion that the Desoxyn which wasnot for Respondent's own abuse was used for some illicit purpose. The AdministrativeLaw Judge recommended that Respondent's registrations be revoked, and thatany pending renewal applications be denied. Respondent filed two documents in the nature of exceptions to the opinionand recommended ruling of the Administrative Law Judge. Responsent arguesthat he has entered into a consent agreement with the Louisiana State Boardof Dentistry regarding his state dental license. This consent agreementwas apparently entered into following the hearing, and there is no evidencein the record regarding its existence. Respondent further argues that hisconduct was not criminal, and that there is no evidence to support a contentionthat he disposed of controlled substances in a criminal manner. He alsoargues that all his problems arose because of his drug abuse problem. Respondentviolated the law in may respects. He obtained controlled substances fraudulently,he exported controlled substances without being registered or filing requireddocuments, and he failed to maintain required controlled substances dispensingrecords. These violations do not lose their significance because criminalcharges were not filed against Respondent. The Administrator adopts the opinion and recommended decision of the AdministrativeLaw Judge in its entirety. The Administrator concludes that Respondent'shistory of personal drug abuse in contrast to a short period of rehabilitationand his failure to maintain records and to properly handle controlled substancesin his practice require the DEA registration to be revoked as inconsistentwith the public interest. Accordingly, the Administrator of the DEA, pursuant to the authority vestedin him by 21 U.S.C. 823 and 824 and 28 CFR 0.100(b), hereby orders thatDEA Certificate of Registration AW337660, previously issued to Wyeth HardyWorley, D.D.S., be, and it hereby is, revoked. Any pending applicationsfor renewal of that registration are hereby denied. This order is effectiveAugust 15, 1988.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: July 7, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John C. Lawn, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-15972 Filed 7-14-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-09-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>