<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88127-0103 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-27-88.f2.A1102</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"> <ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-346] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Toledo Edison Co. and The Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co.; Considerationof Issuance of Amendment to Facility Operating License and Proposed NoSignificant Hazards Consideration Determination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. NPF-3 issuedto Toledo Edison Company and The Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company(the licensees), for operation of the Davis-Besse Nuclear Power Station,Unit No. 1, located in Ottawa County, Ohio. The amendment would permit an extension of the due date for surveillancetesting to demonstrate the operability of the required independent circuitsbetween the offsite transmission network and the onsite Class 1E distributionsystem by automatically and manually transferring the unit power supplyto each of the 345 KV transmission lines. This surveillance is requiredby Technical Specification (TS) Section 4.8.1.1.1.b at least once each18 months during unit shutdown. The amendment would extend the due dateto April 1, 1988, from March 11, 1988. Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act), and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The licensees have evaluated the proposed change against the above criteriaas required by 10 CFR 50.91(a). We have reviewed the licensees' evaluation,and agree with it. The licensees concluded that: A. The change does not involve a significant increase in the probabilityor consequences of an accident previously evaluated (10 CFR 50.92(c)(1))because the manual and automatic transfer capability will still be available,and deferral of the surveillance test has no impact on the probabilityof a loss of offsite power, load rejection, or station blackout. Also,adequate power sources known to be operable such as the diesel generatorsare available. B. The change does not create the possibility of a new or different kindof accident from any accident previously evaluated (10 CFR 50.92(c)(2))because proper operation of the 13.8 KV transfer bus is still assured,and all failure modes are the same as previously analyzed. No changes tothe physical arrangement or operational limits are involved. C. The change does not involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety(10 CFR 50.92(c)(3)) because all the assumptions used for the accidentanalyses in the Updated Safety Analysis Report remain unchanged, and theconsequences of a malfunction of the 13.8 KV bus transfer remain withinthe bounds previously analyzed. Therefore, based on these considerations and the three criteria given above,the Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Rules and Procedures Branch,Division of Rules and Records, Office of Administration, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication dateand page number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room 4000, Maryland National Bank Building, 7735 Old Georgetown Road,Bethesda, Maryland, from 8:15 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Copies of written commentsreceived may be examined at the NRC Public Document Room, 1717 H StreetNW., Washington, DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions forleave to intervene is discussed below. By February 26, 1988, the licensees may file a request for a hearing withrespect to issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operatinglicense and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceedingand who wishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file awritten petition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitionsfor leave to intervene shall be fiiled in accordance with the Commission's``Rules of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part2. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filedby the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board,designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety andLicensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and theSecretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issuea notice of hearing or an appropriate order.   As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes of intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up of fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that amendment involves a significant hazardsconsideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuance ofany amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating a shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secertary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 1717 H Street, NW.,Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during thelast ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitionerpromptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to WesternUnion at 1-800-325-6000 (In Missouri 1-800-342-6700). The Western Unionoperator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the followingmessage addressed to Kenneth Perkins: petitioner's name and telephone number;date petition was mailed; plant name; and publication date and page numberof this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory, Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Gerald Charnoff, Esq., 2300 N Street NW.,Washington, DC 20037, attorney for the licensees. Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment which is available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 1717 H Street NW., Washington, DC, and at the theUniversity of Toledo Library, Documents Department, 2801 Bancroft Avenue,Toledo, Ohio 43606.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Bethesda, Maryland, this 21st day of January, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Albert W. De Agazio, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager Project Directorate III-I, Division of Reactor Projects-III,IV, V andamp; Special Projects.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-1631 Filed 1-26-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>