<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88729-0024 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-29-88.f2.A1023</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">16 CFR Parts 1306 and 1500 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Lawn Darts; Notice of Proposed Rulemaking </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Consumer Product Safety Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Lawn darts are devices intended to be used outdoors bybeing thrown upward and striking the ground point first. A regulation,issued in 1970 by the Food and Drug Administration under the Federal HazardousSubstances Act (``FHSA'') and now administered by the Commission, currentlybans lawn darts, except for those intended for adult use that (1) are labeledto warn against use by children, (2) include instructions for safe use,and (3) are not sold by toy stores or by store departments dealing predominantlyin toys or other children's articles. Despite these restrictions, whichare intended to ensure that lawn darts are sold only for use as a gameof skill by adults, children continue to suffer serious injuries and deathswhile playing with lawn darts. Accordingly, the Commission issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking(``ANPR'') on October 20, 1987, explaining a number of regulatory optionsavailable and asking for comment and data on the issues involved. 52 FR38935. After considering the comments received on the ANPR and other availableinformation, the Commission is proposing to prohibit the sale of lawn dartsthat have the potential for causing skull puncture injuries.\1\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\Chairman Terrence Scanlon and Commissioner Anne Grahamapproved the proposal. Commissioner Carol Dawson dissented from the decisionto propose this rule. Statements of the Commissioners concerning this votemay be obtained from the Office of the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments on this proposal should be received no later thanAugust 29, 1988. If requests are made to present oral comments on the proposal, an opportunitywill be scheduled for 10:00 a.m. on August 9, 1988. Requests to make oralcomments should be submitted to the Office of the Secretary by August 5,1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments should be mailed, preferably in five (5) copies,to the Office of the Secretary, Consumer Product Safety Commission, Washington,DC 20207, telephone (301) 492-6800, or delivered to the office of the Secretary,Consumer Product Safety Commission, Room 528, 5401 Westbard Avenue, Bethesda,Maryland. If an opportunity for the presentation of oral comments on theproposal is requested, it will be held at Room 556 at the Commission'soffices at 5401 Westbard Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Elaine Tyrrell, Project Manager,Office of Program Management and Budget, Consumer Product Safety Commission,Washington, DC 20207, telephone (301) 492-6554.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">A. Background </ITAG>The Consumer Product Safety Commission was created in May of 1973. Priorto that time, the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (``FHSA''), 15 U.S.C.1261-1276, was administered by the Food and Drug Administration (``FDA'').Section 2(Q)(1)(A) of the FSHA, 15 U.S.C. 1261(Q)(1)(A), provides thatthe term ``banned hazardous substance'' includes ``any toy, or other articleintended for use by children, which is a hazardous substance.'' The ChildProtection and Toy Safety Act of 1969 (83 Stat. 187-190) amended the FHSAto provide that any toy or other article intended for use by children maybe classified as a hazardous substance if it is determined that the articlepresents an electrical, mechanical, or thermal hazard. 15 U.S.C 1261(F)(1)(D).Pursuant to this authority, the FDA, on November 17, 1970, proposed, amongother things, to declare that lawn darts are banned toys because they presenta mechanical hazard and an unreasonable risk of injury. 35 FR 17664. The FDA received only one comment concerning the proposal to determinethat lawn darts present a mechanical hazard. That comment stated that thelarge, outdoor-type darts are intended for use by adults as an outdoorsport or game. The comment contended that suitable labeling can be devisedto inform parents or other adults of the necessity of carefully supervisingchildren if they are to be permitted to play the game and to give otherinformation relating to the safety of all nonplayers in the immediate area.After considering this comment, the FDA determined in its final rule, publishedDecember 19, 1970, that ``lawn darts and other similar sharp-pointed toysusually intended for outdoor use and having the potential for causing puncturewound injury, or other injury'' presented a mechanical hazard within themeaning of the FHSA. 35 FR 19266. However, the final rule (as summarizedbelow) also provided that the following types of lawn darts would not beincluded within the term ``banned hazardous substance'': Lawn darts andsimilar sharp-pointed articles not intended for toy use and marketed solelyas a game of skill for adults, provided such articles: (i) Bear the followingstatement on the front of the panel of the carton and on any accompanyingliterature: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Warning: </T4>Not a toy for use by children. May cause serious or fatalinjury. Read instructions carefully. Keep out of the reach of children.</ITAG>Such statement shall be printed in a sharply contrasting color within aborderline and in letters at [least] one-quarter inch high on the mainpanel of the container and at least one-eighth inch high on all accompanyingliterature. (ii) Include in the instructions and rules clear and adequatedirections and warnings for safe use including a warning against use whenany person or animal is in the vicinity of the intended play or targetarea. (iii). Are not sold by toy stores or store departments dealing predominantlyin toys and other children's articles. A petition for judicial review of this regulation was filed by a lawn dartmanufacturer, and the regulation was upheld. <T3>R.B. Jarts, Inc. v. Richardson, </T3>438 F.2d 846 (2d Cir. 1971).Since May of 1973, when the responsibility for administering the FHSA wastransferred to the Commission, the Commission has periodically inspectedsamples of lawn dart labeling and instructions and surveyed marketing practicesfor lawn darts to determine whether the manufacturers, importers, and sellersof lawn darts are complying with the Commission's regulations under theFHSA.The ban of lawn darts is codified in section 1500.18(a)(4) of Title 16of the Code of Federal Regulations (``CFR''). The exemption quoted abovefor those lawn darts that have the specified labeling and instructionsand that are not marketed in toy stores or in store departments dealingpredominantly in children's articles is codified at 16 CFR 1500.86(a)(3).In 1984, the Commission received reports that lawn darts were being soldin certain toy stores. As a result, the Commission's staff inspected atleast 77 retail stores and found seven stores that were selling lawn dartsin violation of the ban and exemption. Of the seven violative retail stores,six were toy stores, and three of these were part of the same nationwidechain. Products of four lawn dart importers had labeling violations. Theretail sales and labeling violations discovered by these inspections werecorrected, and the Commission issued a consumer safety alert in July 1985warning of the hazards of letting children play with lawn darts.In June 1987, the Commission's staff examined the labeling on lawn dartsmarketed by 14 firms, and products from all 14 firms were found to havelabeling violations. Products of eight of the firms were considered tohave serious labeling violations, <T3>i.e., </T3>no required warning statement on the front panel of thepackage. Other labeling violations included one or more of the following:the types size of the required warning statement was smaller than thatspecified in the exemption, the warning statement was absent from the instructionsor was not printed with a borderline as required, and the instructionslacked clear and adequate directions and warning for safe use.In addition, Commission field investigators visited 122 retail stores aroundthe country. Included in the 122 stores were 36 toy stores, 60 varietyor department stores, and 26 sporting goods stores. Fifty-three of thestores were selling lawn darts, and 18 of these were displaying the productwith or in close proximity to toys or sporting goods intended primarilyfor children.As a result, the Commission's compliance staff met on July 17, 1987, withimporters and manufacturers of lawn darts; a representative from the SportingGoods Manufacturers Association also attended that meeting. At the meeting,the staff discussed five voluntary actions that could be taken by the firmsto help assure compliance with the exemption from the ban and to increaseconsumer awareness of the hazards associated with lawn darts in the handsof children. These actions were:1. The front panel warning label should be modified to make it more conspicuousand readable. The recommended front panel warning label reads as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Warning: </T4>Not a toy for use by children. May cause serious or fatalhead injury.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Keep out of reach of children. Read instructions carefully.</ITAG>2. Place a warning label on one fin of each lawn dart in a color that contractswith the fin. (The industry attendees at the July 17, 1987, meeting indicatedthat they would achieve contrast by means other than color, such as bycontrasting texture.) The recommended label would state:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Warning: </T4>Not a toy for use by children. Can cause serious or fatalhead injury.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Keep children away from throwing area.</ITAG>3. Change the design of lawn darts to prevent modification, or includea warning against modification with the instructions. The Commission recommendedthe following language for warning consumers against modifying lawn darts:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Warning: </T4>Do not modify or change the lawn darts in any way.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Modification or changes can make the dart more hazardous.</ITAG>4. Include information on how to display lawn darts with each shipmentof lawn darts to retailers. The Commission recommended the following statement:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Important Safety Information: </T4>It is <T4>Illegal </T4>to sell lawn darts in toy stores or in store departmentswhich sell toys or other articles for children.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Do Not </T4>display lawn darts in sporting goods departments near sportsequipment intended primarily for children.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Promote lawn darts for <T4>Adult Use Only.</T4></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Children have been injured and killed by lawn darts.</ITAG>5. Stop packaging lawn darts in combination sets with other games.After the meeting on July 17, 1987, the staff wrote to all known lawn dartimporters and to the known domestic manufacturer and the company that distributesits products. These letters went both to those who attended the meetingand to those who did not attend. The letters described the five voluntaryactions and asked the firms to state in writing whether they were willingto take the actions requested. A total of 20 firms received letters, includingadditional importers of lawn darts that were identified between July andSeptember.Nineteen of the firms responded in writing or by telephone. Seven firmsstated that they would carry out the five requests (except for the contrastingcolor on lawn dart fins); several of these firms requested additional slightmodifications of the terms.Two major firms stated in writing that they would carry out only the firstfour requests. One of these firms also stated that it was in favor of theCommission making mandatory all of the voluntary actions which were requested.Two firms stated general support for the voluntary actions the compliancestaff had requested, but did not address the specific requests. Eight firmsstated that they intended to stop importing lawn darts.On July 30, 1987, the Commission issued a news release about lawn dartinjuries and deaths. In the release, the Commission provides details onthe existing ban, the exemption, and the hazard and resulting injuries.The release urges consumers to keep lawn darts away from children and asksconsumers to report violations of the ban or exemption to the Commission.On October 1, 1987, the Commission met to consider what actions are appropriateto address the continuing injuries and deaths to children that occur whenchildren play with lawn darts. By a unamimous vote, the Commission decidedat its October 1, 1987, meeting to issue an ANPR indicating that the Commissionmight, among other actions, either require the five actions requested ofindustry at the July 17, 1987, meeting with the staff or ban all lawn dartand similar pointed objects usually intended for outdoor use and havingthe capacity for causing puncture wound injuries.The Commission indicated that whatever action ultimately would be takenwould take into account the results of a surveillance program to be conductedby the Commission's staff three months after publication of the ANPR; theobject of the surveillance was to determine if the industry is in substantialcompliance with the existing regulations and with the actions requestedat the July 17, 1987, meeting described above. The Commission stated furtherthat its final action would also depend upon an evaluation of whether suchvoluntary or mandatory standards, if enforced, could be expected to protectconsumers from unreasonable risk of injuries.The staff was further directed to vigorously enforce the current FHSA provisionson lawn darts and to issue a consumer alert annually. The Commission hasrecently brought two cases in U.S. District Courts against major retailchains for lawn dart violations. In one of these cases, the defendant signeda consent decree to settle the Commission's concerns about the distributionof noncomplying lawn darts. The other case is still pending.In addition, the Commission requested the U.S. Customs Service to considerincluding lawn darts in the Operation Toyland program. This will enableCPSC and the Customs Service to examine incoming shipments of lawn darts.The staff also was directed to begin immediately preparing an injury update,human factors analysis, economic cost/benefit report, possible medicalevaluation of data, and other relevant data and analysis that would beneeded to determine whether further regulatory action for lawn darts isappropriate.In response to this direction, the Commission staff visited 112 retailstores to determine compliance with the current restrictions on the saleof lawn darts. Of these 112 stores, only 31 were selling lawn darts. Twenty-nineof the 31 were variety or department stores, one was a toy store, and onewas a sporting goods store. Of the 31 stores selling lawn darts, 14 werein violation of lawn dart requirements. Violations consisted of displayinglawn darts for sale in a toy store or toy department (8 stores) or offeringlawn darts for sale that violated labeling requirements (8 stores). Twostores were committing both types of violations.The staff also identified 18 importers or manufacturers of lawn darts.Of these, 17 firms were distributing, or had recently distributed, lawndarts with labeling violations. Ten of these firm indicated that they donot intend to import, manufacture, or sell lawn darts in the future. Sevenfirms are known to intend to continue to import lawn darts.With regard to whether the firms were willing to implement voluntarilythe five actions requested at the July 17, 1987, meeting, one firm indicatedthat it will not comply voluntarily with the requests. Except for one firmthat was undecided about whether it would sell lawn darts in combinationsets with other games, the remainder or the companies indicated that theywould comply with the five requests on various, and sometimes indefinite,schedules.The ANPR was published on October 20, 1987. 52 FR 38935 (October 20, 1987).<ITAG tagnum="84">B. The Product and the Scope of the Rule</ITAG>Lawn darts are devices that are intended to be used outdoors and that aredesigned so that when they are thrown into the air they will contact theground point first. Often, lawn darts are used in a game where the dartsare thrown at a target or other feature on the ground. The types of lawndarts that have generally been available in the past and that have demonstratedtheir ability to cause skull puncture injuries typically have a metal orweighted plastic body, on the front of which is an elongated metal shaft,about \1/4\ inch in diameter, which may or may not have a pointed tip.These darts have a shaft on the rear of the body to which plastic finsare attached. These darts are about a foot in length and weigh about onequarter to one half pound. These darts are intended to stick in the groundwhen thrown.Recently, the Commission has become aware of two additional types of gamesusing devices that could fall within the general understanding of the termlawn darts. One type uses a soft, usually plastic, body with an approximatelyhemispherical mushroom- or tulip-shaped head of relatively large diameterthat is weighted so that the large end impacts the ground. This type of``dart'' is not intended to stick in the ground on impact, and the Commission'sstaff concludes that this type does not present a significant risk of skullpuncture injuries.The other recent type of lawn dart resembles the shape of the older typeof lawn dart, but is lighter and the tip is made of a relatively soft andflexible material of about the consistency of a pencil eraser. Furthermore,the tip is mounted in a flexible base so that the tip as a whole can alsoflex. This type of dart is not intended to stick, nor capable of sticking,in the ground, and the staff does not believe that this type of dart presentsa significant risk of skull puncture injuries. These darts are designedto be used with a target that will entrap a dart that falls on the target.The Commission does not believe that it is feasible to describe a set ofphysical characteristics for darts that are capable of causing skull punctureinjuries, because of the large number of combinations of weight, materials,tip diameter, tip shape, etc., that could be used to perform the functionof sticking in the ground. Nevertheless, there is a common thread thatconnects the darts that can cause skull puncture injuries to children;all these darts are intended to stick in the ground. Conversely, the knowndarts that are not intended to stick in the ground are believed to be incapableof causing skull puncture injuries under reasonably foreseeable circumstances.The Commission therefore has decided to apply the proposed rule to ``lawndarts that have a rigid elongated tip and that are intended to be usedoutdoors and thrown into the air so that they will stick in the ground,as well as similar products for outdoor use that are thrown in the samemanner and are capable of sticking in the ground.'' The express inclusionof both darts intended to stick in the ground and darts capable of stickingin the ground is intended to preclude arguments about subjective or unexpressedintentions. The definition given above is not intended to include such items as arrows,horseshoes, javelins, penknives, and the like, nor is the intended to applyto indoor dart games that use a vertically-placed target, such as ``Englishdarts'' or ``American darts.'' It does cover the type of current lawn dartsthat is intended to stick in the ground, and it does not cover the twotypes of lawn ``darts'' described above that are not intended to stick,nor capable of sticking, in the ground.The proposed rule does not require the repurchase of prohibited lawns dartsby manufacturers, marketers, or retailers who have sold the darts to thenext entity in the chain of distribution or to consumers.<ITAG tagnum="84">C. Risk of Injury</ITAG>The risk that the Commission intends to address in this proceeding is thatof puncture of the skulls of children caused by lawn darts being used bychildren. As mentioned above, the potential for these devices to causethese types of injuries is not necessarily obvious to parents or otheradults who might buy these items or allow their children to play with them,much less to the children themselves. This is because the tips do not appearsharp enought to present an obvious danger of puncture. The combined factorsof weight, the rigid shaft, the speed that the dart is traveling at thetime of impact, and the thickness of the child's skull at the point ofimpact present the risk. The Commission's staff has predicted the potential for skull puncture injuryby applying a mathematical model originally developed for bullets to estimatethe probability of penetration of the skull by lawn darts with metal tips.The model estimates these penetration probabilities for various lawn dartparameters, such as tip diameter, dart weight, drop height, and skull thickness.From this model, a typical lawn dart weighing approximately \1/4\ lb.,with a metal tip with a diameter of 0.5 cm (0.2andmin16;andmin16;), and droppingfrom a height of 12 feet was estimated to have a probability of penetrationof 37 percent for the average skull thickness of male and female children3 years of age. It is reasonable to expect that a lawn dart would reacha height of twelve feet above a child's head during normal use. The probabilityof penetration increased to 92 percent for the minimum skull thicknessof a three-year-old.As discussed in Section B of this notice, the Commission has concludedpreliminarily that lawn darts that are intended to stick in the groundall have the potential for skull puncture during reasonably foreseeableuse or misuse.The elimination of lawn darts that can cause skull puncture injuries canbe expected to also eliminate, or greatly reduce in severity, the puncturesof other parts of the body, as well as the lacerations, fractures, andother injuries, that have been associated with lawn darts in the past.The Commission's staff estimates that about 6,700 injuries from lawn dartswere treated in U.S. hospital emergency rooms between January 1978 andDecember 1987. This represents an average of 670 injuries per year treatedin emergency rooms. Approximately 57 percent of the injuries involved thehead, face, eye, or ear. Approximately 4 percent of the injured victimswere hospitalized (on the average, approximately 25 per year), includingall of the injuries reported as fractures. Over 75 percent of the victimswere under age 15; about 50 percent of the victims were under age 10. Inaddition, Commission records dating back to 1970 show that at least threechildren have been killed by injuries associated with lawn darts. Thesechildren were 4, 7, and 13 years old.In the 25 lawn dart injury reports for which information about the userof the lawn darts was available, the reports indicated that children wereplaying with the lawn darts, despite the ban and exemption which were developedto keep the product out of the hands of children.<ITAG tagnum="84">D. Statutory Authorities</ITAG>If lawn darts as a class are deemed to be articles intended for use bychildren, the darts would be regulated under the provisions of the FHSAfor mechanical hazards of children's products. Sec. 2(f)(1)(D) of the FHSA,15 U.S.C. 1261(f)(1)(D); Sec. 30(d) of the Consumer Product Safety Act(``CPSA''), 15 U.S.C. 2079(d). If at least some lawn darts were deemedto be children's products, while other lawn darts might not be children'sproducts, a regulatory proceeding to address all lawn darts could be conductedeither under both the CPSA and the FHSA or under the CPSA alone, aftera finding that it is in the public interest to do so as provided in Section30(d) of the CPSA.An article intended for use by children which has been declared by ruleto be a hazardous substance is banned under section 2(q)(1)(A) of the FHSA,15 U.S.C. 1261(q)(1)(A), unless exempted. To effect a ban of lawn dartsunder the FHSA, the Commission would revoke the exemption at 16 C.F.R.1500.86(a)(3) and make any necessary changes in the terms of the generalban at 16 C.F.R. 1500.18(a)(4).The Commission is authorized, under section 7 of the CPSA, to promulgatea mandatory consumer product safety standard which sets forth certain performancerequirements for a consumer product or which sets forth certain requirementsthat a product be marked or accompanied by clear and adequate warningsor instructions. 15 U.S.C. 2056. A performance, warning, or instructionstandard must be reasonably necessary to prevent or reduce an unreasonablerisk or injury. In addition, if the Commission finds that no feasible consumerproduct standard under section 7 would adequately protect consumers froman unreasonable risk or injury associated with lawn darts, the Commissionmay promulgate a rule under section 8 of the CPSA declaring some or alllawn darts to be banned products. 15 U.S.C. 2057.The procedures and requisite findings to accomplish any of the mandatoryregulatory alternatives under consideration under either or both acts areessentially the same; both acts use a three-stage rulemaking procedure.At each stage of the rulemaking, the Commission is required to considercertain topics and make specified findings, particularly about the statusof voluntary standards and about the costs and benefits of the contemplatedrule.The requirements for promulgating a mandatory rule are set out in section9 of the CPSA, 15 U.S.C. 2058, and section 3(f) of the FHSA, 15 U.S.C.1262(f). An advance notice of proposed rulemaking (``ANPR'') is the firststep of a regulatory proceeding that could lead to a safety rule. As describedabove, this step has already taken place. The second step of the rulemakingprocedure, which is accomplished by the publication of this notice, isthe issuance of a proposed rule, which is followed by public comment onthe proposal. All comments and submissions should be provided to the Officeof the Secretary, at the address given at the beginning of this notice,no later than August 29, 1988. The third step is the issuance of a finalrule.<ITAG tagnum="84">E. Responses to the ANPR</ITAG>The Commission received 11 comments on the ANPR that was published in the<T4>Federal Register </T4> on October 20, 1987. One was from a trade associationrepresenting lawn dart manufacturers, distributors, and retailers; onewas from a major consumer organization; two were from state governments;three were from manufacturers of lawn darts; and four were from individuals.The major points raised by these comments, and the Commission's responsesto those points, are discussed below.The trade association stated its intention to develop a voluntary standard.However, for reasons discussed below in Section F of this notice, the Commissionhas preliminarily determined that there is no feasible standard that canadequately reduce the risk of skull puncture injuries associated with thelawn darts addressed by this proposed rule.Two of the three manufacturers stated that the lead time given in the ANPRfor the five actions that the Commission had requested of industry wasnot sufficient to allow for an orderly changeover. Since the Commissionhas preliminarily determined that these actions will not adequately reducethe risk of skull punctures, for the reasons stated in Section F of thisnotice, these comments are now moot.The third manufacturer, and two of the individuals, believe that the currentregulation is sufficient to address the hazard. They state that in manycases the accidents are attributable to consumer misuse and abuse. Forthe reasons stated in Section F of this notice, the Commission has determinedthat the current regulation is not sufficient to adequately reduce therisk of skull puncture injuries. The accidents that are occurring resultfrom the type of play that youngsters predictably will engage in when playingwith these types of lawn darts. While the most serious types of accidentsare rare, they result from the characteristics of the product and fromthe known behavioral characteristics of the children who can be expectedto play with them. The Commission does not agree that the deaths and seriousinjuries to children that are caused by the characteristics of the productitself when used in predictable ways by children can be properly dismissedas resulting from consumer abuse or misuse.One state government Department of Consumer Protection supported makingthe five requested actions mandatory. However, as mentioned above, theCommission has determined that these actions will not adequately addressthe problem. This department also stated that the regulatory options shouldbe coupled with ongoing enforcement of the current regulations. The Commissionagrees with this comment and, as described above, has directed the staffto vigorously enforce the current regulations pending the completion ofthis rulemaking. This organization also urged that the Commission proceedwith rulemaking under both the CPSA and FHSA, rather than under the CPSAalone. As explained below in Section F of this notice, the Commission isproposing this course in order to prohibit the sale of all lawn darts,and not only those lawn darts that the Commission can establish are intendedfor use by children.The consumer organization, the second state government, and the other twoindividuals support a ban of lawn darts, which is the action the Commissionhas decided to propose.<ITAG tagnum="84">F. Preliminary Regulatory Analysis</ITAG><T3>Introduction. </T3>The Commission has preliminarily determined thateven lawn darts that arguably are intended for the use of adults are likelyto be used by children at various times. Accordingly, for the reasons explainedin Section D of this notice, the Commission is preparing to take actionunder both the FHSA and the CPSA, so as to reach all lawn darts that presenta risk of skull puncture injuries to children and to eliminate potentialarguments about whether any lawn darts can be validly considered to beintended for use by adults.Under section 3(h) of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (``FHSA'') andSection 9(c) of the Consumer Product Safety Act (``CPSA''), the Commissionis required to prepare a preliminary regulatory analysis containing<ITAG tagnum="21">(1) a preliminary description of the potential benefits and potentialcosts of the proposed regulation, including any benefits or costs thatcannot be quantified in monetary terms, and an identification of thoselikely to receive the benefits and bear the costs;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) a discussion of the reasons any standard or portion of a standardsubmitted to the Commission under subsection [(f)(5) of the FHSA and (a)(5)of the CPSA] was not published by the Commission as the proposed regulationor part of the proposed regulation;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(3) a discussion of the reasons for the Commission's preliminary determinationthat efforts proposed under subsection [(f)(6) of the FHSA and (a)(6) ofthe CPSA] and assisted by the Commission as required by section 5(a)(3)of the Consumer Product Safety Act would not, within a reasonable periodof time, be likely to result in the development of a voluntary standardthat would eliminate or adequately reduce the risk of injury identifiedin the notice provided under subsection [(f)(1) of the FHSA and (a)(1)of the CPSA]; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(4) a description of any reasonable alternatives to the proposed regulation,together with a summary description of their potential costs and benefits,and a brief explanation of why such alternatives should not be publishedas a proposed regulation.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">15 U.S.C. 1261(h), 2058(c).While the requirements under the FHSA and the CPSA are similar, Section9 of the CPSA also requires that, for rules issued under the CPSA, theCommission shall make economic findings with respect to: <ITAG tagnum="21">(A) the degree and nature of the risk of injury the rule is designedto eliminate or reduce;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(B) the approximate number of consumer products, or types or classesthereof, subject to such rule;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(C) the need of the public for the consumer products subject to suchrule, and the probable effect of such rule on the utility, cost, or availabilityof such products to meet such need; and </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(D) any means of achieving the objective of the order while minimizingadverse effects on competition or disruption or dislocation of manufacturingand other commercial practices consistent with the public health and safety.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">15 U.S.C. 2058(f)(1). The following discussion addresses requirements under both the FHSA andCPSA, except where noted. <T3>Potential benefits.</T3> The potential benefits of the rule will accruethrough a decrease in the deaths and injuries associated with lawn darts.While the rule is intended to address the risk of skull puncture injuriesto children, the elimination of the rigid, heavy, and elongated-tippedlawn darts that can cause skull puncture injuries should also eliminatethe punctures of other parts of the body and greatly reduce in severitythe lacerations, fractures, and other injuries that have been associatedwith lawn darts in the past. Therefore, while there may be some injuriesin the future from substitute products that may also be called lawn darts,for the purposes of this analysis the Commission is taking the benefitsof the rule to be the complete elimination of lawn dart injuries that havebeen caused by the lawn darts that would be prohibited by the rule beingproposed. A recent analysis by the Commission's Directorate for Epidemiology indicatesthat about 670 lawn-dart-related injuries have occurred annually over thelast ten years. Economic studies indicate that the average cost of theseinjuries was about $7,500 per occurrence. The estimated total yearly costof injuries associated with lawn darts is about $5 million. The Commission is aware of 3 deaths assocaited with lawn darts over theperiod 1970-1987. If it is assumed that other variables, such as exposureand use characteristics, have remained constant and that the Commissionis aware of all such deaths, the games may present a 17 percent risk ofone death in a given year. If a statistical valuation of $2 million forloss of life were assigned, lawn darts would have additional expected lossesof about $300,000 per year. Therefore, the estimated total yearly costs of death and injury associatedwith lawn darts are about $5.4 million. A reduction of these injuries andof the risk of death will make up the benefits accruing from the rule.Since the average useful life of a lawn dart is estimated to be ten years,and since it should take about 20 years to phase out the lawn darts thatare currently in consumers' hands, a portion of the benefits of the proposedrule will phase in each year, until, after the 20 years, the full benefitof the rule will accrue each year and will continue as long as the ruleis in effect. The benefits derived would be further affected by the choice of substitute.For example, if consumers chose a risk-free lawn game as a substitute,the reduction in injury would be completely realized after the existingstocks of elongated-tipped lawn darts in consumers' hands have become wornout, been misplaced, or otherwise passed from use. However, if consumerschoose a substitute with a similar or higher risk to death or injury, theexpected benefits of this action would be offset. The benefits would be to purchasing consumers and their families and friends,but would accrue disproportionately to those 15 years old or younger, sinceover 75 percent of injuries and 100 percent of the deaths have occurredto this age group. Both the costs and benefits associated with a prohibitionon the sale of elongated-tipped lawn darts are expected to be relativelysmall. <T3>Potential costs.</T3> The potential costs of the proposed rule to marketersof elongated-tipped lawn darts are the loss of future sales of a productwith a demonstrated steady demand. Annual sales of these lawn darts areestimated at 1-1.5 million units, holding relatively stable in recent years.The typical retail price of a set of four lawn darts is about $5; thus,the total loss of sales will be about $5_7.5 million annually at the retaillevel. The intermediate and final markups of these products have been estimatedat more than 50 percent of the retail price; thus, industry revenues fromthe sale of elongated-tipped lawn darts likely exceed $2.5 million annually.These revenues would be eliminated if those products are prohibited. However,the loss of these revenues could be largely recouped by sales of substituteproducts that will occupy the display and storage space previously allottedto lawn darts. The vast majority of lawn darts sold in the U.S. are imported. However,the value of these imports is so small as to be negligible compared tototal U.S. imports. There are no known U.S. exports of lawn darts. Thus,the proposed rule is expected to have no effect on U.S. trade. The one known domestic manufacturer will bear costs associated with thedisposal of molds and production processes associated with the manufactureof these lawn darts as well as foregone profit on future sales. The manufacturercould product lawn darts for export; this is considered unlikely sincethe firm does not now export lawn darts and is unlikely to develop overseasmarkets rapidly. If production machinery is adaptable to the manufactureof another product for which there is a demand, the cost effect may beminimized. If molds and machinery are scrapped, and no available substituteis produced to offset lost sales, the domestic manufacturer may incur significanteconomic costs. The impact of lost sales of elongated tipped lawn darts would be the lossof net profit associated with production and marketing of these products,less any profits derived from other products marketed in their stead. The distributional effect on marketers would depend on their share of themarket and on what share they may take of the sale of substitute products.Importers and retailers will similarly be affected by the extent of therelative volumes they sell of these goods. Costs borne by consumers will take two forms. Consumers would be unableto purchase a game which has a proven popularity, and would be inducedto purchase alternate games to fill that demand. There are ready subtitutesavailable, at approximately the same price; however, it is not clear whetherthese substitutes provide a similar level of utility (enjoyment) as theproducts they would replace. If consumers are compelled to purchase morecostly games in order to receive the same utility as that provided by elongated-tippedlawn darts, the rule may result in increased costs to consumers. Further,there may be a loss in consumer surplus associated with the unavailabilityof lawn darts if consumers were willing to pay more than retail for thegame in order to acquire it, thus indicating that they value the productin excess of the retail price. The extent of any lost consumer surplusis unknown, but is expected to be small. The Commission has anecdotal information indicating that elderly personsmay play lawn darts more than other typical adults do. The Commission hasno information to indicate the extent to which handicapped persons mayplay lawn darts. Either of these groups, however, should be able to findsuitable recreational substitutes for lawn darts. The domestic manufacturer and certain marketers and retailers may be consideredsmall businesses. The overall effect of the proposed rule on the domesticmanufacturer is expected to be substantial, but other small businessesare not expected to experience significant adverse effects associated withthe proposed rule. This issue is discussed further in Section G of thisnotice. It is likely that the marketing firms (wholesalers and private labelers)will initially bear the costs associated with the rule. The costs, includingthose of retrieval and disposal of unsaleable inventories and foregoneprofits, would begin on the effective date, which, as discussed below,is being proposed to be 30 days after publication of the final rule andwould apply to all products in the chain of distribution at that time.The Commission expects that it will be able to consider the comments onthe proposed rule and issue a final rule, if appropriate, in November orDecember of 1988. As described below, the Commission is proposing an effectivedate of 30 days after the publication of a final rule, and the rule wouldapply to all lawn darts in the chain of distribution on the effective date.This will minimize the potential for injuries from darts distributed beforethe effective date. Also, the Commission believes that at this time ofyear there will be fewer sets of lawn darts at the retail level or elsewherein the chain of distribution. Furthermore, the industry will have had theopportunity not to enter into contracts for new goods pending a Commissiondecision, thus further reducing any inventory in the chain of distributionand other economic consequences of the rule. Therefore, the Commissionbelieves that costs caused by inventory being held on the effective dateof the rule will not be substantial. The Commission also does not expect that the cost to retailers due to foregoneprofits from the sale of lawn darts subject to the rule would be substantial,since other products could be promoted in the retail space vacated by theprohibited products.<T3>Comparison of costs and benefits. </T3>As explained above, the quantifiablebenefits of the proposed rule are based on an estimated saving of the $5.4million annual cost of deaths and injuries once lawn darts are no longerin use. This figure could be offset to the extent that consumers chooseto engage in activities that involve risk during the time they would otherwisebe playing lawn darts.The quantifiable costs would consist basically of lost industry revenues,which are estimated at somewhat more than $2.5 million per year. However,the loss of these revenues can be largely recouped by the manufacture andsale of substitute items. Unquantifiable costs, discussed above, includeconsumers' loss of enjoyment of lawn darts.After considering the costs and benefits of the proposed rule, the Commissionpreliminarily concludes that the benefits of the proposed rule will beara reasonable relationship to its costs.<T3>Alternatives to the rule. </T3>The Commission has determined that theproposed rule is needed because industry actions of the types discussedin Section A to address the potential hazard presented by lawn darts wouldnot be adequate. The five actions previously under consideration are: modificationsto package labels, labeling one fin of each lawn dart, inclusion of a consumerwarning against modification of the lawn darts, notice to retailers onthe proper display of the games, and elimination of lawn dart sales incombination sets. The cost of implementing the five steps has been estimatedat $150,000 the first year, decreasing to about $100,000 thereafter. Ifthe five voluntary steps were to be about 2 percent effective in reducinginjuries, the benefits derived through injury reduction would exceed thecosts associated with compliance. The Commission believes that these voluntarysteps may not be adhered to by all marketers, and that this approach wouldnot be effective in adequately reducing the risk of injury presented bythese products.In order to determine whether attempts to ensure that lawn darts will bemarketed for adults, the Commission's staff analyzed information on consumerattitudes and behavior. The staff concluded that efforts to market lawndarts only for adult use may not prevent use by children, for the followingreasons:1. Selling lawn darts in stores other than toy stores, such as sportinggoods departments, does not convey the message that lawn darts are foradult use only.2. Consumers may recognize that lawn darts require motor and strategicskills similar to those required for other sports equipment designed forand/or used by children and, therefore, conclude that they are appropriatefor children who have these skills.3. Labeling lawn darts for adult use only may not convince parents thatlawn darts are inappropriate for children. Parents may not consider thegame particularly hazardous, especially in comparison to other productsused by children.4. It may be difficult for parents to prevent children from using lawndarts, as they are often used at large, casual gatherings with little orno supervision provided.5. Parents sometimes have no knowledge that children are using lawn darts.As a result of this analysis of consumer attitudes and behaviors, the staffconcluded that efforts to market lawn darts for adult use only cannot beexpected to completely preclude use by children. Specifically, the marketingand labeling provisions in the current regulations, either by themselvesor supplemented by the five actions requested of industry by CPSC, cannotbe expected to accomplish the intended purpose. Furthermore, lawn dartsdo not require complex skills which preclude use by children. Therefore,the Commission believes children will continue to be attracted to and playwith lawn darts, even if the product is marketed only as a game of skillfor adults. Accordingly, the Commission concludes that no effort to developa voluntary standard based on these types of requirements will adequatelyreduce the risk associated with lawn darts.The Commission could also promulgate the voluntary actions as a mandatoryrule. The expected costs and benefits of a mandatory rule would be similarto the cost of voluntary action, assuming 100 percent compliance. Thisaction would have the additional effect of ensuring compliance by existingmarketers as well as any future entrants. However, the Commission's concernsover effectiveness, described in the preceding paragraph, would remain.The Commission's staff also developed some performance criteria intendedto help explore the potential for lawn darts to cause skull puncture injuries.These critiera involved dropping lawn darts onto a laminate constructedto approximate the puncture resistance of the skull. The Commission hasnot proposed these performance requirements because of the difficulty inestablishing that the laminate will in fact function as an adequate indicatorof the ability of a lawn dart to penetrate a child's skull. The Commissiondoes not believe that it is feasible to develop sufficient evidence concerningthe adequacy of this type of test in the near future. Also, the mathematicalmodel originally developed for bullets has not been correlated to lawndarts to determine the accuracy of the model's predictions for this newapplication. Further, the model has not been tested to determine its applicabilityto lawn darts that have nonmetallic tips or tips that do not closely resemblethe shape of bullets. Because of these difficulties, and because the Commissionbelieves that action to eliminate the risk of skull puncture injuries isneeded immediately, it concludes that performance requirements are notfeasibile at this time. However, if the comments on the proposal or otherinformation that may become available indicate that these or other performancerequirements can adequately address this risk, the Commission wold reconsiderthis determination.<T3>Effective date.</T3> The time allowed after promulgation for the finalrule to go into effect, and the point in the chain of distribution to whichthe rule will be applied, will affect the extent to which the industrywill experience adverse economic effects from the rule. These adverse effectscould be minimized by setting an effective date that facilitates an orderlyelimination of affected products from the marketplace. Such an effectivedate would allow for exhausting wholesale and retail inventories to reducethe number of products that would require shipment to an alternate marketor which would have to be discarded. Absent sufficient lead times, manufacturersestimate the cost of compliance with the proposed rule may be substantial.However, as discussed in the next paragraph, the effect of lead time maydepend on the time of the year the regulation goes into effect.On the other hand, the longer the effective date, the more lawn darts couldbe sold and the greater the number of injuries or deaths which otherwisewould have been prevented by an earlier effective date.A final rule could be published as early as about October 30, 1988. Theeffective date could be as soon as 30 days after publication. Thus, a finalrule may be effective as early as about December 1, 1988. However, if therule were effective at this date, the firms could bear significantly increasedcosts because of contractual obligations to manufacturers, unless marketerstook some anticipatory action. Winter and early spring historically arethe periods of seasonal reorder and inventory buildup for seasonal salesof lawn darts. As previously described, the Commission is proposing to have this rulebecome effective 30 days after the publication of a final rule; the rulewould apply to all products in the chain of distribution on or after thatdate. However, the Commission has considered the potential effects of othereffective dates on the industry and on possible future injuries. If the rule were to affect only products manufactured (or imported) afterthe effective date, the most acute impact to marketers would occur if theeffective date were during the winter and early spring period of reorder.However, in view of the probability that the Commission could take finalaction on the proposal in November of this year, it seems likely that marketerswould delay placing such orders pending a Commission decision on the finalrule. If the rule were based on first entry into commerce (first sale),marketers would be most adversely affected during the period of inventorybuildup, which is early spring to midsummer. Again, marketers may curtailor delay inventory buildup in anticipation of the possibility that a finalrule would apply to product in their inventory on the effective date. <ITAG tagnum="84">G. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG><T3>Introduction.</T3> The Regulatory Flexibility Act (``RFA''), 5 U.S.C.601-612, requires that agencies prepare and make available for public commentan initial regulatory flexibility analysis when a general notice of proposedrulemaking is published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The analysis is required if the proposed rulemay have a significant impact on a substantial number of small businesses,small organizations, and small government jurisdictions. The proposed mandatoryrule for lawn darts applies to lawn darts capable of causing skull punctureinjuries, and would affect all firms manufacturing, importing, or retailingthese products, and may have a minor impact on some firms in the outdoorgame industry that market lawn darts. Lawn darts represent about 5 percentof the total value of production of affected firms on the average, butindividual firms indicate that these products represent as little as 1percent and as much as 50 percent of gross revenue. <T3>Reasons for consideration of agency action.</T3> Lawn darts intendedfor use by children are banned under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act,FHSA, at 16 CFR 1500.18(a)(4) and 1500.86(a)(3), but may continue to besold under an exemption provision if certain warning labeling and retaildisplay requirements are met. The Commission is concerned that, despitethe existing regulation designed to discourage their use by children, lawndarts continue to be used by children. As a result, the products continueto present a risk of injury or death to children. Commission studies indicatethat about 670 lawn dart-related injuries were treated in hospital emergencyrooms yearly from 1978 forward; three deaths have been reported over a17-year period. <T3>Objective of the rule.</T3> The objective of the proposed rule is toeliminate the risk of injury or death to children posed by lawn darts.This would be accomplished by prohibiting the entry into commerce of thoselawn darts which have the potential to cause skull puncture. The proposedrule would prohibit the sale of lawn darts, whether in sets of darts onlyor in combination with other outdoor lawn games. <T3>Legal basis of the proposed rule.</T3> The legal basis for the proposedrule is described in Section D of this notice. <T3>Description of the requirements of the proposed rule.</T3> The Commissionis proposing to prohibit lawn darts with rigid elongated tips and thatare intended to be thrown into the air so that they will stick into theground. The proposed rule would not impose a specific design standard onthese products but would eliminate current design, elongated-tipped lawndarts from the market, whether sold in combination sets or as separategames. <T3>Categories of consumer products to which the rule will apply.</T3>The proposed rule would apply to lawn games using elongated-tipped devicescommonly called ``lawn darts.'' The rule would not apply to blunt-tippedmushroom-type (or ``tulip'') lawn darts, that are also currently offeredfor sale, but that are not considered to present a significant puncturerisk to children. <T3>Entities to which the rule would apply.</T3> In accordance with theRegulatory Flexibility Act, the Commission has considered the effect theproposed rule would have on small entities. Of these, only small businesseswould be affected; small organizations and government jurisdictions wouldnot be affected. The proposed rule would affect importers, manufacturers,and retailers of lawn darts. Each of these business entities also marketsother products which are not subject to the proposed rule. <T3>Potential economic effects of the proposed rule.</T3> The manufactureof lawn darts is included in SIC industry classification 3949, ``Sportingand Athletic Goods, not elsewhere classified,'' a grouping within the outdoorand athletic equipment sector. In 1982, there were 1,452 companies, operating1,553 plants, in this grouping. The Commission has identified 20 marketersof lawn darts. One of these markets domestically-produced lawn darts; theremainder import these products from the Far East. Imports are estimatedto account for the bulk of sales of these games. Five firms are consideredto be the major suppliers of lawn darts. These firms account for an estimated60 to 90 percent of total annual sales. The Commission is aware of only one domestic producer of lawn darts; thatfirm's products are sold to retailers by a single domestic private labeler.The domestic manufacturer employs less than 50 workers, well within thesize standard used by the Small Business Administration to describe smallbusinesses. The firm accounts for a significant, though not the major,share of lawn dart sales. For the purpose of the RFA, the Commission isconsidering this company to be a small business. The bulk of firms marketing lawn darts are importers, which at some timesmay distribute a diverse mix of products and at other times may concentrateon the marketing of sporting goods and games. The Commission is not awareof any importer that markets lawn darts exclusively. While several majorretail chains import lawn darts directly for their retail operations, forthe purpose of Regulatory Flexibility Act considerations, the Commissionconsiders the bulk of importers to be small businesses. <T3>Effect of the proposed rule on small entities.</T3> (1) <T3>Producers.</T3> The one identified domestic manufacturer of lawn darts,which produces the games under private label for use by a full-line marketerof outdoor games, reports that lawn darts account for 50 percent or moreof its gross revenues. This manufacturer would experience a loss of upto 50 percent of its manufacturing revenues if it were unable to produceand market a substitute product that did not present a risk of skull puncturewounds, or if it were unable to export current design lawn darts in quantitiessimilar to those now consumed in the U.S. market. The manufacturer reportedthat it also produces a ``tulip'' type lawn dart, but that the demand forthis substitute has been relatively small. If sales of lawn darts thatwill not stick in the ground sufficiently offset the level of lost salesof the banned lawn darts, and if the cost and profit margin generated bythe substitute were similar, there would not be a significant adverse effecton total revenues or the competitive position of the domestic manufacturer.While the Commission expects the demand for substitutes to rise, if salesof the substitute or of other items manufactured with the production capacityvacated by the lost production of lawn darts do not generate sufficientrevenues, the domestic manufacturer would incur losses through foregonesales. The net loss may be greater than the proportionate loss in grosssales if the firm could not amortize overhead and other indirect costsof operation over the larger gross revenue base. It is unlikely that aforeign market for elongated-tipped lawn darts can be developed to replaceall sales lost in the United States. The proposed rule is considered likely to cause a significant adverse effecton this small business entity, but only in the short run. (2) <T3>Importers and distributors.</T3> Lawn darts constitute an average of5 percent or less of total revenues of affected importers and distributors.The proposed rule would have the effect of reducing gross revenues proportionateto the loss in sales of elongated-tipped lawn darts that is not recoupedthrough the sale of a substitute product. Industry sources indicate thatmuch of the demand for lawn darts is derived from a desire for an outdoorgame rather than a specific demand for this product; if this perceptionis accurate, the Commission expects that the bulk of loss sales associatedwith the hazardous type of lawn game will be made up through the introductionof a substitute or the aggressive marketing of lawn darts that are notbanned. A small adverse effect on importers and distributors is expectedin the first year of the rule as a result of market mix adjustment. Therelikely would be no significant adverse effect on these entities thereafter.The Commission concludes that the proposed rule would not significantlyaffect the operation or profitability of these firms. (3) <T3>Retailers.</T3> Thousands of retailers sell lawn darts; many of theseare small businesses. The proposed rule would eliminate one product tobe offered for sale, with no measurable effect on overall sales or theprofitability of retail establishments. The rule would not result in acompetitive advantage, since lawn darts account for only a negligible proportionof any one retailer's sales. The Commission concludes that there will beno significant adverse effect on retailers. <T3>Alternatives to the proposed rule.</T3> The Commission also could takeother regulatory actions, including mandatory requirements for increasedpackage labeling, a warning label on one fin of each lawn dart, noticeto consumers warning against modification, informing retailers of theirresponsibilities under current law, and prohibiting the sale of lawn dartsin combination sets. Such actions would notify adults of the danger presentedby lawn darts if used by children, and would remove these games from combinationsets since consumers otherwise may infer that all games in the sets areappropriate for general family use. This alternative would result in aminimal adverse effect in the year of introduction, with little cost effectthereafter. The Commission is concerned that this alternative will notbe effective in reducing skull puncture injuries to children, given theeasy access that children normally have to the game after it is purchasedand the skill and judgment required to play the game safely. Similar effectswould be expected if these actions were voluntarily adopted by the industry.For the reasons discussed above, the Commission does not consider thata performance standard for lawn darts, whether a mathematical model ora drop-test onto a laminate, is feasible at this time. The Commission could also use a different effective date. A Notice of FinalRulemaking could be published as early as about October 30, 1988. The effectivedate could be as soon as 30 days after publication of the final rule inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The effects of different effective dates arediscussed in Section F of this notice. The Commission has investigated ways of reducing the potential impact onsmall firms and preliminary concludes that no less burdensome alternativewould adequately address the risk of injury to children. <ITAG tagnum="84">H. Environmental Impact </ITAG>Pursuant to The National Environmental Policy Act, and in accordance withCouncil on Environmental Quality regulations and CPSC procedures for environmentalreview, the Commission has prepared a preliminary assessment of the environmentalimpact associated with the proposed mandatory rule. The assessment addressesthe potential environmental effects of the proposed prohibition of thesale of lawn darts. The proposed rule would make preexisting packaging materials unusable fortheir intended purpose and, absent a residual use, would necessitate destructionof these materials. The Commission anticipates that less than 10 percentof preprinted packaging would remain after the imposition of the effectivedate; thus, less than about 150,000 boxes and printed instructions wouldbe destroyed. The rule would also affect existing molds for fabricatinglawn darts. There is one existing domestic manufacturer of lawn darts subjectto the proposed rule; if the molds cannot be adapted to accommodate productionof blunt-tipped lawn darts, the existing molds likely would be destroyed.The number of individual molds involved is not believed to be substantial.An effective date sufficient to permit the exhaustion of existing inventoriesof noncomplying lawn darts is expected to result in no significant increasein discarded packaging material, other printed materials, or noncomplyingsets.In the industry, molds are periodically changed because of age or designmodifications. Given the relatively small number of individual printingplates and molds affected, the Commission expects that the rule will causeno significant change in the disposal of used printing plate material orused molds.The requirements of the rule are not expected to have a significant effecton the materials used in production of packaging of lawn darts, or on theamount of type of materials discarded after the rule. Therefore, the Commissonpreliminary finds that the proposed mandatory rule on lawn darts will causeno siginficant environmental effects. <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Conclusion</ITAG>For the reasons given above, the Commission preliminarily concludes thatthe lawn darts described in the rule proposed below present an unreasonablerisk of skull puncture injuries to children from the mechanical characteristicsof the darts. Further, it appears that there is no feasible consumer productsafety standard that would adequately reduce this risk, and the rule proposedbelow is the least burdensome alternative that will adequately reduce therisk.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 16 CFR Parts 1306 and 1500</ITAG>Consumer protection, recreation, voluntary standards.Therefore, under the authority of the Federal Hazardous Substances Actand the Consumer Product Safety Act, the Commission proposes to amend Title16 of the Code of Federal Regulations as follows:1. The authority citation for Part 1500 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>15 U.S.C. 1261-1276.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1500.86</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>2. Section 1500.86(a)(3) is removed and reserved.3. Section 1500.18(a)(4) is revised to read as follows: (Paragraph (a)introductory text is republished).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1500.18</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Banned toys and other banned articles intended for use by children.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Toys and other children's articles presenting mechanical hazards.</T3>Under the authority of section 2(f)(1)(D) of the act and pursuant to provisionsof section 3(e) of the act, the Commission has determined that the followingtypes of toys or other articles intended for use by children present amechanical hazard within the meaning of section 2(s) of the act becausein normal use, or when subjected to reasonably foreseeable damage or abuse,the design or manufacture presents an unreasonable risk of personal injuryor illness:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(4) Lawn darts that have a rigid elongated tip and that are intended tobe used outdoors and thrown into the air so that they will stick in theground, as well as similar products for outdoor use that are thrown inthe same manner and are capable of sticking in the ground. The Commissionhas determined that the benefits expected from this regulation bear a reasonablerelationship to its costs and that the regulation imposes the least burdensomerequirement which prevents or adequately reduces the risk of skull punctureinjury to children.4. A new part 1306 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1306_BAN OF HAZARDOUS LAWN DARTS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1306.1 Scope and application.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1306.2 Purpose.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1306.3 Banned hazardous products.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1306.4 Findings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1306.5 Effective date.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>15 U.S.C. 2058-2060.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1306.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope and application.</ITAG>(a) In this Part 1306, the Commission declares lawn darts and similar products,described in andSection; 1306.3, that are intended to stick in the groundor capable of sticking into the ground, to be banned hazardous products.(b) Lawn darts and similar products that are articles intended for useby children and that otherwise would be covered by this ban are not coveredby this ban, but are banned under the Federal Hazardous Substances Actat 16 CFR 1500.18(a)(4).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1306.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose.</ITAG>The purpose of this rule is to prohibit the sale of lawn darts and similarproducts that present an unreasonable risk of skull puncture injuries tochildren.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1306.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Banned hazardous substances.</ITAG>Any lawn dart that has a rigid elongated tip and that is intended to beused outdoors and thrown into the air so that it will stick in the ground,and any similar products for outdoor use that is thrown in the same mannerand is capable of sticking in the ground, is a banned hazardous product.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1306.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Findings. </ITAG>(a) The Commission has found that the products covered by this ban arebeing distributed in commerce and present an unreasonable risk of injury.(b) <T3>The degree and nature of the risk of injury. </T3>(1) The risk thatthe Commission intends to address in this proceeding is that of punctureof the skulls of children caused by lawn darts being used by children.The potential for these devices to cause these types of injuries is notnecessarily obvious to parents or other adults who might buy these itemsor allow their children to play with them, much less to the children themselves.This is because the tips do not appear sharp enough to present an obviousdanger of puncture. The combined factors of weight, the rigid shaft, thespeed that the dart is traveling at the time of impact, and the thicknessof the child's skull at the point of impact present the risk. The Commissionhas concluded that lawn darts that are intended to stick in the groundall have the potential for skull puncture during reasonably foreseeableuse or misuse. (2) The elimination of lawn darts that can cause skull puncture injuriescan be expected to also eliminate, or greatly reduce in severity, the puncturesof other parts of the body, as well as the lacerations, fractures, andother injuries that have been associated with lawn darts in the past. TheCommission's staff estimates that about 670 injuries from lawn darts aretreated in U.S. hospital emergency rooms per year. Approximately 57 percentof the injuries involved the head, face, eye, or ear. Approximately 4 percentof the injured victims were hospitalized (on the average, approximately25 per year), including all of the injuries reported as fractures. Over75 percent of the victims were under age 15; about 50 percent of the victimswere under age 10. In addition, Commission records dating back to 1970show that at least three children have been killed by injuries associatedwith lawn darts. These children were 4, 7, and 13 years old. In the 25lawn dart injury reports for which information about the user of the lawndarts was available, the reports indicated that children were playing withthe lawn darts, despite the ban and exemption which were developed to keepthe product out of the hands of children. (c) <T3>Products subject to this ban. </T3>(1) Lawn darts are devices thatare intended to be used outdoors and that are designed so that when theyare thrown into the air they will contact the ground point first. Often,lawn darts are used in a game where the darts are thrown at a target orother feature on the ground. The types of lawn darts that have generallybeen available in the past and that have demonstrated their ability tocause skull puncture injuries typically have a metal or weighted plasticbody, on the front of which is an elongated metal shaft, above \1/4\ inchin diameter, which may or may not have a pointed tip. These darts havea shaft on the rear of the body containing plastic fins. These darts areabout a foot in length and weigh about one quarter to one half pound. Thesedarts are intended to stick in the ground when thrown. Prior to this rule,annual sales of these lawn darts were estimated at 1-1.5 million units.(2) The Commission has become aware of two additional general types ofgames using devices that could fall within the general understanding ofthe term lawn darts. (i) One type uses a soft, usually plastic, body with an approximately hemisphericalmushroom- or tulip-shaped head of relatively large diameter that is weightedso that the large end impacts the ground. This type of ``dart'' is notintended to stick in the ground on impact, and the Commission concludesthat this type does not present a significant risk of skull puncture injuries.(ii) The other type of lawn dart that the Commission does not believe presentsa significant risk of skull puncture injuries resembles the shape of theolder type of lawn dart, but is lighter and the tip is made of a relativelysoft and flexible material of about the consistency of a pencil eraser.Furthermore, the tip is mounted in a flexible base so that the tip as awhole can also flex. This type of dart is not intended to stick, nor isit capable of sticking, in the ground. These darts are designed to be usedwith a target that will entrap a dart that falls on the target. (3) The Commission does not believe that it is feasible to describe a setof physical characteristics for darts that are capable of causing skullpuncture injuries, because of the large number of combinations of weight,materials, tip diameter, tip shape, etc., that could be used to performthe function of sticking in the ground. Nevertheless, there is a commonthread that connects the darts that can cause skull puncture injuries tochildren; all these darts are intended to stick in the ground. Conversely,the known darts that are not intended to stick in the ground are believedto be incapable of causing skull puncture injuries under reasonably foreseeablecircumstances. (4) The definition for lawn darts in this rule is not intended to includearrows or horseshoes, nor is it intended to apply to indoor dart gamesthat user a vertically-placed target, such as ``English darts'' or ``Americandarts.'' It does not cover the two types of ``darts'' described above thatare not intended to stick, nor capable of sticking, in the ground. (d) <T3>The need of the public for lawn darts, and the effects of the ruleon their utility, cost, and availability. </T3>The need of the public forlawn darts is for recreational enjoyment. Products similar to lawn dartsbut that are not intended to stick in the ground and are not capable ofcausing skull puncture injuries will continue to be available. Also, substituterecreational enjoyment can be obtained from other products. Lawn dartssubject to the rule will not be available through commercial channels afterthe effective date of the ban. (e) <T3>Alternatives. </T3>(1) The Commission considered various labeling requirementsand limitations on the marketing of lawn darts that would be intended todiscourage the marketing of the product to children and the use of theproduct by children. The Commission concluded, however, that these typesof requirements would not preclude completely the use of the product bychildren and would not reduce adequately the risk of injury addressed bythis rule. (2) The Commission also considered the possibility of performance requirementsfor lawn darts to determine which lawn darts present an unreasonable riskof injury of skull penetration to children. The Commission concluded thatthis alternative is not feasible because of the difficulty, and lengthof time required, in determining whether performance requirement adequatelyidentify the risk. (f) <T3>Conclusion. </T3>The Commission finds: (1) That this rule, including its effective date, is reasonably necessaryto eliminate or adequately reduce the unreasonable risk of skull puncturewounds to children associated with lawn darts. (2) That issuance of the rule is in the public interest. (3) That no feasible consumer product safety standard would adequatelyprotect the public from the unreasonable risk associated with lawn darts.(4) That the benefits expected from this rule bear a reasonable relationshipto its costs. (5) That the rule imposes the least burdensome requirement which preventsor adequately reduces the risk of injury for which the rule is being promulgated.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1306.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Effective date.</ITAG>This rule is effective [insert date 30 days after publication of finalrule] and applies to all lawn darts in the chain of distribution on orafter that date.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: July 19, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Sadye E. Dunn,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary, Consumer Product Safety Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">List of Relevant Documents</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">[This list will not be published in the Code of Federal Regulations.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Snow to Sen. Albert Gore, May 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Snow, June 4, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Schmeltzer, AED/CAL, to various persons associatedwith the lawn dart industry to invite them to a meeting on July 17, 1987;July 2, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Schmeltzer, D., AED/CA, to Noble, D., Director, OPMB,``Lawn Darts,'' dated July 15, 1987, with attachments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Attachment A_Proposed Ban of Lawn Darts, </ITAG><T4>Federal Register, </T4>Vol. 35, No. 223, November 17, 1970.<ITAG tagnum="24">Final rule on Lawn Dart Ban and Exemption, </ITAG><T4>Federal Register, </T4>Vol. 35, No. 246, December 19, 1970.<ITAG tagnum="24">Attachment B_Memorandum from Karels, T.R., ECSS, to Nelson, D., CARM,``Lawn Darts_PSA andplusmin;2804'', dated June 22, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Attachment C_Memorandum from Kennedy, J., EPHF, to Nelson, C., CARM,``PSA 2826; Lawn darts in Combination Game Sets,'' July 13, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum of July 17, 1987, meeting.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Snow to Chairman Terrence Scanlon, July 18, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum to CPSC Regional Centers from Robert G. Poth, CARM, ``Requestto Notify Retail Stores of Noncomplying and Questionable Law Dart SalesPractices,'' July 22, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Snow to K-Mart International Headquarters, July26, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Schmeltzer to AEDCA, to persons invited to the July17, 1987, meeting who did not attend; July 27, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Schmeltzer, AED/CAL, to persons who attended theJuly 17, 1987, meeting, July 28, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">CPSC News Release: ``Lawn Darts Can Cause Serious or Fatal Head Injuriesand Death'', Released July 30, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Ray, D., and Bennett, L., ECPA, to Tyrrell, E., OPMB,``Lawn Dart Accident Costs,'' August 4, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter to David Snow from David Schmeltzer, AED Compliance and AdministrativeLitigation, August 6, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from Marcella V. Ridenour, Dept. of Physical Education, TempleUniversity, to John Preston, CPSC, transmitting the following materialon lawn darts:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Patent 2,976,042 (March 21, 1961).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. </ITAG><T3>First National Bank of Dwight v. Regent Sports Corp., </T3>7th Cir.No. 85-2834 (October 22, 1986).<ITAG tagnum="24">3. </ITAG><T3>Trial, </T3>``Lawn darts: a dangerous game,'' February 1985.<ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from John Preston, ESMT, to Chris Nelson, CARM, ``Responseto PSA Request No. 2837'', August 11, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Warren A. Mathers, EPHF, to Christine Nelson, CARM,``PSA 2846; Lawn Darts_Develop Labeling Criteria,'' August 13, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Snow to David Schmeltzer, AED/CAL, August 18, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Koeser, R., to Tyrrell, E.A., OPMB, ``Lawn Dart OptionsPackage'', August 19, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Materials for June-July Compliance Status Briefing, August 20, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Ulsamer, A.G., to Tyrrell, E.A., EX-PB, ``HS Recommendationson Lawn Darts'', August 20, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Tinsworth, D., and Crigler, W., EPHA, to Tyrrell,E., EX-PB, ``Lawn Dart Injury Data'', August 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from John D. Preston, ESMT, to Elaine A. Tyrrell, EX-PB,``ES Comments on Options Package for Lawn Darts,'' August 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Poth, B., CARM, to Tyrrell, E., OPMB, ``Lawn DartsOption Package'', August 27, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Dale R. Ray, ECPA, to Elaine Tyrrell, OPMB, ``LawnDarts,'' August 27, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Walton, W.W., ES, to Tyrrell, E., EXPM, ``Lawn DartsOption Package'', August 28, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Bob Poth, CARM, to Elaine Tyrrell, OPM, ``Lawn DartsOption Package,'' September 1, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Briefing package from Elaine Tyrrell, Project Manager, to the Commission,September 10, 1987, with attachments:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab A_Memorandum from D. Schmeltzer, AED/CA, to Noble, D., OPMB, ``LawnDarts,'' with attachments, July 15, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab B_Memorandum from Tinsworth, D., EPHA, to Tyrrell, E., EX-PB,``Lawn Dart Injury Data,'' August 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab C_Memorandum from Ray, D., and Bennett, L., ECPA, to Tyrrell,E., OPMB, ``Lawn Dart Accident Costs,'' August 4, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab D_CPSC News Release July 30, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab E_Memorandum from Poth, B., CARM, to Tyrrell, E., OPMB, ``LawDarts Options Package,'' August 28, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab F_Memorandum from Ulsamer, A., to Tyrrell, E., EX-PB, HS Recommendationson ``Lawn Darts,'' August 20, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> _Memorandum from Koeser, R., to Tyrrell, E., OPMB, ``Lawn Dart OptionsPackage,'' August 19, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> _Memorandum from Ray, D., ECPA, to Tyrrell, E., OPMB, ``Lawn Darts,''August 27, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter to John R. Fanone, Esq., from Robert G. Poth, CARM, September11, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Commission vote sheet on lawn darts options, September 16, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">CPSC staff memorandum from Douglas L. Noble, Acting AED for Complianceand Administrative Litigation, to the Commission, ``Lawn Darts OptionsPackage_Update of CPSC's Investigation and Industry's Response to RequestedVoluntary Actions,'' with restricted attachment, September 16, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Paul H. Rubin, AED for Economic Analysis, to the Commission,``Lawn Darts Options Package,'' September 16, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Materials for lawn dart update briefing, September 17, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Transcript, Commission meeting of September 17, 1987 (43 pp.).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Petition from David A. Snow asking that the CPSC ban lawn darts (PetitionHP 87-3), received in the Office of the Secretary September 23, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Robert G. Poth, CARM, to Elaine A.Tyrrell, ProjectManager, ``Enforcement Resources Associated with Options 1 andamp; 2 of LawnDarts Options Package of September 10, 1987,'' September 23, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum of Ross Koeser, Acting AEDFO, from Elizabeth Hendricks,FO, ``Lawn Dart Surveillance by States,'' September 25, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from OPMB, ``Follow-Up Information Requested at the Briefingof September 17, 1987, dated September 28, 1987, with attachments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Memorandum from Robert G. Poth, CARM, to Elaine Tyrrell, Project Manager,``Enforcement Resources Associated with Options 1 andamp; 2 of Lawn DartsOptions Package of September 10, 1987,'' September 23, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Memorandum from Dale R. Ray, ECPA, to Elaine Tyrrell, OPMB, ``ProjectResource Estimate,'' September 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Memorandum from Andrew G. Ulsamer, AED/HS, to Elaine Tyrrell, ProjectManager, ``Health Sciences Resources for Law Dart Options,'' September21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Minutes of Commission meeting, October 1, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Transcription of portion of October 1, 1987, Commission meeting (1p.).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Statement of Commissioner Anne Graham on lawn dart decision, October2, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from James V. Lacy, General Counsel, to David Snow, October6, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Log of telephone conversation between Douglas Noble, CPSC, and MiltonBush of the Sporting Goods Manufacturing Association, October 6, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memo record from John Preston, ESMT, to Pat Fairall, ESMT, ``VoluntaryStandard for Lawn Darts,'' October 8, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Log of a conversation between Nick Marchica and Elaine Tyrrell, CPSC,and Milton Bush, SGMA, October 13, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Transcript of Commission meeting of October 15, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26"><T4>Federal Register</T4> notice, ``Lawn Darts; Advance Notice of ProposedRulemaking; Request for Comments and Data,'' 52 FR 38935 (October 20, 1987).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from the Secretary of the Commission to David Snow, advisingof the status of Petition HP 87-3, November 3, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Log of a telephone conversation between James V. Lacy, General Counsel,and Milton Bush of the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association (SGMA),November 4, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter dated November 5, 1987, to James V. Lacy, General Counsel,from Milton Bush, SGMA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from James V. Lacy, General Counsel to Milton M. Bush, SGMA,November 13, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from John Preston, ESMT, to Elaine Tyrrell, EX-PB, ``ESResources/Tasks Concerning Rulemaking on Lawn Darts,'' undated.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from D. Schmeltzer, AEDCA, to Elaine Tyrrell, OPMB, ``LawnDarts,'' February 5, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Briefing package from Elaine Tyrrell, OPMB, to the Commission, ``LawnDarts: Follow-Up to Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR),'' February8, 1988, with attachments:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab A_Copy of ANPR.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab B_Memorandum from Tinsworth, D., EPHA, to Tyrrell, EXPM, ``LawnDart Injuries,'' January 20, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab C_Memorandum from Deppa, S.W., and White, S., EPHF, to Tyrrell,E.A., EX-PB, ``Evaluation of Lawn Dart Provision Effectiveness,'' January29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab D_Memorandum from Karels, T.R., ECSS, to Tyrrell, E., EX-P, ``LawnDarts,'' January 20, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab E_Memorandum from Nelson, C., CARM, to Tyrrell, E., OPMB, ``LawnDart Compliance Survey,'' January 20, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab F_Log of meeting held by the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association(SGMA) with industry representatives on lawn darts, December 10, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab G_Public comments in response to the ANPR:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> A. Letter from Bush, M., Esq., Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association,December 17, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> B. Comments of Consumer Federation of America, submitted by M. Fise,December 21, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> C. Letter to the Editor from C. Mesneck, September 29, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> D. Letter from Heslin, M., Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection,December 8, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> E. Letter from Vultaggio, S., Regent Sports Corp., to D. Schmeltzer,CPSC, November 10, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> F. Letter from G. Hostetler, November 16, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> G. Letter from S. Coberly, November 3, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> H. Letter from R. Lamontagne, November 16, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> I. Letter from P. Spaeth, New York State Department of Law, to DougNoble, CPSC, October 8, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> J. Letter from C. Bouris, December 1, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> K. Letter from R. Archer, Kent Sporting Goods Co., Inc., to D. Schmeltzer,CPSC, November 9, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab H_Memorandum from D. Shifflet, OIPA, to Noble, D., OPMB, ``LawnDart Consumer Alert,'' February 2, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Additional comments on lawn darts:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73"/><T3>Commenter </T3>and <T3>Date</T3><ITAG tagnum="26">Carl Meseck, September 29, 1987</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">N. Mease, October 29, 1987</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">H. Hatch, October 5, 1987</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Rochester City Council, January 20, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Consumer Federation of America, March 7, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">New York Department of Law, March 24, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Commission vote sheet on lawn darts options, February 9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Minutes of Commission meeting of March 2, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">CPSC news release, ``CPSC to Continue Its Formal Rulemaking Processon Lawn Darts,'' March 2, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Anne Graham, Commissioner, ``Statement on Lawn Dart Decision,'' March2, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Jack Kramer, EPHA, to Elaine Tyrrell, EXPM, ``LawnDarts: Head and Eye Injuries,'' March 30, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">News from CPSC, ``CPSC sues Sears to halt improper sale of lawn darts;Sears agrees to stop all sales,'' March 30, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from D. Schmeltzer, AEDCA, to National Retail Merchants Association,April 19, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Commission ballot vote sheet, ``Lawn Darts_Additional Option,'' April21, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Douglas L. Noble, OPMB, to the Commission, ``LawnDarts,'' April 22, 1988, with attached memorandum from John Preston, ESMT,``A Test to Define the Scope of a Ban of Lawn Darts,'' April 21, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Report from Eric Allely, M.D., ``An Approximation of the Probabilityof Penetration of the Human Skull by a Lawn Dart,'' with a cover letter,April 25, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Log of meeting of new ASTM task group for lawn darts on May 3, 1988,prepared by John Preston, ESMT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Purohit, V., and Cohn, M., HSHE, ``The probabilityof penetration of a child's skull by a lawn dart,'' May 16, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from Jan Kinney, SGMA to Wendy Dyer, ASTM, May 16, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Minutes of Commission meeting of May 17, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Jack Kramer, EPHA, to Elaine Tyrrell, OPMB, ``LawnDart Injuries,'' May 24, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Minutes of Commission meeting of May 25, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Statement by Commissioner Anne Graham on decision to ban lawn darts,May 25, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Statement of Chairman Terrence Scanlon on lawn darts, May 25, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Opinion of Commissioner Carole G. Dawson regarding Commission actionto ban lawn darts, May 25, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memo record from Jack Kramer, EPHA, to Elaine Tyrrell, EXPM, ``LawnDarts,'' May 26, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Karels, T., ``Preliminary Regulatory Analyses, Economic and EnvironmentalAssessments _ Proposed Mandatory Rules on Lawn Darts,'' June 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Karels, T., ``Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis of a MandatoryRule for Lawn Darts,'' June 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Letter from David Snow to Commissioner Carol Dawson, June 9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum from Christine Nelson, CARM to Carl Blechschmidt, OPMB,``Proposed Ban of Lawn Darts,'' June 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Vote sheet from Harleigh Ewell, OGC, to the Commission ``Draft <T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice to Propose a Prohibition of The Sale ofLawn Darts,'' June 30, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Memorandum to the Commission from Carl Blechschmidt, Program Manager,``Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for Lawn Darts,'' June 30, 1988, with attachments:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab A_Memorandum from Karels, T.R., ECSS, to Blechschmidt, C.W., EXPM,``Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis: Lawn Darts,'' June 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> _Memorandum from Karels, T.R., ECSS, to Blechschmidt, C.W., EXPM,``Preliminary Regulatory Analyses and Assessments _ Lawn Darts,'' June28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Tab B_Draft Federal Register notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Minutes of Commission meeting, July 13, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">News from CPSC, ``CPSC obtains consent decree to halt improper saleof lawn darts,'' July 18, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">In-depth Investigation Reports:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">760603BEP7002</ITAG><P>760615BEP7009</P><P>760727BEP7009</P><P>790709BEP0033</P><P>790709BEP0034</P><P>790712BEP0007</P><P>790716BEP0002</P><P>790726BEP0038</P><P>790801BEP0007</P><P>800809BEP0002</P><P>840716CBC3338</P><P>840719CBC1263</P><P>841107DAL5011</P><P>850304BEP0008</P><P>870415WES5054</P><P>870824CAA0177</P><P>870916CAA0145</P><P>871007CEN0008</P><P>871221CAA0081</P><P>871222CAA0082</P><P>880112CAA097</P><P>880318CAA0245</P><P>880321CEN0740</P><P>880330BEP0002</P><P>880401CAA0278</P><P>880406WES4004</P><P>880413CAA0288</P><P>880413CAA0289</P><P>880415CAA0302</P><P>A05478</P><P>A16275</P><P>A21284</P><P>A33558</P><P>A43934</P><P>A43935</P><P>A43936</P><P>A43938</P><ITAG tagnum="73">Reported Incident File:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">B880020A1</ITAG><P>C1A0102A1</P><P>C320025A1</P><P>C4A5021A1</P><P>G4A0154A1</P><P>C635013A1</P><P>C7A0028</P><P>D450030A1</P><P>G001589</P><P>G860558A1</P><P>H190670A1</P><P>H847023</P><P>H847045</P><P>H885051A1</P><P>H891442A1</P><P>1059342</P><P>N0762792</P><P>X281330A1</P><P>X341002A1</P><P>X491009A1</P><P>X890311A1</P><P>X961003A1</P><P>X78479A1</P><P>H350192A1</P><ITAG tagnum="20">Investigation of lawndart injury, June 25, 1974.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-16643 Filed 7-28-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6355-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>