<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881021-0019 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-21-88.f2.A1018</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 204 / Friday, October 21, 1988/ Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Food and Drug Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">21 CFR Parts 312 and 314 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 88N-0359]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Investigational New Drug, Antibiotic, and Biological Drug ProductRegulations; Procedures for Drugs Intended To Treat Life-Threatening andSeverely Debilitating Illnesses </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Food and Drug Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Interim rule; opportunity for public comment.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is issuing interimregulatory procedures designed to speed the availability of new therapiesto desperately ill patients, while preserving appropriate guarantees forsafety and effectiveness. These procedures are intended to facilitate thedevelopment, evaluation, and marketing of such products, especially whereno satisfactory alternative therapies exist. These procedures reflect therecognition that physicians and patients are generally willing to acceptgreater risks or side effects from products that treat life-threateningand severely-debilitating illnesses, than they would accept from productsthat treat less serious illnesses. These procedures also reflect the recognitionthat the benefits of the drug need to be evaluated in light of the severityof the disease being treated. The procedures apply to products intendedto treat acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), some cancers, and otherlife-threatening or severely-debilitating illnesses. FDA is issuing theseprocedures as an interim rule with opportunity for public comment.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Interim rule effective October 21, 1988; comments by December20, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA-305)Food and Drug Administration, Rm. 4-62, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD20857.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2><ITAG tagnum="15">Steven H. Unger, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD-362),Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 301-295-8049,</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">   or <ITAG tagnum="15">Steven F. Falter, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (HFB-130),Food and Drug Administration, 8800 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892,301-295-8046.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Expediting the availability of promisingnew therapies has been a major priority of FDA over the past several years.In the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of May 22, 1987 (52 FR 19466), FDA issued newregulations designed to increase the availability to desperately ill patientsof promising investigational new drug (IND) and biological products beforegeneral marketing begins. This rulemaking initiative, known as the treatmentIND program, was endorsed by the President's Task Force on Regulatory Relief,chaired by Vice President George Bush. The final rule has received broadsupport from the medical and patient communities. The significance andutility of the treatment IND program has also been recognized and endorsedby the President's Commission on the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)Epidemic. The treatment IND regulations became effective on June 22, 1987. Sincethat time, seven promising experimental therapies have been made availableto patients stricken with AIDS, cancer, Parkinson's disease, and otherserious conditions. In February 1988, the American Medical Associationand FDA cosponsored a major national conference intended to educate physiciansand health care organizations about the treatment IND program. FDA hasalso publicized specific treatment IND approval actions in both medicaland lay journals (Refs. 1 through 8). The treatment IND program is part of FDA's comprehensive efforts to facilitatethe development and availability of significant new therapies. For example,through its implementation of the Orphan Drug Act, enacted in 1983, FDAhas given special emphasis to potential new therapies for rare diseasesor conditions. Since 1983, FDA has granted orphan drug designation to over200 products, many of which are for life-threatening illnesses. (Orphandrug designation provides the commercial sponsor with certain economicincentives to encourage drug development, including tax credits for thecost of clinical development and exclusive marketing rights for the designatedindication upon marketing approval.) FDA has approved for marketing 27such orphan products, including therapies to treat such life-threateningillnesses as leukemia and AIDS. FDA has also instituted a number of management improvements designed toexpedite the evaluation of AIDS-related products in particular. These includeestablishment of a top ``1-AA'' priority for the review of all AIDS products,and the creation of two new divisions_one for drugs and one for biologicals_togive special focus to the review of such products. FDA's actions have ledto the approval in record time of the first drug, zidovudine (formerlycalled AZT), to treat the AIDS virus, as well as approval for human testingof the first potential AIDS vaccines. Building on these achievements, on August 3, 1988, Vice President Bush,in his capacity as chairman of the Presidential Task Force on RegulatoryRelief, requested FDA to develop procedures for expediting the marketingof new therapies intended to treat AIDS and other life-threatening illnesses.This charge recognized the urgency felt by desperately ill patients andtheir families. The charge was directed to FDA as the Federal agency thatregulates the transfer of the fruits of biomedical research to the marketplace.The procedures contained in this notice respond to the Vice President'scharge. In developing these procedures, FDA met informally with representativesof AIDS interest groups as well as with representatives of consumer, healthprofessional, academic, orphan drug, and industry organizations. FDA alsomet informally with leadership of the National Institutes of Health. As described further below, FDA is issuing these new procedures as an interimrule, effective immediately, with an opportunity for public comment. Highlightsof the interim rule are summarized below, followed by a section-by-sectiondescription of the new procedures.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Highlights of the Regulations</ITAG>New procedures are being codified as part of FDA's IND regulations, byadding a new Subpart E consisting of andSection;andSection; 312.80 through312.88, and by adding a conforming amendment to FDA's new drug application(NDA) regulations, new paragraph (c) of andSection; 314.25. The purpose ofthese new procedures (andSection; 312.80) is to expedite the development,evaluation, and marketing of new therapies intended to treat persons withlife-threatening or severely-debilitating illnesses, especially where nosatisfactory alternative therapies exist. The procedures themselves focuson the entire drug development and evaluation process_from early preclinicaland clinical testing, through FDA evaluation of controlled clinical trialsand marketing applications, to postmarketing surveillance_in order to treatthe entire process as a coherent whole and thereby significantly increaseits overall efficiency.The scope of the new procedures (andSection; 312.81) will apply to new drugs,antibiotics, and biological products that are being studied for their safetyand effectiveness in treating life-threatening or severely-debilitatingillnesses. Within the context of these procedures, the term ``life-threatening''is defined to include diseases where the likelihood of death is high unlessthe course of the disease is interrupted (e.g., AIDS and cancer), as wellas diseases or conditions with potentially fatal outcomes where the endpoint of clinical trial analysis is survival (e.g., increased survivalin persons who have had a stroke or heart attack). The term ``severely-debilitating''refers to diseases or conditions that cause major irreversible morbidity(e.g., blindness or neurological degeneration).A key component of the procedures is early consultation between FDA anddrug sponsors (andSection; 312.82) to seek agreement on the design of necessarypreclinical and clinical studies needed to gain marketing approval. Suchconsultation is intended to improve the efficiency of the process by preventingfalse starts and wasted effort that could otherwise result from studiesthat are flawed in design. Most important, at the end of early (phase 1)clinical testing, FDA and the sponsor will seek to reach agreement on theproper design of phase 2 controlled clinical trials, with the goal thatsuch research will be adequate to provide sufficient data on the product'ssafety and effectiveness to support a decision on its approvability formarketing. Where appropriate, FDA will invite to such meetings one or moreoutside expert scientific consultants or advisory committee members.If the preliminary analysis of test results appears promising, FDA mayask the sponsor (andSection; 312.83) to submit a treatment protocol to bereviewed under the treatment IND regulations. Such a treatment protocol,if submitted and granted, would serve as a bridge between the completionof early stages of clinical trials and final marketing approval.Once phase 2 testing and analysis is completed by the sponsor and a marketingapplication is submitted, FDA will evaluate the data utilizing a medicalrisk-benefit analysis (andSection; 312.84). As part of this evaluation, FDAwill consider whether the benefits of the drug outweigh the known and potentialrisks of the drug and the need to answer remaining questions about risksand benefits of the drug, taking into consideration the severity of thedisease and the absence of satisfactory alternative therapy. In makingdecisions on whether to grant marketing approval for products that havebeen the subject of an end-of-phase 1 meeting under this rule, FDA willusually seek the advice of outside expert scientific consultants or advisorycommittees.As a conforming amendment, a new paragraph (c) is being added to andSection;314.125 of FDA's NDA regulations. This paragraph is designed to make clearthat FDA's evaluation of marketing applications for drugs to treat life-threateningand severely-debilitating diseases will incorporate the criteria beingadded to andSection; 312.84. These criteria include the adoption of a medicalrisk-benefit analysis when assessing the safety and effectiveness of thesedrugs.Finally, when approval or licensing of a product is being granted, FDAmay seek agreement from the sponsor (andSection; 312.85) to conduct certainpostmarketing (phase 4) studies to delineate additional information aboutthe drug's risks, benefits, and optimal use. These studies could include,but would not be limited to, studying different doses or schedules of administrationthan were used in phase 2 studies, use of the drug in other patient populationsor other stages of the disease, and use of the drug over a longer periodof time.These procedures are modeled after the highly successful development, evaluation,and approval of zidovudine, the first drug approved to treat the AIDS virus.Close consultation between FDA, the sponsor, and the National Institutesof Health resulted in efficient preclinical animal testing (2 to 4 weeksin duration), focused phase 1 clinical testing, and a well-designed andconducted multi-center phase 2 clinical trial that provided dramatic evidenceof increased survival in patients with advanced cases of AIDS. Given suchevidence, FDA approved a treatment protocol in 5 days, and marketing approvalin 107 days. Concurrent with approval, the sponsor agreed to conduct phase4 research studying the effects of zidovudine in patients at an earlierstage of the disease. In total, the drug development and evaluation process,which takes an average of 8 years from initial human testing under an INDto final marketing approval, took only 2 years for zidovudine. Althoughthe total development time will vary with different drugs, FDA believesthat the approach contained in these new procedures has great potentialfor increasing significantly the efficiency of the drug development andevaluation process for the drugs affected.Moreover, to the extent that the Commissioner determines that clinicaltrials to treat life-threatening or severely-debilitating diseases arealready underway and are consistent with the requirements of these rules,upon his own initiative and in cooperation with the drug sponsor, he mayrecommend that a marketing application be submitted under the new procedures.In conjunction with these procedures, FDA may, in certain circumstances,undertake focused regulatory research (andSection; 312.86) addressing criticalrate-limiting aspects of the preclinical, chemical/manufacturing, and clinicalphases of drug development and evaluation. The FDA Commissioner and otheragency officials will also actively monitor (andSection; 312.87) the progressof the conduct and evaluation of clinical trials for products covered bythese procedures, and will be involved in facilitating their appropriateprogress.The final provision of these procedures (andSection; 312.88) references applicablesafeguards inherent in existing FDA regulations to ensure patient safetyduring clinical testing and the safety of products following marketingapproval. These safeguards include FDA requirements regarding informedconsent and institutional review boards. These safeguards further includethe review of animal studies prior to initial human testing, and the monitoringof adverse drug experiences during the IND, marketing application, andpostmarketing phases.FDA believes that this program, taken as a whole, establishes a new andinnovative approach to stimulating the development of particularly importantdrugs, while at the same time building on past practices that have provento be successful.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Effective Date and Opportunity for Public Comment</ITAG>For the reasons described below, FDA is issuing these procedures as aninterim rule, with an opportunity for public comment. Because of the urgencyassociated with life-threatening illnesses, the agency intends to beginimplementation of these procedures immediately, but will consider modificationsto them based on issues raised during the comment period and experiencegained under the interim rule.The program established in this interim rule is intended to bring abouta significant improvement in the efficiency of the development, evaluation,and marketing of new therapies for life-threatening and severely-debilitatingillnesses, while preserving appropriate quarantees for safety and effectiveness.Although the program is important, it builds upon managerial and regulatoryoptions available under existing practices and procedures. The opportunityfor early consultation with sponsors on the design of clinical trials,for example, is permissible under the existing investigational new drugreview provisions of FDA's regulations. Because the new program representsa fundamental commitment to expediting the development of innovative products,it is appropriate to identify and describe the components of that programand to codify them for ready reference by affected persons. Moreover, theamendment to Part 314, requiring consideration of risk-benefit criteriain decisions to approve or disapprove these drugs, is consistent with theflexibility granted to the Agency under the statute in determining whethersubstantial evidence of safety and effectiveness has been demonstrated.To the extent that the elements of the program announced today are regardedas new rules, they are within the exception to the Administrative ProcedureAct notice-and-comment requirement for general statements of policy andrules of agency organization, procedure, and practice (5 U.S.C. 553(b)(A)).Moreover, if the new program is regarded as substantive rulemaking, theCommissioner hereby finds good cause for not providing notice and an opportunityto comment prior to its effectiveness. The importance of developing newtherapies for life-threatening diseases has been highlighted in recentyears by the AIDS crisis. In addition, the sustained search by drug researchersfor treatments for many other diseases, including Alzheimer's disease andcancer, merits immediate attention. FDA believes that, as promising newtherapies for these diseases are identified, they must be developed bysponsors and evaluated by the agency as expeditiously as possible. It wouldtherefore be contrary to the public interest to delay the implementationof this program pending the time necessary to engage in the APA's notice-and-commentprocedures, and such delay would also be unnecessary because the programderives from existing regulations that have already been the subject ofnotice and an opportunity for comment (5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B); 21 CFR 10.40(e)).FDA believes, however, that it should invite and consider public commenton its practices and procedures for reviewing investigational new drug,new drug approval, and biologics license applications, including thosedescribed in this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Contents of the Program </ITAG>A. Purpose The drug development process is generally thought of, in simplified terms,as consisting of three phases of human testing to determine if a drug issafe and effective: Phase 1 with 10 to 50 patients to study how the drugis tolerated, metabolized, and excreted; phase 2 with 50 to 200 patientsin which the safety and efficacy of the drug are first evaluated in controlledtrials; and phase 3 with 200 to 1,000 or more patients to confirm and expandupon the safety and efficacy data obtained from the first two phases. (Forpurposes of this discussion, the word ``drug'' is meant to include newdrugs, antibiotic drugs, and biological products.) A recent study of new drug development has documented the percentage ofdrugs whose development is discontinued after each of these phases. Ofthe 174 new chemical entities that entered phase 1 testing under U.S. IND'sbetween 1976 and 1978, 70 percent successfully completed phase 1 and movedon to phase 2, while 33 percent successfully completed phase 2 and movedon to phase 3. At this point the dropout rate slowed considerably, as 27percent successfully completed phase 3 and were submitted to FDA in theform of a marketing application, and 20 percent actually received marketingapproval from the agency (Ref. 9). The three phases describe the usual process of drug development, but theyare not statutory requirements. The basis for marketing approval is theadequacy of the data available; progression through the particular phasesis simply the usual means the sponsor uses to collect the data needed forapproval. The statute itself focuses on the standard of evidence neededfor approval, as derived from adequate and well-controlled clinical investigations,with no mention of phases 1, 2, and 3. FDA believes that if sufficientattention is paid to the quality and amount of data obtained in phase 2,it should be possible to identify early those drugs that represent safeand effective treatments for life-threatening and severely-debilitatingdiseases_and to develop the evidence needed for their marketing_in thecourse of carrying out the first controlled trials. This program is based on that premise. For drugs intended to treat life-threateningand severely debilitating illnesses, it should be possible to reduce thetotal premarket drug development time by designing and conducting phase2 controlled trails that are capable of providing necessary data on thedrug's safety and effectiveness. FDA would analyze data from such studiesutilizing medical risk-benefit considerations appropriate for drugs intendedto treat life-threatening or severely-debilitating illnesses. The treatmentIND, as appropriate, could continue to serve as a bridge between phase2 trials and the point of marketing approval. Drug sponsors might alsoconduct postmarketing (phase 4) studies to delineate additional informationabout the drug's risks, benefits, and optimal use. The FDA Commissionerand other agency officials would actively monitor the process to ensurethat such products are developed by the sponsor and analyzed by the agencyas expeditiously as possible. Section 312.80 of the rule summarizes the program's purpose: to expeditethe development, evaluation, and marketing of new therapies intended totreat persons with life-threatening or severely-debilitating illnesses,especially where no satisfactory alternative therapy exists. As statedin FDA's new drug application regulations (andSection; 314.105(c)), whilethe statutory standards of safety and effectiveness apply to all drugs,the many kinds of drugs that are subject to them, and the wide range ofuses for those drugs, demand flexibility in applying the standards. Inpromulgating this interim rule, FDA has determined that it is appropriateto exercise the broadest flexibility in applying the statutory standards,while preserving appropriate guarantees for safety and effectiveness. Theprocedures contained in this rule reflect the recognition that physiciansand patients are generally willing to accept greater risks or side effectsfrom products that treat life-threatening and severely-debilitating illnesses,than they would accept from products that treat less serious illnesses.These procedures also reflect the recognition that the benefits of thedrug need to be evaluated in light of the severity of the disease beingtreated. The procedures outlined in this notice should be interpreted consistentwith this statement of purpose.B. Scope Section 312.81 of the rule outlines the scope of this rule. The rule appliesto new drug, antibiotic, and biological products being studied for theirsafety and effectiveness in treating life-threatening or severely-debilitatingdiseases. A ``lt life-threatening'' disease is defined as one in which the likelihoodof death is high unless the course of the disease is interrupted (e.g.,progression from asymptomatic HIV infection to symptomatic HIV infection,or further progression to a later stage of AIDS; metastatic cancer; amyotrophiclateral sclerosis). This use of the term ``life-threatening'' plainly includesany disease whose progression is likely to lead to death, especially ina short period of time (e.g., 6 months to 1 year). This section also appliesto any condition in which a study is to be carried out to determine whetherthe treatment has a beneficial effect on survival (e.g., increased survivalafter a stroke or heart attack). The term ``severely-debilitating'' is defined as a disease or conditionthat leads to major irreversible morbidity (e.g., severe functional deficitsin multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease or progressive ankylosing spondylitis;prevention of blindness due to cytomegalovirus infection in AIDS patients).With respect to ``severely-debilitating'' illnesses, the procedures containedin this rule are applicable to those instances where the studies proposedwill examine the treatment's capacity to prevent or reverse what wouldotherwise be irreversible damage, such as putting ankylosing spondylitisinto remission and stopping joint damage and deformity, or preventing blindness.It is in such studies that excellence in study design and an early answerto key questions on safety and effectiveness are especially critical. Theagency notes that there are many other studies that examine symptomaticrelief (e.g., pain of ankylosing spondylitis) rather than irreversiblemorbidity. While products being studied for symptomatic relief of a seriousdisease would likely qualify for treatment IND consideration under andSection;312.34(b)(2), they would not be covered by the procedures contained inthis interim rule. In all of the cases covered by these new procedures, when the end pointsof clinical study relate to survival or prevention of major disability,they are of such great importance that it is imperative that the firstcontrolled clinical trials be designed and conducted as well as possible.If this is not done, preliminary reports of success from poorly designedstudies might make it difficult ever to carry out the proper trials. FDAbelieves it is clearly in the public interest to assure in such situations,to the extent possible, that the first clinical trials be designed so thatthe true merit of the drug or biologic can be evaluated as promptly aspossible. FDA will also expedite the designation of eligible orphan productsto provide additional incentive for their development. The agency recognizes that the scope of these procedures is subject tointerpretation, and the examples given above are illustrative only. FDAintends to be flexible in its implementation of this program and, subjectto available resources, provide early advice when it is sought. The agencyencourages sponsors to consult with FDA on the program's applicabilityto particular products. C. Elements of the Program <T3>1. Early consultation. </T3>A key component to be addressed is earlyconsultation, which is covered in andSection; 312.82 of the rule. In 1987,FDA codified the practice that, upon request of a drug's sponsor, FDA medicalstaff will hold a conference with the sponsor at the end of phase 2 testing.(See andSection; 312.47(b)(1).) The goal of this conference is to reach agreementon a plan of phase 3 testing that will provide the needed remaining evidenceof the drug's safety and efficacy to gain marketing approval. If, however,the evidence obtained from well-planned and well-executed phase 2 researchis sufficient under the statute for marketing approval, there may be noneed for additional phase 3 premarket testing, and the drug can becomeavailable much more rapidly than usual. This is most likely to occur for drugs to treat life-threatening illnesseswhere the relatively small amount of data available at this stage may neverthelessbe sufficient for approval. For example, phase 2 research was sufficientfor approval of zidovudine the only drug approved thus far to treat theAIDS virus. Zidovudine was developed and approved in record time, largelybecause further premarketing (phase 3) studies were not needed to supportsafety and effectiveness following completion of a highly successful well-controlledmulti-center phase 2 study that demonstrated dramatic effects on survival.There have been other circumstances, particularly in the oncology area,where early (phase 2) results were such that additional studies were notneeded to conclude that the drug was effective and that its benefits outweighedits risks. For example, the licensing of alpha interferons to treat hairycell leukemia was based on phase 2 trials that showed partial or completeremission of the disease in 75 to 90 percent of patients. To build upon these successes, FDA is instituting a process for conferencesto be held at the end of phase 1 (rather than waiting until the end ofphase 2) with the sponsors of drugs and biologics intended to treat life-threateningand severely-debilitating illnesses, especially where there are no satisfactoryalternative therapies. The purpose of these conferences will be to reviewthe product's phase 1 test results and phase 2 plans for clinical testing.If enough is known about the drug at that time, agreement would be reachedon a phase 2 testing program (e.g., the design of the studies, the numberof patients to be tested, the end points to be used, and the proposed modeof replication), that would be sufficient to establish the drug's safetyand effectiveness. Where the data resulting from these phase 2 studiesprove sufficient to allow a determination that, on the basis of risk-benefitconsiderations detailed further below, the drug is safe and effective,FDA will approve the drug without further preapproval studies. In thiscase, phase 2 thus obviates the need for further research in phase 3, ifthe phase 2 trials prove successful. Of course, when the results of phase2 research do not provide evidence that fulfills the statutory criteriafor approval, further preapproval studies will be necessary. Because the end-of-phase 1 conference server the same function (exceptearlier in the process) as an end-of-phase 2 conference would otherwiseserve, FDA will apply the same procedures to both meetings, as codifiedin andSection; 312.47(b)(1). This includes provision for documenting theagreements reached at the meeting. In order to provide the broadest possibleexpertise available, FDA may invite to the meeting one or more of its advisorycommittee members or other scientific consultants. The sponsor may, ofcourse, also bring scientific consultants to the meeting. With respect to study design, the agency recognizes that there has beensome confusion about the role of placebo-controlled studies in patientswith a life-threatening disease. FDA believes that a requirement for placebo-controlledstudies is <T3>not </T3>appropriate in those situations where there is known to bean effective therapy, for the stage of disease or condition under investigation,that can improve survival or prevent irreversible morbidity. For example,in the case of symptomatic AIDS or advanced AIDS-related complex (ARC),where zidovudine is known to improve survival, it would not be appropriateto compare a new drug with placebo. Rather, the new drug should be comparedwith zidovudine. It would also be possible to compare the new drug pluszidovudine with zidovudine alone, but in neither case would it be necessaryto deny patients therapy with zidovudine which is known to improve survival.In contrast, where no therapy has been shown to be effective, it is scientificallyand ethically appropriate to randomize patients to test drug and placebo.This was done with zidovudine and, by providing early and clear evidenceof benefit in terms of improved survival, enabled FDA to confer the rapidapproval that made the drug widely available to AIDS patients. The Institute of Medicine, in its recent report entitled, ``ConfrontingAIDS: Update 1988,'' emphasized the importance of controlled clinical trialsas the ``fastest, most efficient way to determine what treatments work''(Executive Summary at page 19; Report at page 139) (Ref. 10). As the reportcontinues, ``Conducting well-designed trials from the beginning will benefitmore patients, sooner, than any other approach. Poorly designed trials,or administering drugs without controls and `observing' the course of thedisease, risk being inconclusive or drawing incorrect conclusions.'' (Reportat page 139) (Ref. 10). FDA fully supports the early initiation of well-designedphase 2 controlled clinical trials as the most efficient mechanism of evaluatingtreatments for the desperately ill.When planning phase 2 studies, it will be particularly important to makeoptimal use of pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic studies carried out in phase1. Such phase 1 data are particularly useful in selecting the best dose(s)and dosing intervals for phase 2 testing. Therefore, FDA input should behelpful in the design of phase 1 studies also. FDA can also make the drug development process more efficient by interactingwith the drug sponsor, even before phase 1 testing begins, to help identifythe animal studies necessary to assess the toxicity of the new drug andassure that clinical studies can be initiated with reasonable assuranceof safety. In consulting with sponsors on animal studies, FDA takes intoaccount the seriousness of the disease to be treated and the nature ofthe clinical studies planned. In this way, FDA involvement can facilitatethe initiation of trials in human patients as early as the safety studiesin animals permit, thereby reducing potential barriers to innovation atthis early but important stage of new pharmaceutical development. For example, using this process, some new AIDS drugs have been able toenter clinical testing after animal studies that were 4 weeks long or lessin duration, and the preclinical animal studies completed before initialhuman use of zidovudine were 2 to 4 weeks long. By working closely withthe sponsor, FDA can suggest the minimum amount of preclinical testingneeded to go forward without compromising the safety of clinical studyparicipants. Unnecessary animal studies can be avoided, animal lives canbe spared, and the sponsor can move the drug into clinical testing in theshortest possible time. Moreover, early FDA involvement can also shortenthe time it takes the agency to review and IND submission and lessen thelikelihood of FDA placing the application on clinical hold. <T3>2. Treatment IND's.</T3> Section 312.83 of the rule outlines the roleof the treatment IND in the context of this overall program. As codifiedin andSection;andSection; 312.34 and 312.35, treatment IND's are intended topermit the wider use of promising experimental drugs for serious and immediatelylife-threatening illnesses in patients who lack satisfactory alternativetherapy. Within the drug development process, treatment IND's can providea bridge between the completion and initial analysis of promising phase2 studies and the point of marketing approval. Thus, when early evidencefrom phase 2 indicates that a drug for a life-threatening or severely-debilitatingillness is promising, FDA will actively work with the sponsor to evaluatethe appropriateness of a treatment protocol. This approach was used duringthe development of zidovudine, and allowed wide availability of the drugto over 4,000 patients while the marketing application was being assembledby the sponsor and reviewed by FDA. In addition, FDA will continue to workactively to educate physicians and drug sponsors on how to utilize thetreatment IND process most effectively. <T3>3. Risk-benefit analysis.</T3> Section 312.84(a) of the rule providesthat FDA's application of the statutory standards for marketing approvalshall recognize the need for a medical risk-benefit judgment in makingthe final decision on approvability. As part of this evaluation, consistentwith the statement of purpose in andSection; 312.80, FDA will consider whetherthe benefits of the drug outweigh the known and potential risks of thedrug and the need to answer remaining questions about risks and benefitsof the drug, taking into consideration the severity of the disease andthe absence of satisfactory alternative therapy. While the statute uses the terms safety and effectiveness, rather thanrisks and benefits, the decision on whether to approve a drug inherentlyrepresents a medical risk-benefit judgment. The agency recognizes thatsafety and effectiveness are not absolute (i.e., not all drugs are freeof risk or have unequivocal benefits), but must be assessed in light ofwhat condition the drug treats. This is particularly true in the case ofdrugs to treat life-threatening diseases, where drugs that are quite toxicmay nevertheless be considered safe under the circumstances. In carrying out the statutory mandate, FDA will consider the seriousnessof the disease being treated in balancing risks and benefits. For example,as a class, oncologic drugs are highly toxic, but this is acceptable whenthey are used to treat illnesses for which they represent the only availablemethod of treatment and when they can have a favorable influence on survivalor on intractable symptoms. Moreover, dramatic responses (i.e., great benefit),especially on significant end points like survival or progression to aninevitably fatal stage of illness, make it easier to conclude that thebenefits of treatment outweigh its risks, even if not all important questionsabout the drug are answered. Clearly, for a life-threatening illness, arelatively high level of known risk and some uncertainty about potentialrisk from the drug can be acceptable in exchange for the improved survivalprovided by effective drug treatment for a condition that, left untreated,would result in death. Similarly, for the same life-threatening illnesses,evidence of effectiveness must be weighed against risks of the drug andthe knowledge that death would result in the absence of treatment.Section 312.84(b) of the rule provides that the agency will usually seekthe advice of outside expert consultants or advisory committees in reachingits conclusions. That section also provides that FDA will notify the membersof the relevant standing advisory committee of the filing of a marketingapplication covered by this rule, and its availability for review.    In seeking to utilize phase 2 data for final decisionmaking, FDA wouldbe trying to increase the likelihood that a safe and effective drug, especiallyone that affects mortality or major irreversible morbidity, would be shownsafe and effective in the shortest possible time by assuring that the initialstudies are adequate to do this_i.e., to provide evidence, even thoughderived from a limited data base, that would be sufficient to reach a benefit-riskjudgment. FDA's goal is to be able to reach a scientifically defensibledecision based on the results of well-designed phase 2 controlled clinicaltrials. If, on the basis of phase 2 testing, a therapy is found to effectivelytreat a life-threatening disease for which no other therapy exists, itwould not be appropriate to continue premarketing research into phase 3.However, poorly designed phase 2 studies serve to retard the drug developmentprocess.    If FDA concludes that the data presented are not sufficient for marketingapproval, andSection; 312.84(b) of the rule provides that FDA will issuea letter to the sponsor describing the deficiencies in that application,including why the results of the research design agreed to under andSection;312.82 of this rule, or in subsequent meetings, did not provide sufficientevidence for marketing approval. Such letter will also describe any recommendationsmade by the advisory committee regarding the application.    To increase the likelihood that phase 2 testing can provide sufficientresults, sponsors could need to plan phase 2 studies that are somewhatlarger and more extensive than is currently the norm, including a modefor replication of key findings. Moreover, to avoid missing an effect byusing too little drug, or to avoid studying a dose that proves toxic, itmay be necessary to study several doses in the first formal trials, anapproach that may require a larger study but can plainly save time, therebyenabling physicians to treat patients with life-threatening illnesses morerapidly. However, it should be appreciated that is a drug has only minoror inconsistent therapeutic benefits, its positive effects may be missedin this stage of clinical testing, even if the drug ultimately proves tobe beneficial following more extensive phase 3 trials.    The issue of replication requires careful consideration. The requirementin the statute for adequate and well-controlled ``clinical investigation<T3>s</T3>'' (21 U.S.C. 355(d) (emphasis added)) has long been interpretedto mean that the effectiveness of a drug should be supported by more thanone well-controlled clinical trial and carried out by independent investigators.This interpretation is also consistent with the general scientific demandfor replicability to ensure reliability of study results. Therefore, asa general requirement, the clinical trials submitted in a marketing application_includingtrials on products covered by this rule_must include studies by more thanone independent investigator, each of whom has studied a number of patientsadequate to generate statistically reliable results.    When applying the statutory requirement of ``adequate and well-controlledinvestigations'' to a drug for a life-threatening or severely-debilitatingdisease, FDA will consider the quality of the data submitted, includingthe assurance of the data's consistency, reliability, and reproducibility.There have been a few unusual instances in which a particularly persuasivemulti-center study has been accepted in support of a claim of increasedsurvival because the study was, due to its design and dramatic and reliableresults, considered highly persuasive; therefore, replication was not requiredfor ethical reasons. One such example was the approval of zidovudine totreat AIDS patients (discussed earlier in this preamble). A second exampleinvolved the approval of timolol for reduction of post-infarction mortality,where a major effect on mortality was demonstrated in a large multi-centerstudy. The timolol study was very persuasive because of excellent design,minimal or no problems during execution of the study, and a high degreeof statistical significance associated with the critical finding.    In both these instances, the sufficiency of a multi-center study for marketingapproval was based on the research being well-designed and well-conducted,and a dramatic increase in survival of the patients using the drug. Underthese circumstances, FDA believed it would be unethical to repeat the trial.FDA would consider applying the same principle to other such cases in whichthe outcome of a multi-center study demonstrated a consistently dramaticincrease in survival among independently evaluable study sites and whererepetition of the study would be unethical. However, the agency cautionsthat persuasively dramatic results are rare and that two entirely independentstudies will generally be required. Sponsors should therefore plan in advancea strategy for replication of key findings through a second well-controlledstudy. Such replication need not delay approval where a sponsor carriesout all necessary clinical studies concurrently.Finally, andSection;312.84(d) of the rule provides that marketing applicationssubmitted under the procedures contained in this section will be subjectto the requirements and procedures contained in 21 CFR Part 314 or Part600, as well as those in this interim rule. FDA has also added a conformingamendment to andSection;314.125 of the new drug application regulations,noting that for drugs intended to treat life-threatening or severely-debilitatingillnesses that are developed in accordance with andSection;andSection;312.80through 312.88, the criteria contained in paragraphs (b)(3), (4), and (5)of andSection;314.125 shall be applied according to the considerations containedin andSection;312.84. While FDA can contribute to the design of the controlled clinical trials,and actively urge that such trials be pursued, the agency has no directcontrol over the pace at which trials are initiated and completed. Successof drug development depends on the willingness of the sponsor and clinicalinvestigators to devote the necessary time and resources to complete thestudies expeditiously. <T3>4. Phase 4 studies. </T3>Section 312.85 of the rule describes the roleof phase 4 studies in this program. If FDA approval is gained on the basisof limited, but sufficient, clinical trials, it will usually be importantto conduct postmarketing (phase 4) clinical studies that will extend theknowledge about the drug's safety and efficacy and allow physicians tooptimize its use. For example, in the case of zidovudine, early appearanceof a dramatic improvement in survival of the treated patients was takenas clear evidence that, for the relatively advanced HIV-infected patientstreated, the benefits clearly outweighed the risks. Although significantside effects of zidovudine were found, the clinically demonstrated benefitof prolonged survival clearly outweighed those risks. This does not mean that all important questions were answered at the timeof approval of zidovudine and that research into its use could end. Itwas critical to examine_after marketing_its use in earlier stages of thedisease, where its toxicity might outweigh its benefit (i.e., in earlierstages of the disease, survival is much greater without treatment so thatthere is less improvement possible, but toxicity might be just as severe).It was also important to explore dosing regimens that might be less toxicand equally effective. In addition, as with any drug, it is important toconsider whether there are long-term adverse effects that might ``takeaway'' the early gain. As with zidovudine, FDA has generally been ableto obtain a voluntary agreement with drug sponsors about the need to dosuch followup studies and the nature of their design, because sponsorsalso recognize important gaps in the data base and believe they need tobe filled. Section 312.85 of the rule codifies this practice. <T3>5. Focused FDA regulatory research. </T3>The responsibility for conductingthe preclinical and clinical testing needed to gain marketing approvalclearly rests with the drug's sponsor. This rule does not alter that responsibility.Recognizing the lack of available therapy for certain life-threateningand severely-debilitating illnesses, andSection;312.86 of the rule providesthat in certain circumstances FDA may, in its discretion, undertake researchon critical rate-limiting aspects of the preclinical, chemical/manufacturing,and clinical phases of drug development and evaluation. For example, FDAoften needs specific information upon which critical regulatory decisionsare made_e.g., manufacturing standards and assays for vaccine or biotechnologyproducts. Recent examples include FDA potency testing of vaccines and developmentof assay methods for drug bioavailability. FDA is prepared to intensifythis practice on a limited basis as a means of meeting a public healthneed in facilitating the development of therapies to treat life-threateningillnesses, rather than merely waiting passively. <T3>6. Active monitoring of conduct and evaluation of clinical trials.</T3>Section 312.87 of the rule provides that the Commissioner and otheragency officials will actively monitor the progress of the conduct andevaluation of clinical trials and be involved in stimulating their appropriateprogress. Recognizing that people with life-threatening diseases face acatastrophic condition that requires special attention, it is imperativethat the conduct of clinical trials and FDA's evaluation of them proceedas expeditiously as possible. FDA actions would include, for example, contactingthe sponsor directly when clinical trials are not proceeding on schedule.FDA may also convene special meetings of its advisory committees, as necessary,rather than waiting for the next scheduled periodic meeting. Finally, FDA, in conjunction with other Public Health Service agencies,will utilize, to the extent possible, clearinghouse mechanisms for informingphysicians and patients of investigational therapies for life-threateningillnesses. Existing mechanisms of this type will be augmented, as appropriate.<T3>7. Safeguards for patient safety. </T3>If successfully implemented,this program will expedite the availability and approval of new therapiesfor life-threatening and severely-debilitating illnesses while assuringthat the products are shown safe and effective under the law. Section 312.88of the rule references safeguards inherent in FDA regulations that ensurethe safety of clinical testing and the safety of products following marketingapproval. These include the requirements for informed consent (21 CFR Part50) and institutional review boards (21 CFR Part 56). These safeguardsfurther include the review of animal studies prior to initial human testing(andSection;312.23); IND safety reports during the conduct of clinical trialsand treatment IND protocols (andSection;312.32); safety update reports duringthe review of marketing applications (andSection;314.50); and adverse drugreaction reports after products are approved for marketing (andSection;314.80).In addition to these regulatory safeguards designed to assure patient safety,FDA's practices and procedures provide additional safeguards to assurethe quality and integrity of the drug development and review process. Theseinclude conducting on-site audits of key studies and/or clinical investigatorsto assure authenticity of the data submitted to FDA, and inspections ofmanufacturing facilities before marketing approval is granted to assurethat manufacturers are able to produce properly formulated compounds. D. Environmental Impact The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(a)(8) that this action isof a type that does not individually or cumulatively have a significanteffect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessmentnor an environmental impact statement is required. E. Economic Impact FDA has considered the economic impacts of this interim rule and concludesthat additional costs resulting from this rule will be negligible, andto the limited extent that they may occur, they will likely be more thanoff-set by the societal benefits of this rule. The compression of the drug development process set forth in this rulefor life-threatening and severely-debilitating illnesses presents a trade-offfor affected sponsors. They would be relieved of conducting the customaryphase 2/phase 3 clinical studies if they participate in early study designconsultation with FDA, conduct a sufficiently comprehensive phase 2 study,and stand ready to conduct any necessary phase 4 studies. Considering theprobable time savings of this process, it is expected that the net costof clinical development and regulatory review for a sponsor will remainconstant or possibly decrease. Even if costs were to increase slightly,the societal benefits would more than likely compensate for any added costssince a considerable patient population would be receiving the life-savingbenefits of the expedited therapy over an extended period of time thatwould not otherwise be realized. Accordingly, FDA concludes that this interim rule is not a major rule asdefined by Executive Order 12291, which would require a regulatory flexibilityanalysis. Furthermore, this rule is not expected to impose substantialimpacts on a significant number of small entities which would require aregulatory flexibility analysis under the requirements of the RegulatoryFlexibility Act of 1980. F. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 This interim rule does not contain new collection of information requirements.Section 312.88 does refer to regulations that contain collection of informationrequirements that were previously submitted for review to the Directorof the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under section 3504 of thePaperwork Reduction Act of 1980. Sections 312.23 and 312.32 were approvedunder OMB control number 0910-0014. Section 314.50 was approved under OMBcontrol number 0910-0001. Section 314.80 was approved under OMB controlnumber 0910-0230. <ITAG tagnum="84">References </ITAG>The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets ManagementBranch (address above) and may be seen by interested persons between 9a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. <ITAG tagnum="21">1. Young, Frank E., and Stuart L. Nightingale, ``FDA's Newly DesignatedTreatment IND's,'' ``Information on Treatment IND's as They Become Availableto the Practitioner,'' <T3>Journal of the American Medical Association, </T3>260:224-225, 247,1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">2. Young, Frank E., John A. Norris, Joseph A. Levitt, and Stuart L.Nightingale, ``The FDA's New Procedures for the Use of InvestigationalDrugs in Treatment,'' <T3>Journal of the American Medical Association, </T3>259:2267-2270, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">3. ``Drugs Hold Hope for Parkinson's Obsessive-Compulsive Patients,''<T3>FDA Consumer, </T3>September 1988:31. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">4. Young, Frank E., ``Experimental Drugs for the Desperately Ill:A Progress Report,'' <T3>FDA Consumer, </T3>May 1988:2-3. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">5. ``Updates,'' <T3>FDA Consumer, </T3>February 1988:2-3. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">6. Young, Frank E., ``New Drug Development in the United States,''<T3>FDA Consumer, </T3>November 1987:4-5. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">7. ``Updates,'' <T3>FDA Consumer, </T3>September 1987:5-6. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">8. Young, Frank E., ``Experimental Drugs for the Desperately Ill,''<T3>FDA Consumer, </T3>June 1987:2-3. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">9. Office of Planning and Evaluation Study 77, ``The Outcome of Researchon New Molecular Entities Commencing Clinical Research in the Years 1976-78,''FDA, May 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">10. ``Confronting AIDS: Update 1988,'' Institute of Medicine, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects </ITAG>21 CFR Part 312 Drugs, Exports, Imports, Investigations, Labeling, Medical research, Reportingand recordkeeping requirements, Safety. 21 CFR Part 314 Administrative practice and procedure, Drugs, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements.Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the PublicHealth Service Act, Parts 312 and 314 are amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 312_INVESTIGATIONAL NEW DRUG APPLICATION </ITAG>1. Subparts E and F are redesignated as Subparts F and G, respectively,and new Subpart E is added consisting of andSection;andSection;312.80 through312.88 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="76">Subpart E_Drugs Intended to Treat Life-threatening and Severely-debilitatingIllnesses </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.80 Purpose. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.81 Scope. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.82 Early consultation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.83 Treatment protocols. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.84 Risk-benefit analysis in review of marketing applications fordrugs to treat life-threatening and severely-debilitating illnesses. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.85 Phase 4 studies. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.86 Focused FDA regulatory research. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.87 Active monitoring of conduct and evaluation of clinical trials.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">312.88 Safeguards for patient safety.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 501, 502, 503, 505, 506, 507, 701, 52 Stat. 1049-1053as amended, 1055-1056 as amended, 55 Stat. 851, 59 Stat. 463 as amended(21 U.S.C. 351, 352, 353, 355, 356, 357, 371); sec. 351, 58 Stat. 702 asamended (42 U.S.C. 262); 21 CFR 5.10, 5.11.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Subpart E_Drugs Intended to Treat Life Threatening and Severely-debilitatingIllnesses</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.80</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose.</ITAG>The purpose of this section is to establish procedures designed to expeditethe development, evaluation, and marketing of new therapies intended totreat persons with life-threatening and severely-debilitating illnesses,especially where no satisfactory alternative therapy exists. As statedandSection; 314.105(c) of this chapter, while the statutory standards ofsafety and effectiveness apply to all drugs, the many kinds of drugs thatare subject to them, and the wide range of uses for those drugs, demandflexibility in applying the standards. The Food and Drug Administration(FDA) has determined that it is appropriate to exercise the broadest flexibilityin applying the statutory standards, while preserving appropriate guaranteesfor safety and effectiveness. These procedures reflect the recognitionthat physicians and patients are generally willing to accept greater risksor side effects from products that treat life-threatening and severely-debilitatingillnesses, than they would accept from products that treat less seriousillnesses. These procedures also reflect the recognition that the benefitsof the drug need to be evaluated in light of the severity of the diseasebeing treated. The procedure outlined in this section should be interpretedconsistent with that purpose. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.81</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope.</ITAG>This section applies to new drug, antibiotic, and biological products thatare being studied for their safety and effectiveness in treating life-threateningor severely-debilitating diseases. (a) For purposes of this section, the term ``life-threatening'' means:(1) Diseases or conditions where the likelihood of death is high unlessthe course of the disease is interrupted; and (2) Diseases or conditions with potentially fatal outcomes, where the endpoint of clinical trial analysis is survival. (b) For purposes of this section, the term ``severely debilitating'' meansdiseases or conditions that cause major irreversible morbidity. (c) Sponsors are encouraged to consult with FDA on the applicability ofthese procedures to specific products. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.82</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Early consultation. </ITAG>For products intended to treat life-threatening or severely-debilitatingillnesses, sponsors may request to meet with FDA-reviewing officials earlyin the drug development process to review and reach agreement on the designof necessary preclinical and clinical studies. Where appropriate, FDA willinvite to such meetings one or more outside expert scientific consultantsor advisory committee members. To the extent FDA resources permit, agencyreviewing officials will honor requests for such meetings (a) <T3>Pre-investigational new drug (IND) meetings. </T3>Prior to the submissionof the initial IND, the sponsor may request a meeting with FDA-reviewingofficials. The primary purpose of this meeting is to review and reach agreementon the design of animal studies needed to initiate human testing. The meetingmay also provide an opportunity for discussing the scope and design ofphase 1 testing, and the best approach for presentation and formattingof data in the IND. (b) <T3>End-of-phase 1 meetings. </T3>When data from phase 1 clinical testingare available, the sponsor may again request a meeting with FDA-reviewingofficials. The primary purpose of this meeting is to review and reach agreementon the design of phase 2 controlled clinical trials, with the goal thatsuch testing will be adequate to provide sufficient data on the drug'ssafety and effectiveness to support a decision on its approvability formarketing. The procedures outlined in andSection; 312.47(b)(1) with respectto end-of-phase 2 conferences, including documentation of agreements reached,would also be used for end-of-phase 1 meetings. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.83 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Treatment protocols.</ITAG>If the preliminary analysis of phase 2 test results appears promising,FDA may ask the sponsor to submit a treatment protocol to be reviewed underthe procedures and criteria listed in andSection;andSection; 312.34 and 312.35.Such a treatment protocol, if requested and granted, would normally remainin effect while the complete data necessary for a marketing applicationare being assembled by the sponsor and reviewed by FDA (unless groundsexist for clinical hold of ongoing protocols, as provided in andSection;312.42(b)(3)(ii)). <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.84</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Risk-benefit analysis in review of marketing applications for drugsto treat life-threatening and severely-debilitating illnesses.</ITAG>(a) FDA's application of the statutory standards for marketing approvalshall recognize the need for a medical risk-benefit judgment in makingthe final decision on approvability. As part of this evaluation, consistentwith the statement of purpose in andSection; 312.80, FDA will consider whetherthe benefits of the drug outweigh the known and potential risks of thedrug and the need to answer remaining questions about risks and benefitsof the drug, taking into consideration the severity of the disease andthe absence of satisfactory alternative therapy.(b) In making decisions on whether to grant marketing approval for productsthat have been the subject of an end-of-phase 1 meeting under andSection;312.82, FDA will usually seek the advice of outside expert scientific consultantsor advisory committees. Upon the filing of such a marketing applicationunder andSection; 314.101 or Part 601 of this chapter, FDA will notify themembers of the relevant standing advisory committee of the application'sfiling and its availability for review.(c) If FDA concludes that the data presented are not sufficient for marketingapproval, FDA will issue (for a drug) a not approvable letter pursuantto andSection; 314.120 of this chapter, or (for a biologic) a deficienciesletter consistent with the biological product licensing procedures. Suchletter, in describing the deficiencies in the application, will addresswhy the results of the research design agreed to under andSection; 312.82,or in subsequent meetings, have not provided sufficient evidence for marketingapproval. Such letter will also describe any recommendations made by theadvisory committee regarding the application.(d) Marketing applications submitted under the procedures contained inthis section will be subject to the requirements and procedures containedin Part 314 or Part 600 of this chapter, as well as those in this subpart.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.85</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Phase 4 studies.</ITAG>Concurrent with marketing approval, FDA may seek agreement from the sponsorto conduct certain postmarketing (phase 4) studies to delineate additionalinformation about the drug's risks, benefits, and optimal use. These studiescould include, but would not be limited to, studying different doses orschedules of administration than were used in phase 2 studies, use of thedrug in other patient populations or other stages of the disease, or useof the drug over a longer period of time.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.86</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Focused FDA regulatory research.</ITAG>At the discretion of the agency, FDA may undertake focused regulatory researchon critical rate-limiting aspects of the preclinical, chemical/manufacturing,and clinical phases of drug development and evaluation. When initiated,FDA will undertake such research efforts as a means for meeting a publichealth need in facilitating the development of therapies to treat life-threateningor severely debilitating illnesses.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.87</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Active monitoring of conduct and evaluation of clinical trials.</ITAG>For drugs covered under this section, the Commissioner and other agencyofficials will monitor the progress of the conduct and evaluation of clinicaltrials and be involved in facilitating their appropriate progress.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 312.88</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Safeguards for patient safety.</ITAG>All of the safeguards incorporated within Parts 50, 56, 312, 314, and 600of this chapter designed to ensure the safety of clinical testing and thesafety of products following marketing approval apply to drugs coveredby this section. This includes the requirements for informed consent (Part50 of this chapter) and institutional review boards (Part 56 of this chapter).These safeguards further include the review of animal studies prior toinitial human testing (andSection; 312.23), and the monitoring of adversedrug experiences through the requirements of IND safety reports (andSection;312.32), safety update reports during agency review of a marketing application(andSection; 314.50 of this chapter), and postmarketing adverse reactionreporting (andSection; 314.80 of this chapter).<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 314_APPLICATIONS FOR FDA APPROVAL TO MARKET A NEW DRUG OR ANANTIBIOTIC DRUG</ITAG>2. The authority citation for 21 CFR Part 314 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 501, 502, 503, 505, 506, 507, 701, 52 Stat. 1049-1053as amended, 1055-1056 as amended, 55 Stat. 851, 59 Stat. 463 as amended(21 U.S.C. 351, 352, 353, 355, 356, 357, 371); 21 CFR 5.10, 5.11.</ITAG>3. Section 314.125 is amended by adding paragraph (c) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 314.125</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Refusal to approve an application.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) For drugs intended to treat life-threatening or severely-debilitatingillnesses that are developed in accordance with andSection;andSection; 312.80through 312.88 of this chapter, the criteria contained in paragraphs (b)(3), (4), and (5) of this section shall be applied according to the considerationscontained in andSection; 312.84 of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="6">Otis R. Bowen,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: October 18, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-24457 Filed 10-19-88; 10:18 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>