<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881202-0068 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.12-02-88.f2.A1067</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Economic Regulatory Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Consent Order With Tesoro Petroleum Corp.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Economic Regulatory Administration, DOE.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed consent order and opportunity for publiccomment.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Economic Regulatory Administration (ERA) announcesa proposed Consent Order between the Department of Energy (DOE) and TesoroPetroleum Corporation (Tesoro). The agreement proposes to resolve mattersrelating to Tesoro's compliance with the federal petroleum price and allocationregulations for the period January 1, 1973 through January 27, 1981. Ifthis Consent Order is approved, Tesoro shall pay a total of $48,500,000,plus interest on any unpaid balance over a period of six years. Withinthirty days of the effective date of the Consent Order, Tesoro will payan initial payment of $25,000,000. Thereafter, beginning one year afterthe initial payment, Tesoro will make six equal annual payments of $5,177,850.95each, including interest at the rate of 8.61% per annum on the unpaid balance.DOE's Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) will be petitioned to implementSpecial Refund Procedures pursuant to 10 CFR Part 205, Subpart V, in whichproceedings any persons who claim to have suffered injury from Tesoro'salleged overcharges would have the opportunity to submit claims for payment.Pursuant to 10 CFR 205.199J, ERA will receive written comments on the proposedConsent Order for thirty (30) days following publication of this Notice.Following this comment period, ERA will conduct a public hearing on January4, 1989, to provide interested persons an additional opportunity to presentcomments. ERA will consider all comments received from the public in determiningwhether to accept the settlement and issue a final Order, renegotiate theagreement and issue a modified agreement as a final Order, or reject thesettlement. DOE's final decision will be published in the <T4>Federal Register,</T4> along with an analysis of and response to thesignificant written and oral comments, as well as any other considerationsthat were relevant to the final decision.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Dorothy Hamid, Economic RegulatoryAdministration, Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington,DC 20585, (202) 586-4167.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="26">I. Resolution of Regulatory Issues</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">II. Determination of Reasonable Settlement Amount</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">III. Terms and Conditions of the Consent Order</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Resolution of Regulatory Issues</ITAG>Tesoro is a petroleum refiner subject to the audit jurisdiction of ERAto determine compliance with the Federal Petroleum Price and AllocationRegulations. During the period covered by this proposed Order (January1, 1973 through January 27, 1981), Tesoro engaged in, among other things,the production, importation, refining, and sale of crude oil; and the saleof residual fuel oil, motor gasoline, middle distillates, aviation fuel,propane and other refined petroleum products.ERA conducted an audit of Tesoro's compliance for the period beginningin 1973 to the date when Federal price and allocation controls were endedby the President (January 27, 1981, Executive Order 12287). During thisaudit, ERA identified certain areas in the pricing, refining, and salesof crude oil and pricing and sales of refined petroleum products in whichit believed that Tesoro had failed to comply with the requirements of theFederal price and allocation regulations.A. The crude oil overcharge allegations resolved by this settlement involveproceedings pending before the DOE's Office of Hearings and Appeals andan appeal pending at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. The proceedingsare discussed below.1. EntitlementsIn March 1988, ERA issued to Tesoro a Proposed Remedial Order (PRO), asamended May 25, 1988, alleging violations of 10 CFR 211.66(b) and (h) and205.202 as a result of Tesoro's significant understatement on its entitlementsreports of its receipts of controlled tier crude oil at its refinery locatedin Kenai, Alaska, during the period January 1978 through December 1980.Specifically, ERA alleged that during this period Tesoro failed to correctlyreport the volumes of controlled tier certification associated with substantialvolumes of its crude oil receipts at the Kenai, Alaska refinery. Instead,Tesoro reported such volumes as uncontrolled crude oil. ERA alleges thatTesoro's actions circumvented and contravened, or resulted in the circumventionand contravention of, the requirements of the Entitlements Program. Asa remedy for these alleged violations, the Proposed Remedial Order seeksto recover approximately $37.5 million, which is the amount of Tesoro'sreduced post-entitlement crude costs. Tesoro subsequently submitted documentationto demonstrate that corrections to the crude oil purchases and sales identifiedin the PRO reduce DOE's principal claim to approximately $36.2 million.With interest, Tesoro's maximum legal liability in this case would be approximately$101 million.2. Processing Agreement Disputes In three enforcement cases, ERA alleges Tesoro was liable for the improperuse of processing agreements with small and exempt refiners to avoid entitlementsobligations. A PRO issued in December 1986 names Tesoro and another firmas jointly liable for alleged violations in the amount of approximately$2 million, plus interest of $4.4 million. A PRO issued in November 1986,names Tesoro and another firm as jointly liable for $1.4 million in violations,plus interest amounting to approximately $3 million. The third processingagreement is the subject of a Remedial Order issued in September 1988,and now pending appeal at FERC, which finds Tesoro liable for violationsin the amount of $2.9 million plus interest in the amount of $6 million.Pursuant to the terms of the proposed Consent Order, 50% of DOE's claimwill remain against the parties other than Tesoro in the two cases wherejoint liability is alleged. Therefore, the total maximum refund liabilitybeing settled in the three processing cases is approximately $14.3 million,including interest.3. Crude ProductionIn September 1983, ERA issued to Tesoro a PRO alleging violations of 10CFR Part 212, Subpart D, in its first sales of domestically produced crudeoil in the amount of approximately $1.5 million, plus interest. Subsequentresponses by Tesoro have reduced the amount of the overcharge dispute toless than $700,000. With interest, the current total in dispute is approximately$2 million. The allegations involved Tesoro's use of an incorrect postedprice; improper aggregation of two properties as a single property andimproper certifications as to exempt stripper wells based on erroneousaverage daily production calculations.4. Crude Oil ResalesIn a PRO issued to Tesoro in September 1988, ERA alleged that Tesoro resoldcrude oil in excess of its maximum lawful selling price in certain monthsbetween 1973 and 1976, in violation of 10 CFR, Subpart F. ERA estimatedTesoro's potential overcharge liability in these sales to approximately$5.2 million plus interest in the amount of $10 million. Tesoro's positionis that factual errors in DOE's data base would reduce Tesoro's maximumovercharge liability to approximately $700,000. ERA has not yet made adetermination as to the correctness of Tesoro's submissions, but has reasonto believe that potential liability would be reduced to some extent. In the negotiation process which led to this proposed settlement, ERA analyzedthe results of the audit and the nature of the alleged regulatory violations.With regard to the entitlements of PRO issued in March 1988, ERA took intoconsideration the evidence Tesoro provided that $10.8 million of Tesoro'sreduced post-entitlements cost were, by specific contractual provisions,directly passed through to a large utility, San Diego Gas andamp; Electric(SDGandamp;E). Under the contract, the price of SDGandamp;E's residual fueloil was directly affected by Tesoro's post-entitlements crude costs. Thus,nearly 30% of the alleged liability in this case was directly passed throughby Tesoro to the utility.B. <T3>Refinery Product Pricing. </T3>In April 1988, ERA issued a PRO to Tesororegarding certain cost issues relating to its refined product sales duringthe period May 1973 and August 1973 through December 1980. The PRO allegesthat in determining its maximum legal selling prices, Tesoro overstatedits available increased costs by approximately $85 million.ERA estimated the maximum amount of refined product overcharges for whichTesoro might be liable as a result of the cost issues with Tesoro by comparingTesoro's available costs with costs actually recovered by Tesoro in salesof its products during the period of price controls. This comparison yieldedthe information necessary to estimate Tesoro's maximum potential overchargeliability for refined products.Under the relevant regulations, a refiner was permitted to ``bank'' anyincreased costs in a given month that it was permitted to recover in itsproduct prices but did not. Costs could be ``banked'' and used, subjectto certain limitations, in later months in pricing products.In the PRO, ERA indicated that success on all of the cost disputes wouldresult in estimated overcharges of $4 to $6 million. Tesoro subsequentlysubmitted documentation to demonstrate that the maximum resulting overchargesin the case would amount to $1.3 million. With interest on that amount,Tesoro's maximum potential liability would be approximately $4 million.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Determination of Reasonable Settlement Amount</ITAG>The settlement calls for Tesoro to pay $48.5 million, plus interest, todischarge in full the potential liability for its obligations under theprice and allocation regulations. Under the terms of the proposed ConsentOrder, the ERA would petition the OHA to implement Special Refund Proceduresfor disposition of these funds pursuant to 10 CFR Part 205, Subpart V,ERA has preliminarily agreed to the settlement amount after consideringthe factual aspects related to the various issues, assessing the litigationrisks associated with establishing the alleged overcharges, and consideringthe benefit to the public from a substantial settlement of numerous issueswhich would take years of continued litigation to resolve.In determining a reasonable settlement amount for the $137 million of refundclaims being settled in this case, as discussed above, ERA reviewed submissionsof certain factual data by Tesoro which reduced the entitlements PRO allegationto $36.2 million from $37.5 million, and in the crude production PRO, toless than $700,000 from $1.5 million. Also, the crude oil resale allegedviolations may require reduction upon further review and development. Moreover,ERA took into consideration the contractual evidence that a substantialportion of the violations alleged in one case was actually passed throughto a utility.The inherent risks in litigation make success on all of the issues problematic,and the necessity for the government to prevail on all of the issues inorder to maximize overcharge and interest recovery was an important considerationin ERA's preliminary determination that Tesoro's agreement to pay $48.5million in settlement is in the public interest.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Although ERA and Tesoro did not come to any specific agrementas to the portions of the $48.5 million settlement amount attributableto crude oil and refined product violations, in ERA's view, approximately$2 million is attributable to the refined product issues and the remainderto the crude oil issues.In evaluating the total settlement amount for Tesoro's regulatory violations,in addition to the analysis of litigation risks, ERA took into accountsuch factors as the number and complexity of the legal and factual issuesand the time and expense required for the government to fully litigateevery issue in order to obtain and recovery. Based on all of these considerations,ERA has tentatively concluded that the resolution of these matters for$48.5 million plus interest, is an appropriate settlement and in the publicinterest.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ ERA has also concluded that it is appropriate for Tesoroto satisfy its total obligation by means of seven payments over a periodof six years. Over 50% of the total settlement amount will be paid withinthirty days of the effective date of the Consent Order. Further, Tesorowill pay interest on the unpaid principal balances. (See note 3, <T3>infra.</T3>).<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Terms and Conditions of the Consent Order</ITAG>If the settlement is not made final by the one hundered fiftieth day followingexecution, Tesoro may withdraw from the proposed agreement. If the ConsentOrder is made final, Tesoro will pay DOE $48.5 million plus interest. Withinthirty days of the effective date of the Consent Order, Tesoro will makeits first payment to the DOE in the amount of $25,000,000. Thereafter,Tesoro will make six annual payments to DOE, each for $5,177,850.95, inclusiveof interest,\3\<NOTE/> beginning 12 months from the date the initial payment oftwenty-five million dollars is due and payable.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ Tesoro's total payments on the $23.5 million balance willexceed $31 million. Interest at the stated rate is included in each ofthe installments.ERA will petition OHA to implement Special Refund Procedures under theprovisions of Subpart V of the regulations. In these proceedings, OHA woulddevelop procedures for the receipt and evaluation of applications for refundin order to distribute the settlement monies. To ensure that OHA has sufficientinformation to evaluate the claims, the proposed Consent Order requiresthat Tesoro provide customer identification and purchase volume informationto OHA upon request.Tesoro and DOE mutually release each other from claims and actions arisingunder the subject matters covered by the proposed Consent Order. The proposedOrder does not affect the right of any other party to take action againstTesoro, or of Tesoro or the DOE to take action against any other party.<ITAG tagnum="84">Submission of Written Comments</ITAG>The proposed Consent Order cannot be made effective until the conclusionof the public review process, of which this Notice is a part.Interested parties are invited to submit written comments concerning thisproposed Consent Order to: Tesoro Consent Order Comments, RG-30, EconomicRegulatory Administration, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC20585, and to appear at a public hearing, beginning at 10:00 a.m. on January4, 1989, at the Department of Energy Auditorium, Room GE-086, ForrestalBuilding, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC. All comments receivedby the thirtieth day following publication of this Notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, and all statements made at the hearing, willbe considered before determining whether to adopt the proposed ConsentOrder as a final Order. Any modifications of the proposed Consent Orderwhich significantly alter its terms or impact will be published for additionalcomments. If, after considering the comments it has received and the commentsat the hearing, ERA determines to issue the proposed Consent Order as afinal Order, the proposed Order will be made final and effective by publicationof a Notice in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>Any information or data considered confidential by the person submittingit must be identified as such in accordance with the provisions of 10 CFR205.9(f).<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on November 23, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Milton C. Lorenz,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Chief Counsel for Enforcement Litigation, Economic Regulatory Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Consent Order With Tesoro Petroleum Corporation </ITAG>I. Introduction 101. This Consent Order is entered into between Tesoro Petroleum Corporation(``Tesoro'') and the United States Department of Energy (``DOE''). Exceptas othewise provided herein, this Consent Order settles and finally resovlesall civil and administrative claims and disputes, whether or not heretoforeasserted, between the DOE, as hereinafter defined, and Tesoro, as hereinafterdefined, relating to Tesoro's compliance with the federal petroleum priceand allocation regulations, as hereinafter defined, during the period January1, 1973, through January 27, 1981 (all the matters settled and resolvedby this Consent Order are referred to hereinafter as ``the matters coveredby this Consent Order''). II. Jurisdiction, Regulatory Authority and Definitions 201. This Consent Order is entered into by the DOE pursuant to the authorityconferred upon it by sections 301 and 503 of the Department of Energy OrganizationAct (``DOE Act''), 42 U.S.C. 7151 and 7193, Executive Order No. 12009,42 FR 46267 (1977); Executive Order 12038, 43 FR 4957 (1978); and 10 CFR205.199J. 202. The Economic Regulatory Administration (``ERA'') was created by section206 of the DOE Act, 42 U.S.C. 7136. In Delegation No. 0204-4, the Secretaryof Energy delegated responsibility for the administration of the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations to the Administrator of theERA. In Delegation No. 0204-4A, the Administrator delegated to the SpecialCounsel authority to audit the compliance of refiners, including Tesoro,with the federal petroleum price and allocation regulations and to takeappropriate enforcement actions based upon such audits. 203. For purposes of this Consent Order, the phrase ``federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations'' means all statutory requirements andadministrative regulations and orders regarding the pricing and allocationof crude oil, refined petroleum products, natural gas liquids, and naturalgas liquid products, including the entitlements and mandatory oil importsprograms, administered by the DOE. The Federal petroleum price and allocationregulations include (without limitation) the pricing, allocation, reporting,certification, and recordkeeping requirements imposed by or under the EconomicStabilization Act of 1970, the Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act of 1973,the Federal Energy Administration Act of 1974, Presidential Proclamation3279, all applicable DOE regulations codified in 6 CFR Parts 130 and 150and 10 CFR Parts 205, 210, 211, 212, and 213, and all rules, rulings, guidelines,interpretations, clarifications, manuals, decisions, orders notices, forms,and subpoenas relating to the pricing and allocation of petroleum products.The provisions of 10 CFR 205.199J and the definitions under the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations shall apply to this ConsentOrder except to the extent inconsistent herewith. Reference herein to ``DOE''includes, besides the Department of Energy, the Cost of Living Council,the Federal Energy Office, the Federal Energy Administration, the Officeof Special Counsel (OSC), the Economic Regulatory Administration and allpredecessor and successor agencies. References in this Consent Order to``Tesoro'' shall include: (1) Tesoro Petroleum Corporation and all of itssubsidiaries and affiliates, (2) all of Tesoro's petroleum-related activitiesas refiner, producer, operator, working interest or royalty interest owner,reseller, retailer, natural gas processor, or otherwise and, except forpurposes of Article IV, <T3>infra,</T3> (3) Tesoro's directors, officers, and employees. III. FactsThe stipulated facts upon which this Consent Order is based are as follows:301. During the period covered by this Consent Order, Tesoro was a ``refiner,''``producer,'' and ``reseller'' as those terms are defined in the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations and was subject to the jurisdictionof the DOE. Tesoro engaged in, among other things, the production, importation,sale, and refining of crude oil, the sale of residual fuel oil, motor gasoline,middle distillates, aviation fuel, propane, and other refined petroleumproducts. 302. DOE conducted an audit to determine Tesoro's compliance with the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations. During the course of the DOE'saudit, the enforcement proceedings instituted by the DOE and the negotiationsthat led to this Consent Order, the DOE raised certain issues with respectto Tesoro's application of the federal petroleum price and allocation regulations.The DOE has taken various administrative enforcement actions against Tesoro,including the issuance of Notices of Probable Violation, Proposed RemedialOrders, and Remedial Orders. Tesoro maintained, however, that it has calculatedits costs, determined its prices, sold its crude oil and petroleum products,and operated in all other respects in accordance with the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations. The DOE and Tesoro have disagreed inseveral respects concerning the proper application of the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations to Tesoro's activities with respect tothe matters covered by this Consent Order, and each has asserted its beliefthat its respective legal and factual positions on the matters resolvedby this Consent Order are meritorious. These positions were emphasizedin the intensive review and exchange of information conducted during theaudit and subsequent settlement negotiation process. However, in orderto avoid the expense of protracted and complex litigation and the disruptionof its orderly business functions, Tesoro has agreed to enter into thisConsent Order. The DOE believes this Consent Order constitutes a satisfactoryresolution of the matters covered herein and is in the public interest.IV. Remedial Provisions401. In full and final settlement of all matters covered by this ConsentOrder and in lieu of all other remedies which have been or might be soughtby the DOE against Tesoro for such matters under 10 CFR 205.199I or otherwise,Tesoro shall pay a total principal amount of forty-eight million five hundredthousand dollars ($48,500,000), plus interest, to the DOE in the mannerspecified in paragraphs 402 and 403. 402. Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Consent Order,Tesoro shall make an initial payment to the DOE of twenty-five milliondollars ($25,000,000). 403. Beginning one year after the date the initial payment prescribed byparagraph 402 becomes due and payable, Tesoro shall make six equal annualinstallments to the DOE of five million one hundred seventy-seven thousandeight hundred fifty dollars and ninety-five cents ($5,177,850.95), constitutingan additional principal sum of twenty-three million five hundred thousanddollars ($23,500,000) plus interest calculated at the rate of 8.61 percentper annum. 404. The payments pursuant to paragraphs 402 and 403 shall be made by wiretransfer in accordance with instructions furnished to Tesoro by the DOEin a timely manner. Late payments will bear interest at the rate of 17.22percent per annum from the day following the due date through the dateof payment, with interest deemed earned each day as of 2:00 p.m. EasternTime.405. Payments made by Tesoro pursuant to this Consent Order shall be distributedby the DOE pursuant to the special refund procedures prescribed by 10 CFRPart 205, Subpart V.V. Issues Resolved501. All pending and potential civil and administrative claims, whetheror not known, demands, liabilities, causes of action or other proceedingsby the DOE against Tesoro regarding Tesoro's compliance with and obligationsunder the Federal petroleum price and allocation regulations during theperiod covered by this Consent Order, whether or not heretofore raisedby an issue letter, Notice of Probable Violation, Notice of Proposed Disallowance,Proposed Remedial Order, Remedial Order, action in court or otherwise,are resolved and extinguished as to Tesoro by this Consent Order. ThisConsent Order, however, does not resolve, extinguish, or otherwise affectDOE's claims against any other party, except that the DOE agrees to reduceby fifty percent all claims that it has asserted against other partiesbefore the Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) in OHA Case Nos. KRO-0630,and KRO-0540 now pending.502. (a) Except as otherwise provided herein, compliance by Tesoro withthis Consent Order shall be deemed by the DOE to constitute full compliancefor administrative and civil purposes with all federal petroleum priceand allocation regulations for matters covered by this Consent Order. Inconsideration for performance as required under this Consent Order by Tesoro,the DOE hereby releases Tesoro completely and for all purposes from alladministrative and civil judicial claims, demands, liabilities or causesof action, including without limitation claims for civil penalties, thatthe DOE has asserted or might otherwise be able to assert against Tesorobefore or after the date of this Consent Order for alleged violations ofthe Federal petroleum price and allocation regulations with respect tomatters covered by this Consent Order. The DOE will not initiate or prosecuteany such administrative or civil judicial matter against Tesoro or causeor refer any such matter to be initiated or prosecuted, nor will the DOEor its successors directly or indirectly aid in the initiation of any suchadministrative or civil judicial matter against Tesoro or participate voluntarilyin the prosecution of such actions. The DOE will not assert voluntarilyin any administrative or civil judicial proceeding that Tesoro has violatedthe federal petroleum price and allocation regulations with respect tothe matters covered by this Consent Order or otherwise take any actionwith respect to Tesoro in derogation of this Consent Order. However, nothingcontained herein shall preclude the DOE from defending the validity ofthe federal petroleum price and allocation regulations.(b) This Consent Order settles and finally resolves all aspects of Tesoro'spotential liability to the DOE under the federal petroleum price and allocationregulations, including but not limited to its capacity as an operator orworking interest or royalty interest owner of a crude oil producing property.In addition, if Tesoro was the operator of a property that produced crudeoil for all or part of the period covered by this Consent Order, the DOEshall not initiate or prosecute any enforcement action against any personfor noncompliance with the Federal petroleum price and allocation regulationsduring such period relative to such property. Otherwise, the DOE reservesthe right to initiate and prosecute enforcement actions against any personother than Tesoro for noncompliance with the Federal petroleum price andallocation regulations, including suits against operators for overchargesfor crude oil when Tesoro is a working interest or royalty interest ownerin such crude oil production. In that connection, Tesoro and the DOE agreethat the amount paid to the DOE pursuant to this Consent Order is not attributableto Tesoro's activities as a working interest or royalty interest owneron properties on which it is not the operator. Furthermore, Tesoro andthe DOE agree that the Consent Order and the payments hereunder do notresolve, reduce or release the liability of any other person for violationson properties of which (but only for the times during which) Tesoro isor was a working interest or royalty interest owner (and not the operator)or affect any rights or obligations between Tesoro and the operator orany other working interest or royalty interest owner.(c) The DOE will not seek or recommend any criminal fines or penaltiesbased on information or evidence presently in its possession for the matterscovered by this Consent Order, provided, however, that nothing in thisConsent Order precludes the DOE from (1) seeking or recommending such criminalfines or penalties if information subsequently coming to its attentionindicates, either by itself or in combination with information or evidencepresently known to DOE, that a criminal violation may have occurred, or(2) otherwise complying with its obligations under law with regard to forwardinginformation of possible criminal violations of law to appropriate authorities.Nothing contained herein may be construed as a bar, estoppel or defenseagainst any criminal or civil action brought by an agency of the UnitedStates other than the DOE under (i) section 210 of the Economic StabilizationAct of 1970 or (ii) any statute or regulation other than the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations. Finally, this Consent Order does notprejudice the rights of any third party or Tesoro in any private action,including an action for contribution by or against Tesoro.(d) Tesoro releases the DOE completely and for all purposes from all administrativeand civil judicial claims, liabilities, or causes of action that Tesorohas asserted or may otherwise be able to assert against the DOE relatingto the DOE's administration of the Federal petroleum price and allocationregulations. This release, however, does not preclude Tesoro from assertingany factual or legal position or argument as a defense to any action, claim,or proceeding brought by the DOE, the United States, or any agency of theUnited States. Nor does it preclude Tesoro from asserting a defense, counter-claimor offset to any action, claim or proceeding brought by any other person.503. (a) Within thirty (30) days after the Effective Date of this ConsentOrder, Tesoro and the DOE will file or cause to be filed appropriate pleadingsand will take all other steps necessary to withdraw all claims and dismisswith prejudice all proceedings covered by this Consent Order then pendingor subsequently filed before the DOE's Office of Hearings and Appeals orthe Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and to dismiss with prejudiceany court proceeding then pending or subsequently filed involving an appealfrom or seeking review of a decision by the OHA or the FERC in any suchproceeding. (b) Within fifteen (15) days after the execution of the Consent Order byboth parties, DOE agrees to join with Tesoro in written notification toDOE's Office of Hearings and Appeals, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionand any appropriate court of the fact of such execution, which notice shallrequest that said administrative or judicial tribunal stay all furtheraction in the proceedings covered by this Consent Order until such timeas DOE provides notice to said tribunals that the Consent Order has becomeeffective or has been withdrawn purusant to Article IX of this ConsentOrder. 504. Execution of this Consent Order constitutes neither an admission byTesoro nor a finding by the DOE of any violation by Tesoro of any statuteor regualtion. The DOE has determined that it is not appropriate to seekto impose civil penalties for the matters covered by this Consent Order,and the DOE will not seek any such civil penalties. None of the paymentsor expenditures made by Tesoro pursuant to this Consent Order are to beconsidered for any purpose as penalties, fines, or forfeitures or as settlementof any potential liability for penalties, fines or forfeitures. 505. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, with respect to the matterscovered by this Consent Order, the DOE reserves the right to initiate anenforcement proceeding or to seek appropriate penalties for any newly discoveredregulatory violations committed by Tesoro, but only if Tesoro has knowinglyconcealed facts relating to such violations. The DOE also reserves theright to seek appropriate judicial remedies, other than full rescissionof this Consent Order, for any knowing misrepresentation of fact materialto this Consent Order during the course of the audit or the negotiationsthat preceded this Consent Order. VI. Recordkeeping, Reporting and Confidentiality 601. Tesoro shall maintain such records as are necessary to demonstratecompliance with the terms of this Consent Order and records related toTesoro's crude oil purchases, sales, exchanges or transfers during theperiod January 1, 1978 through January 27, 1981. To assist DOE in the distributionof the monies paid pursuant to this Consent Order, Tesoro shall also retainsales volume data and customers' names and addresses regarding its salesof crude oil and refined petroleum products for the transactions coveredby this Consent Order until thirty (30) days after final distribution byDOE of such monies. If requested, Tesoro shall make such information availableto DOE. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, upon timely paymentto DOE of the amount required to be paid under paragraph 402 of this ConsentOrder, Tesoro is relieved of its obligation to comply with the recordkeepingrequirements of the federal petroleum price and allocation regulationsrelating to the matters settled by this Consent Order. 602. Except for formal requests for information regarding other firms subjectto the DOE's information gathering and reporting authority, Tesoro willnot be subject to any audit requests, report orders, subpoenas, or otheradministrative discovery by DOE relating to Tesoro's compliance with thefederal petroleum price and allocation regulations relating to the matterssettled by this Consent Order. 603. The DOE will treat the sensitive commercial and financial informationprovided by Tesoro pursuant to negotiations which were conducted with respectto this Consent Order or obtained by the DOE in its audit of Tesoro andrelated to matters covered by this Consent Order as confidential and proprietaryand will not disclose such information unless required to do so by law,including a request by a duly authorized committee or subcommittee of Congress.If a request or demand for release of any such information is made pursuantto law, the DOE will claim any privilege or exemption reasonably availableto it. The DOE will provide Tesoro with ten (10) days actual notice, ifpossible, of any pending disclosure of such information, unless prohibitedor precluded from doing so by law or request of Congress. The DOE willretain the audit information which it has acquired during its review ofTesoro's compliance with the federal petroleum price and allocation regulationsin accordance with the DOE's established records retention procedures.Notwithstanding the otherwise confidential treatment afforded such informationby the terms of this Copnsent Order, the DOE will make such informationavailable to the Department of Justice (``DOJ'') in response to a requestpursuant to the DOJ's statutory authority by a duly authorized representativeof the DOJ. If requested by the DOJ, the DOE shall not disclose that sucha request has been made. Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to waiveor prejudice any right Tesoro may have independent of this Consent Orderregarding the disclosure of sensitive commercial and financial information.VII. Contractual Undertaking701. It is the understanding and express intention of Tesoro and the DOEthat this Consent Order constitutes a legally enforceable contractual undertakingthat is binding on the parties and their successors and assigns. Notwithstandingany other provision herein, Tesoro (and its successors and assigns) andthe DOE each reserves the right to institute a civil action in an appropriateUnited States district court, if necessary, to secure enforcement of theterms of this Consent Order, and the DOE also reserves the right to seekappropriate penalties and interest for any failure to comply with the termsof this Consent Order. The DOE will undertake the defense of the ConsentOrder, as made effective, in response to any litigation challenging theConsent Order's validity in which the DOE is named a party. Tesoro agreesto cooperate with the DOE in the defense of any such challenge.VIII. Final Order801. Upon becoming effective, this Consent Order shall be a final orderof DOE having the same force and effect as a remedial order issued pursuantto section 503 of the DOE Act, 42 U.S.C. 7193, and 10 CFR 205.199B. Tesorohereby waives its right to administrative or judicial review of this Order,but Tesoro reserves the right to participate in any such review initiatedby a third party.IX. Effective Date901. This Consent order shall become effective as a final order of theDOE upon notice to this effect being published in the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Prior to that date, the DOE will publish noticein the Federal Register that it proposes to make this Consent Order finaland, in that notice, will provide not less than thirty (30) days for membersof the public to submit written comments and to appear at a public hearingconducted by ERA. The DOE will consider all written comments and the statementsmade at the hearing to determine whether to adopt the Consent Order asa final order, to withdraw agreement to the Consent Order, or to attemptto renegotiate the terms of the Consent Order.902. Until the Effective Date, the DOE reserves the right to withdraw consentto this Consent Order by written notice to Tesoro, in which event thisConsent Order shall be null and void. If this Consent Order is not madeeffective on or before the one hundred fiftieth (150th) day following executionby Tesoro, Tesoro may, at any time thereafter until the Effective Date,withdraw its agreement to this Consent Order by written notice to the DOE,in which event this Consent Order shall be null and void.I, the undersigned, a duly authorized representative of Tesoro, herebyagree to and accept on behalf of Tesoro the foregoing Consent Order. <ITAG tagnum="6">Dennis F. Juren,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">President and Chief Executive Office, Tesoro Petroleum Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: October 31, 1988.</ITAG>I, the undersigned, a duly authorized representative of Tesoro, herebyagree to and accept on behalf of Tesoro the foregoing Consent Order. <ITAG tagnum="6">Milton C. Lorenz,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Chief Counsel Economic Regulatory Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated; October 21, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-27839 Filed 12-1-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6450-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>