<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88712-0092 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-12-88.f2.A1091</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="56">Voluntary Protection Programs To Supplement Enforcement and To ProvideSafe and Healthful Working Conditions; Changes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency: </T2>Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action: </T2>Clarifications to the voluntary protection programs (VPP)regarding injury rates and referrals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary: </T2>Documentation retention duration, applicability of therequirements to small businesses, Star construction and Merit injury rates,frequency on consultation safety committee inspections and areas of genericemployee participation requirements are clarified, and OSHA's policy onreferral for enforcement is specified. Other program requirements and OSHAresponsibilities remain unchanged.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>effective date: </T2>June 29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:  </T2>James Foster, Room N3647, Officeof Information and Consumer Affairs, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210, (220) 523-8148.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Introduction</ITAG>A. BackgroundThe Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP), adopted by OSHA on July 2, 1982,have established the credibility of cooperative action among government,industry and labor to address worker safety and health issues and expandworker protection. Requirements for VPP participation are based on comprehensivemanagement systems with active employee involvement to prevent and controlthe potential safety and health hazards of the site. Companies which qualifygenerally view OSHA standards as a minimum level of safety and health performanceand set their own more stringent standards where necessary for effectiveemployee protection.From the beginning, OSHA has reserved the right to use its enforcementauthority in specified instances such as the investigation of employeecomplaints, significant accidents, and chemical leaks or spills. On theother hand, OSHA has been careful to keep separate from enforcement anyinformation submitted through the VPP application process, because applicantshave voluntarily requested OSHA review and have voluntarily presented toOSHA safety and health program information not required by law. A 1984study of private sector attitudes about the VPP indicated that the riskthat most non-participating employers associated with VPP application wasthe possibility that a VPP review could lead to enforcement action. Thathas not ever been and is not now OSHA's intent.The question has arisen as to what action OSHA would take in the eventthat, during the course of VPP interaction, it was determined that employeeswere endangered and the cooperative approach was not effective in resolvingthe situation. In the first place, OSHA believes that such a situationwould be rare, if it ever were to occur. During the more than five-yearhistory of the VPP, cooperation has always resolved any identified problems.Since it is conceivable, however, that a situation could arise where managementwould refuse to address a condition which poses a serious threat to thesafety and health of employees, the agency wants to clarify how an unresolvedsituation of that nature would be handled.The need for a variety of minor clarifications has been determined. Forexample, an organizational change is needed to that an assurance impliedelsewhere in the document is specified in the assurance section.VPP participants have requested clarification on the length of time programdocumentation must be maintained.Questions have arisen requiring a clarification of the time requirementsfor prior site experience at construction sites which are applying forStar participation, necessitating a clarification. In addition, a previouschange inadvertently eliminated an option for Merit construction participation,thereby warranting a reinstatement of earlier language.A discrepancy between two sections addressing frequency of constructionsafety committee inspections has been noted and requires correction.Langage intended to permit waivers of some requirements for written proceduresand documentation for small businesses has not been clearly understood.Finally, where employee participation has been implied in the generic sense,that term has been used instead of the reference to safety committees whichwas previously used. Where the intent was to refer specifically to safetycommittees, there has been no change.B. Statutory FrameworkThe Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29 U.S.C 651 et seq. (the``Act'' and the ``OSH Act''), was enacted ``to ensure so far as possibleevery working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditionsand to preserve our human resources.''Section 2(b) specifies the measures by which the Congress would have OSHAcarry out these purposes. They include the following provisions which establishthe legislative mandate for the Voluntary Protection Programs.<ITAG tagnum="21">``* * * (1) by encouraging employers and employees in their effortsto reduce the number of occupational safety and health hazard at theirplaces of employment, and to stimulate employers and employees to institutenew and to perfect existing programs for providing safer and healthfulworking conditions;'' </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">``* * * (4) by building upon advances already made through employerand employee initiative for providing safe and healthful working conditions;''</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">``* * * (5) by developing innovative methods, techniques, and approachesfor dealing with occupational safety and health problems;''</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">``* * * (13) by encouraging joint labor-management efforts to reduceinjuries and disease arising out of employment.'' </ITAG>C. Structure of NoticeSection II deals with the rationale for the changes.Section III incorporates the change of the name of the Try Program to theMerit Program as announced in 53FR2101 with the clarifications in the programrequirements and OSHA responsibilities.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Rationale for Change </ITAG>The first change in section III.D.2. involves a specification in the assurancessection of management's commitment to optimum occupational safety and healthprotection and to meeting and maintaining the requirements for programparticipation. This has been required as a part of management commitmentin III.E.5.a. Instructions for VPP application and review tools used byOSHA staff, however, have addressed this issue primarily in the assurancesarea. So that VPP materials will reflect the order of requirements listedin the <T4>Federal Register, </T4>this assurance has been added to the assurancessection as Section III.S.2.a. The concept continues to be addressed inthe management commitment section as well.The second change is in section III.D.2.g. That section specifies the kindof program documentation which must be maintained for OSHA review. Impliedin previous <T4>Federal Register </T4>language was the idea that such documentationmust be kept for the duration of VPP participation. In fact, records requiredfor VPP alone, such as documentation of self-inspection or safety committeeactivities must be retained for a minimum of twelve months or until OSHAhas communicated its decision regarding program participation based onthe results of its pre-approval review or regularly scheduled evaluation.This means that, initially, documentation of program activities for theprevious twelve months is required to demonstrate whether or not the VPPrequirements have been operational for the minimum amount of time. Thisdocumentation should be retained until OSHA has communicated its decisionregarding VPP participation in case any questions arise about any aspectsof the site program. The same type of safety and health program documentationmust then be maintained throughout the period of participation to be coveredby the OSHA evaluation, again until notification of OSHA's decision regardingcontinued approval is received, for the reason previously noted.This time period is now specified to clear up any uncertainty for participants.Some of the items listed, such as the OSHA log and industrial hygiene records,must also be maintained for periods of time specified by other regulations.The change is section III.E.4. clarifies the point that the length of timethat rates for all employees at a construction site must have been kepttogether is the most recent twelve months. The previous language requiringsite rates for ``the last full year'' Could be misconstrued as referringto the preceding complete calendar year.Section III.E.5.a(4) has been changed to clarify the ability of OSHA towaive formal requirements such as written procedures or documentation forsmall business where, due to the size of the worksite and numbers of employees,such formalities are unnecessary for the effective functioning of safetyand health management systems. It is intended that OSHA will make the determinationon a case-by-case basis after thorough review of the effectiveness of thesystem in question.Section III.E.5.e. (2)(d) has been changed to coincide with the requirementin section III.E.5.b. (3)(c) that construction safety committee inspectionscover the entire worksite at least monthly. Because of the constantly changingconditions at a construction site, more frequent coverage of the entireworksite is required to ensure prompt hazards correction than is requiredas a minimum for a static general industry site. Most general industryStar sites provide more frequent inspection coverage than is required.In Section III.E.5.f. (2), N.1.c. (5), and N.2.c. (6) the term ``safetycommittee'' had been used as a generic term to indicate some type of ``employeeparticipation.'' In order to reflect this generic connotation more accurately,the term ``employee participation'' is used instead. When the VPP was adoptedin 1982, the preponderance of information regarding employee involvementin safety and health programs focused on joint committees. During the agency'smore than five years' experience with reviewing site programs, however,many different kinds of effective employee participation have been seen.Where options are allowed, OSHA does not want to limit, by its use of language,the type of employee participation a company many choose. The second andthird changes, regarding employee participation in the evaluation measures,clarify that the effectiveness of whatever type of participation the siteuses will be a major determining factor in continued VPP participation.The change in section III.3.b. (2) involves an injury rate clarification.In a previous revision to the Voluntary Protection Programs, 52 FR 7337,the language regarding injury rates for the Try Program (now know as Merit)inadvertently omitted the fact that both the three-year average lost workdaycase rate and the total recordable incidence rate could be above the industryaverage for a general industry applicant if OSHA were convinced that theapplicant's planned program improvements could be expected to bring therates down to a level at or below the industry average in a reasonabletime. The language has been changed to reflect ``either or both,'' in accordwith original program design.In response to questions from agency personnel, Section L has been revisedto indicate how OSHA would handle enforcement referrals in unlikely eventthat a company would refuse to resolve a safety and health issue that hadbeen identified during the course of VPP interaction. To date, no enforcementreferral has been needed to protect workers at potential or participatingVPP sites.There is always the potential for differences of opinion among reasonablepeople regarding the appropriate way to prevent and control hazards. Thespirit of cooperation engendered by VPP facilitates open discussion ofoptions and supports joint efforts for determining solutions to any safetyand health problem that may arise. When joint efforts are successful andemployees are protected, a referral is unnecessary and would not be made.Given the cooperative spirit of the program, the need for referral is unlikely.On the other hand, one can imagine a scenario where workers could be seriouslyendangered, and for one reason or another, management refused to make changesnecessary to protect them. If that situation were to occur, it is clearthat OSHA would be obligated to ensure the safety and health of those employees,and a referral to appropriate enforcement officials would be made becauseOSHA cannot ignore its responsibility to employee safety and health.A referral to enforcement would never be made lightly. OSHA, in line withthe cooperative spirit on which the VPP are based, would first make everyeffort to find a mutually satisfactory solution among government, managementand labor. Since the companies that apply for VPP participation committhemselves to providing superior worker protection that goes beyond theminimum requirements of OSHA standards and since companies that are willingto work with OSHA on a cooperative basis are unlikely to take a negativeapproach to the resolution of any occupational safety and health concern,as indicated above, it is not anticipated that a situation of this naturewill arise. It is not OSHA's intent to jeopardize the cooperative relationship betweenvolunteer companies and OSHA staff nor to squander enforcement resourcesin pursuing trivial concerns. It is, however, OSHA's intention that nosafety and health problem which would seriously endanger employees, andwhich anyone acting in good faith would expect to see corrected, go unresolved.The careful balance between these important needs requires an approachwhich emphasizes the gravity of the question and the need for consistencyin selecting the best way to assure that the employees in question areprotected. The agency has, therefore, determined that any referral to appropriateenforcement officials shall be decided by the Assistant Secretary.Current participants in the VPP have expressed their recognition of theneed for enforcement referrals in deplorable situations that remain unresolvedand have indicated their trust in OSHA to make the determination of thatneed appropriately. Other program requirements and OSHA responsibilities remain unchanged.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. The Voluntary Protection Programs</ITAG>A. Purpose of the Voluntary Protection ProgramsOSHA has long recognized that compliance with its standards cannot be itselfaccomplish all the goals established by the Act. The standards, no matterhow carefully conceived and properly developed, will never cover all unsafeactivities and conditions. Furthermore, limited resources will never permitregular or exhaustive inspections of all of the Nation's workplaces. Inaddition, employers and employees, because of their day-to-day experiencein the workplace, acquire a special knowledge of the processes, materialsand hazards involved with the job. This knowledge, combined with the abilityto evaluate and address unique hazards quickly and to provide rewards forpositive action, can be used by employers to improve workplace safety andhealth in ways simply not available to OSHA.The purpose of the Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) is to emphasizethe importance of, encourage the improvement of, and recognize excellencein employer-provided, site-specific occupational safety and health programs.These programs are comprised of managment systems for preventing or controllingoccupational hazards. The systems not only ensure that OSHA's standardsare met, but go beyond the standards to provide the best feasible protectionat that site.When employers apply for and achieve approval for participation in theVPP, they are removed from programmed inspection lists. This frees OSHA'sinspection resources for visits to establishments that are less likelyto meet the requirements of the OSHA standards. VPP participants enterinto a new relationship with OSHA in which safety and health problems canbe approached cooperatively, when and if they arise.Participation in any of the programs does not diminish existing employerand employee rights and responsibilities under the Act. In particular,OSHA does not intend to increase the liability of any party at an approvedVPP site. Employees or any representatives of employees taking part inan OSHA-approved VPP safety and health program are not assuming the employer'sstatutory or common law responsibilities for providing safe and healthfulworkplaces or undertaking in any way to guarantee a safe and healthfulwork environment.The programs included in the VPP are voluntary in the sense that no employeris required to participate and that any employer may volunteer for applicationto one of the VPP. Compliance with OSHA standards and applicable laws remainsmandatory.Approval for participation is determined by the Assistant Secretary forOccupational Safety and Health.B. Purpose of this NoticeThis notice describes the qualifications criteria for approval of participationin the Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP), and the conditions of participation,termination of or withdrawal from participation and means of reinstatement.C. Program Description<ITAG tagnum="81">1. General </ITAG>The VPP are voluntary programs which provide recognition to qualified employersand removes those ``recognized employers'' from programmed inspection lists.They emphasize the importance of worksite safety and health programs inmeeting the goal of the Act ``to assure so far as possible every workingman and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions . . .''through official recognition of excellent safety and health programs, assistanceto employers in the efforts to reach a level of excellence and the useof the cooperative approach to resolve safety and health problems.The VPP consist of two major programs, Star and Merit, plus a DemonstrationProgram to permit demonstration and/or testing of experimental approacheswhich differ from the two established programs. In addition, within theStar and Merit Programs there are some variations between general industryand construction industry requirements.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Recognition </ITAG>By approving an applicant for participation in the VPP, OSHA recognizesthat the applicant is providing, at a minimum, the basic elements of ongoingsystematic protection of workers at the site which makes routine Federalenforcement efforts unnecessary. The symbols of this recognition are certificatesof approval and the right to use flags showing the program in which thesite is participating. The participant may also choose to use program logosin such items as letter-head or award items for employee contests.In addition to removing approved worksites from programmed inspection lists(but not from valid, formal employee safety and health complaint, inspections,investigations of significant chemicals spills/leaks, nor fatality/catastropheinvestigations), OSHA will provide the opportunity for a company to workcooperatively with the agency both in the resolution of safety and healthproblems and in the promotion of effective safety and health problems throughsuch means as presentations before meetings of safety and health organizationssuch the National Safety Congress. Each approved site will have a designatedOSHA Contact Person to handle information and assistance requests.D. Aspects Common to All VPP<ITAG tagnum="81">1. The Eligible Applicant</ITAG>a. <T3>Site Management. </T3>Management at a site which is either independentor part of a corporation can make application to the VPP for that site.b. <T3>Corporate Management. </T3>The management of a corporation may applyto the VPP on behalf of one or more sites in the corporation. This staffprovide one or more aspects of the site safety and health program.c. <T3>General Contractors and Organizations Providing Overall Managementat Multi-Employer Sites. </T3>At multi-employer sites, such as in the constructionindustry, the only eligible applicant is the one which can control safetyand health conditions of all employees at the site, such as the generalcontractor or the owner. d. <T3>Organizations Representing Groups of Small Business in the Same Industry.</T3>OSHA will consider, for Demonstration Programs, applications fromorganizations providing health and safety program services to groups ofsmall businesses of the same industry (at the three or four digit SIC level)in a limited geographical area. All sites must meet requirements and willbe subject to onsite review. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Assurances </ITAG>Applications for all VPP must be accompanied by certain assurances describingwhat the applicant will do if the application is approved for participationin one of the VPP. The applicant must assure that: a. All the requirements for the VPP will be met and maintained. b. All employees, including newly hired employees when they reach the site,will have the VPP explained to them, specifically including employee rightsunder the program and under the Act. c. All hazards discovered through self-inspections, accident investigationsor employee notification will be corrected in a timely manner. d. If employees are given health and safety duties as part of the applicant'ssafety and health program, the applicant will assure that those employeeswill be protected from discriminatory actions resulting from the duties,just as section 11(c) of the Act protects employees for the exercise ofrights under the Act. e. Employees shall have access to the results of self-inspections and accidentinvestigations upon request (in construction, this requirement may be metthrough the joint labor-management committee). f. For construction, injury records for all work done at the site willbe recorded <T3>together </T3>and the injury rates for that site will be maintainedat or below the national average for that type of construction.g. The information listed below will be maintained and available for OSHAreview. It will be retained until OSHA communicates its decision approvingVPP participation. The same information will be retained during participationfor evaluation purposes for the time period covered by the evaluation untilOSHA communicates its decision regarding continued approval for VPP participation.(1) Written safety and health program; (2) Copies of the log of injuries and illnesses and the OSHA 101 or itsequivalent; (3) Monitoring and sampling records if applicable; (4) Agreement between management and the collective bargaining agent(s)concerning the functions of the safety committee and its organization whereapplicable; (5) Minutes of each committee meeting where applicable; (6) Committee inspection records where applicable; (7) Management inspection and accident investigation records; (8) Records of notifications of unsafe or unhealthful conditions receivedfrom employees and action taken, taking into account appropriate privacyinterests; and, (9) Annual internal safety and health program evaluation reports (describedbelow in E.5.f.). h. Applicants for the Merit or Demonstration Programs must provide assurancethat any data necessary to evaluate achievement of individual goals notlisted above will be made available to OSHA for evaluation purposes. i. Each year by February 15, the participating site will send notificationto the designated OSHA Contact Person, described under Section III.M.,of the site's injury incidence and lost work day case rates, hours workedand estimated average employment for the past full calendar year.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Unionized Sites </ITAG>When a site covered by an application for any of the VPP has a significantportion of its employees organized by one or more collective bargainingunits, the authorized agent must either sign the application or submita signed statement indicating that the collective bargaining agent(s) do(es)not object to participation in the program. Without such concurrence, OSHAwill not approve program participation. <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Inspection/Interaction History </ITAG>If the applicant has been inspected in the last three years, the inspection,abatement and/or any other history of interaction with OSHA must indicategood faith attempts to improve safety and health and include no upheldwillful violations during those last three years. E. The Star Program<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Purpose</ITAG>The Star Program is based on the characteristics of the most comperehensivesafety and health programs used by American industry. It aims to recognizeleaders in injury and illness prevention programs who have been successfulin reducing workplace hazards and to encourage others to work toward suchsuccess.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Term of Participation</ITAG>The term for participation in an approved Star Program is unlimited, contingentupon continued favorable triennial evaluation. In the construction industry,participation is ended with the completion of construction work at thesite.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Experience</ITAG>All elements of the safety and health program must be in place and havebeen implemented for a period of not less than twelve months before Starapproval at both general industry and construction sites. Adequate writtenguidance must be available prior to Star approval.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Results</ITAG>The general industry applicant must have an average of both lost workdayinjury case rates and injury incidence rates for the most recent three-yearperiod at or below the most recent specific industry (at the three or fourdigit level) national average published by BLS. For the construction application,the average injury incidence rate and lost workday injury case rate forat least the most recent twelve months at the site applied for, includingall workers of all subcontractors of the site, must be at or below thenational average for that type of construction according to the most preciseSIC code. The SIC for the site is based on the type of construction project,not individual trades.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Safety and Health Program Qualifications for the Star Program</ITAG>a. <T3>Management Commitment and Planning. </T3>Each applicant must be ableto demonstrate top-level management commitment to occupational safety andhealth in general and to meeting the requirements of VPP. Management systemsfor comprehensive planning must address safety and health.(1) <T3>Commitment to Safety and Health Protection. </T3>As with any othermanagement system, authority and responsibility for employee safety andhealth must be integrated with the management system of the organizationand must involve employees. This commitment includes:(a) <T3>Policy. </T3>Clearly established policies and results-oriented objectivesfor worker safety and health protection which have been communicated toall employees;(b) <T3>Line Accountability. </T3>Authority and responsibility for safety andhealth protection clearly defined and implemented; accountability throughevaluation of supervisors; and a system for rewarding good and correctingdeficient performance;(i) The general industry applicant must have a documented system for holdingall line managers and supervisors accountable for safety and health.(ii) The construction applicant must demonstrate that, at a minimum, theproject manager and contractor superintendents are held accountable forsafety and health conditions within their areas of responsibility.(c) <T3>Resources. </T3>Commitment of adequate resources to workplace safetyand health, in staff, equipment, promotion, etc.;(d) <T3>Management Involvement. </T3>Top management involvement in worker safetyand health concerns, including clear lines of communication with employeesand setting an example of safe and healthful behavior; and(e) <T3>Contract Worker Coverage. </T3>All contractors and subcontractors arerequired, whether in general industry, construction or other specializedindustry, to follow worksite safety and health rules and procedures applicableto their activities while at the site, including special precautions necessaryas a result of their activities.(i) Except where precluded by government regulations, participants shouldbe able to demonstrate that they have considered the safety and healthprograms and performance of major contractors during the evaluation andselection process, especially in operations such as construction wherecontractors and sub-contractors are a routine aspect of business arrangements.(ii) In general industry, when the contractor's activities are not partof the overall operation and include special skills and hazards beyondthe participant's expertise, the participant's responsibility is not expectedto extend beyond proper diligence and prudence in both the selection andthe oversight of the contractor. (2) <T3>Commitment to VPP Participation.</T3> Management must also clearlycommit itself to meeting and maintaining the requirements of the VPP forwhich application is made. (3) <T3>Planning.</T3> Planning for safety and health must be a part of theoverall management planning process. In construction, this includes pre-jobplanning and preparation for different phases of construction as the projectprogresses. (4) <T3>Written Safety and Health Program.</T3> All critical elements of abasic safety and health program, which includes hazard assessment, hazardcorrection and control, safety and health training, employee participationand safety and health program evaluation, must be part of the written programAll aspects of the safety and health program must be appropriate to thesize of the worksite and the type of industry. Some formal requirementssuch as written procedures or documentation may be waived for small businesseswhere the effectiveness of the systems has been evaluated and verified.Waivers will be decided on a case-by-case. b. <T3>Hazard Assessment.</T3> Management of safety and health programs mustbegin with a thorough understanding of all potentially hazardous situationsand the ability to recognize and correct all existing hazards as they arise.This requires: (1) Analysis of all new processes, materials or equipment before use beginsto determine potential hazards and plan for prevention or control. (2) Comprehensive safety and health surveys at intervals appropriate forthe nature of workplace operations, and regular reviews (by a person(s)qualified to recognize existing hazards and potentially significant risks)to ensure the employer's awareness and control of those risks. (a) A baseline survey of health hazards accomplished through initial comprehensiveindustrial hygiene surveying or other comprehensive means of assessment,such as complete industrial hygiene engineering studies, before equipmentor process installation in general industry or in the pre-job planningfor construction; and (b) The use of nationally recognized procedures for all sampling, testing,and analysis with written records of results. (3) A system for conducting, as appropriate, routine self-inspections whichfollow written procedures or guidance and which result in written reportsof findings and tracking of hazard correction. (a) In general industry, these inspections must occur no less frequentlythan monthly and cover the whole worksite at least quarterly; (b) In construction, this must include management inspections which coverthe entire worksite at least weekly; and (c) Also in construction, inspections by members of the safety and healthcommittee which cover the entire worksite as appropriate, but no less frequentlythan once per month, are required. (4) Routine examination and analysis of hazards associated with individualjobs, processes, or phases and inclusion of the results in training andhazard control programs. This includes, e.g., job safety analysis and processhazard review. In construction, the emphasis should be on special safetyand health hazards of each craft and each phase of construction. (5) A reliable system for employees, without fear of reprisal, to notifyappropriate management personnel in writing about conditions that appearhazardous and to receive timely and appropriate responses. The system mustinclude tracking of responses and hazard corrections. (6) An accident/incident investigation system which includes written proceduresor guidance, with written reports of findings and hazard correction tracking;and review of injury/illness experience identifying causes and providingfor preventive or corrective actions. (7) A medical program which includes the availability of physician servicesand personnel trained in first-aid. c. <T3>Hazard Correction and Control.</T3> Based on the results of hazardassessment, identified hazards and potential hazards must be addressedby the implementation of engineering controls; equipment maintenance; personalprotective equipment; disciplinary action, when needed; and emergency preparedness.Safety rules and work procedures must be developed, thoroughly understoodby supervisors and employees, and followed by everyone in the workplace,to prevent and control potential hazards. These include the following provisions;(1) Reasonable site access to Certified Industrial Hygienists and CertifiedSafety Professionals or Certified Safety Engineers must be available, asneeded, based on the potentially significant risks of the site. (2) Means for eliminating or controlling hazards. These include the following:(a) Engineering controls. (b) Personal protective equipment. (c) Safety and health rules, including safe and healthful work proceduresfor specific operations. (i) Appropriate to the potential hazards of the site. (ii) Written, implemented and updated by management as needed and usedby employees. (3) Procedures for disciplinary action or reorientation of employees andsupervisors who break or disregard safety rules, safe work, materials handlingor emergency procedures must be written, communicated to employees, andenforced. (4) Procedures for response to emergencies listing requirements for personalprotective equipment, first aid, medical care, or emergency egress mustbe written and communicated to all employees. Procedures should includeprovisions for emergency telephone numbers, exit routes, and training drills.(5) Ongoing monitoring and maintenance of workplace equipment to preventit from becoming hazardous. (6) A system for initiating and tracking hazard correction in a timelymanner. d. <T3>Safety and Health Training.</T3> Training is necessary to implementmanagement's commitment to prevent exposure to hazards. Supervisors andemployees must know and understand the policies, rules and procedures establishedto prevent exposure. Training for safety and health must ensure that: (1) Supervisors understand the hazards associated with a job, their potentialeffects on employees, and the supervisor's role, through teaching and enforcement,in ensuring that employees follow the rules, procedures and work practicesfor avoiding or controlling exposure to the hazards. (2) Employees are made aware of hazards, and the safe work procedures tofollow in order to protect themselves from the hazards, through trainingat the same time they are taught to do a job and through reinforcement.(3) Supervisors and all employees understand what to do in emergency situations.(4) Where personal protective equipment is required, employees understandthat it is required, why it is required, its limitations, how to use it,and how to maintain it; and employees use it properly. e. <T3>Employee Participation.</T3> (1) For general industry, the requirementfor employee participation may be met in any one of a variety of ways,as long as employees have an active and meaningful way to participate insafety and health problem identification and resolution. (a) This is in addition to the individual right to notify appropriate managersof hazardous conditions and practices. (b) Examples of acceptable means of providing for employee impact on decision-makinginclude the following: (i) Safety committees, (ii) Safety observers, (iii) Ad hoc safety and health problem-solving groups, (iv) Safety and health training of other employees, (v) Analysis of hazards of jobs, and (iv) Committees which plan and conduct safety and health awareness programs.(2) Construction sites must utilize the labor-management safety committeeapproach to involve employees in the identification and correction of hazardousactivities and conditions. This is required because of the seriousnessof the hazards, the changing worksite conditions, the expanding and contractingwork force and the high turnover in the construction industry. The applicantmust be able to demonstrate that the site has a joint labor-managementcommittee for safety and health which has the following characteristics.(a) Has a minimum of one year's experience providing safety and healthadvice and making periodic site inspections. (b) Has at least equal representation by bona fide worker representativeswho work at the site and who are selected, elected, or approved by a dulyauthorized collective bargaining organization.(c) Meets regularly, keeps minutes of the meetings, and follows quorumrequirements consisting of at least half of the members of the committee,with representatives of both employees and management.(d) Makes regular workplace inspections (with at least one worker representative)at least monthly and more frequently as needed, and has provided for atleast monthly coverage of the whole worksite.(e) In addition, the joint committee must be allowed to:andbullet; Observe or assist in the investigation and documentation of majoraccidents;andbullet; Have access to all relevant safety and health information; and,andbullet; Have adequate training so that the committee can recognize hazards,with continued training as needed.(3) If a construction applicant chooses to use a joint committee that differseither in the membership composition or in the functional duties specifiedin (b) above, the applicant must:(a) Meet operational requirements for quorum, meeting minutes, etc.(b) Demonstrate that the alternative practices achieve the objectives ofthe practices they replace. For example, bona fide employee representationin the joint committee is intended to ensure that all site employees participatefully in matters of safety and health and that they are fully informedof decisions affecting safety and health. In the absence of bona fide employeerepresentation on the joint committee, means which are equally effectivein achieving these objectives must be provided.(c) Contractually bind all contractors and subcontractors operating atthe applicant's site to maintain effective safety and health programs andto comply with applicable safety and health rules and regulations:(i) Such contract provisions must specify authority for the oversight,coordination and enforcement of those programs by the applicant and theremust be documentary evidence of the exercise of this authority by the applicant;(ii) Such contract provisions must provide for the prompt correction andcontrol of hazards, however detected, by the applicant in the event thatcontractors or individuals fail to correct or control such hazards; and(iii) Such contract provisions must specify penalties, including dismissalfrom the worksite, for willful or repeated non-compliance by contractors,subcontractors, or individuals.f. <T3>Safety and Health Program Evaluation.</T3> The applicant must havea system for evaluating the operation of the safety and health programannually to determine what changes are needed to improve worker safetyand health protection.(1) The system must provide for written narrative reports with recommendationsfor improvements and documentation of followup action.(2) In particular, the effectiveness of the operation of the self-inspectionsystem, the employee hazard notification system, accident investigations,employee participation, safety and health training, the enforcement ofsafety and health rules, and the coverage of health aspects, includingpersonal protective equipment and routine monitoring and sampling, shouldbe determined and the findings should be used to improve the implementationof the company's written safety and health program.(3) The evaluation may be conducted by corporate or site officials or bya private sector third-party.(4) In construction, the evaluation should be conducted annually and immediatelyprior to completion of construction to determine what has been learnedabout safety and health activities that can be used to improve the contractor'ssafety and health program at other sites.F. The Merit Program<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Purpose</ITAG>The Merit Program is aimed at employers in any industry who do not yetmeet the qualifications for the Star Program but who wish to work towardStar Program participation. If OSHA determines that the employer has demonstratedthe commitment and the potential to achieve the Star requirements, Meritis used to set goals that, when achieved, will qualify the site for Starparticipation.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Term of Participation</ITAG>Merit Programs will be approved for a period of time agreed upon in advanceof approval. The term will be dependent upon how long it is expected totake the applicant to accomplish the goals for Star participation. Participationis canceled at the end of the term.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Qualifications for Merit</ITAG>a. <T3>Safety and Health Program Requirements.</T3> An eligible applicantto the Merit Program must have a written safety and health program whichcovers the essential elements of a safety and health program as describedin Section III.E.5 for Star.(1) The basic elements (management commitment and planning; hazard assessment;hazard correction and control; safety and health training; employee participationand safety and health program evaluation) should all be operational or,at a minimum, in place and ready for implementation by the date of approval.For the construction industry, the joint labor-management committee musthave had a minimum of three months experience in providing safety and healthinspections before approval.(2) The elements are not expected to be at Star quality of completeness.The Merit applicant is not expected to meet each of the specific Star requirementsin each element. Participation in Merit is an opportunity for employersto work with OSHA to improve the quality of their safety and health programsand reduce their injury rates to meet the requirements for Star.b. <T3>Injury Rates.</T3> (1) For the Merit Program in construction, if theinjury rates for the site applied for are not at or below the industryaverages for the preceding twelve months as required for Star, the applicantcompany must be able to demonstrate that the company's three-year averageinjury rates are at or below the most recently published BLS national averagefor the industry (at the three digit level). The injury incidence rateand the lost workday case rate must each be averaged over the last threecomplete calendar years. The rate must include <T3>all</T3> of the applicant's employees who are actually employed atconstruction sites in that SIC. The applicant may use nationwide employmentor may designate an appropriate geographical area which include the sitefor which application is made.(2) For general industry, if either the three-year average rate for allrecordable injuries, or for injury lost workday cases, or both for thelast three calendar years is above the national average for the specificindustry average (at the three or four digit level) as most recently publishedby BLS, the applicant must indicate goals for the reduction of either orboth of those rates and demonstrate that the methods planned to reducethem are feasible.c. <T3>Goals.</T3> Any system required for Star participation that is notin place or is not yet of Star quality at the time of approval must beset as a goal along with any rate reduction goals.G. The Voluntary Protection Demonstration Program<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Purpose</ITAG>This program provides the opportunity for companies to demonstrate theeffectiveness of alternative methods which, if proven successful (usuallyat more than one site), could be substituted as alternative qualificationsfor the Star Program for certain situations; to explore the use of VPPin industries other than construction and those classified as general industries,such as maritime or agriculture; and to test methods of overcoming problemswhich have kept certain employers, such as small business employers andmany contractors in the construction industry, from taking part in theVPP.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Qualifications</ITAG>a. Like all VPP participants, those in the demonstration program must havea site safety and health program that addresses a minimum of the basicelements (management commitment and planning, hazard assessment, hazardcorrection and control, safety and health training, employee participation,and safety and health program evaluation) described for Star in SectionIII.E. above. How the applicant implements those elements may be the subjectof demonstration so long as Star quality protection is afforded all employees.The applicant is not expected to meet each of the specifics in each element.b. Applicants for this program must demonstrate to the Assistant Secretary'ssatisfaction that the alternative approach shows reasonable promise ofbeing successful enough to serve as an alternative basis for inclusionin the Star Program. This includes having average injury incidence andlost workday case rates for the previous three years at or below the specificindustry average. Injury rates for mobile worksites such as in the constructionindustry must be at or below the specific industry average for the lifeof the worksite.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Term of Participation</ITAG>Demonstration programs will be approved, subject to annual evaluation,for the period of time agreed upon in advance of approval but not to exceedfive years.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Approval to Star</ITAG>a. Approval to Star is contingent upon:(1) Successful demonstration of the alternative aspects; and,(2) A decision by the Assistant Secretary that changing the requirementsof the Star Program to allow inclusion of these alternative aspects isdesirable.b. Once a decision has been made by the Assistant Secretary to change Star,those changes must be published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>to provide public notice of the change.c. When the published change has become effective, the demonstration sitemay be approved to Star without submitting a new application or undergoingfurther onsite review provided that the approval occurs no later than oneyear following the last evaluation under the Demonstration Program.H. Application Requirements for All VPP<ITAG tagnum="81">1. The Application Instructions</ITAG>OSHA will prepare, keep current and make available to all interested parties,application guidelines which explain the type of information to be submittedfor OSHA review.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Application Content</ITAG>Eligible applicants will be required to provide all relevant informationdescribed in the most current version of the <T3>Application Instructions </T3>which apply to the program for whichapplication is made.Amendments to submitted applications will be requested when the applicationinformation is insufficient to determine eligibility for onsite review.Materials needed to document the safety and health program which the applicantfeels may involve invasion of privacy or a trade secret should not be includedin the application. Instead, such materials should be described in theapplication and provided for viewing only at the site, if an onsite Pre-ApprovalReview is conducted as part of the application review.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Application Submission</ITAG>Applications may be submitted to OSHA Regional Offices or, in the caseof multi-regional applications, to OSHA's Directorate of Federal-StateOperations in Washington, DC.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Application Withdrawal</ITAG>Any applicant may withdraw a submitted application at any time after formalsubmission and before approval or denial. When the applicant notifies OSHAof its withdrawal, the original application will be returned to the applicant.OSHA may keep the assigned Program Officer's marked working copy of theapplication for a year before discarding it, in case the applicant shouldraise questions concerning the handling of the application. Once an applicationhas been withdrawn, a new submission of a formal application is requiredto begin application review again.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Public Access</ITAG>The following documents will be maintained in OSHA's National and applicableRegional Offices for public access beginning on the day the applicant isapproved and for so long as VPP participation is active:a. VPP application and amendments;b. Pre-Approval report and subsequent evaluation reports;c. Transmittal memoranda to Assistant Secretary;d. Assistant Secretary's approval letter; and,e. Notification memoranda to Regional Administrator.I. Qualification Verification<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Initial Review</ITAG>The initial review of the application is made to ascertain whether thosequalifications which can be documented by paper submission have been met.The applicant will be given the opportunity to amend the application withadditional or substitute materials for the purpose of improving the application.Where resources allow, OSHA staff will assist with application preparation,particularly for the Demonstration Program.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Pre-Approval Onsite Reviews</ITAG>a. <T3>Purpose. </T3>The Pre-Approval Review, which is conducted by a teamof non-enforcement OSHA staff, on the site for which participation hasbeen requested is a management review of the site safety and health program.It is conducted to:(1) Verify the information supplied in the application concerning qualificationfor the VPP for which application made;(2) Identify the strengths and weaknesses of the site safety and healthprogram;(3) Determine the adequacy of the safety and health program to addressthe potential hazards of the site; and(4) Obtain information to assist the Assistant Secretary in making theapproval decision.b. <T3>Preparation.</T3> The review will be arranged at the mutual convenienceof OHSA and the applicant. The review team will consist of a team leaderwith a back-up along with health and safety specialists as required bythe size of the site and the complexity of the safety and health program.c. <T3>Duration of the Review.</T3> The time required for the Pre-ApprovalReview will depend upon the size of the site and the program applied for.Reviews will usually average one-and-a-half to two days onsite, unlessthe site has more than 1,000 workers or has other complicating factors.d. <T3>Content.</T3> All Pre-Approval Reviews will include a review of injuryrecords, recalculation of the rates submitted with the application, verificationthat the safety and health program described in the application has beenimplemented and a general assessment of safety and health conditions todetermine if the safety and health program is adequate for the hazardsof the site.The review will also include interviews with relevant individuals (suchas members of joint safety committees, management personnel and randomlyselected non-supervisory personnel).Onsite document review will include the following records (or samples ofthem) if they exist and are relevant to the application or the safety andhealth program;(1) Management statement of commitment to safety and health;(2) The OSHA 200 log;(3) Safety and health manual(s);(4) Employee notifications of safety and health problems;(5) Safety rules, emergency procedures and examples of safe work procedures;(6) The system for enforcing safety rules;(7) Self-inspection procedures, reports and correction tracking;(8) Accident investigations;(9) Safety committee minutes;(10) Employee orientation and safety training programs and attendance records;(11) Industrial hygiene monitoring records; and,(12) Other records which provide documentation of the qualifications forthese programs.J. Application Approval<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Deferred Approval</ITAG>If, at the conclusion of the Pre-Approval Review, the applicant needs totake actions to meet the qualifications for approval, reasonable time_upto 90 days_will be allowed for those actions to be taken before a recommendationis made to the Assistant Secretary. Where necessary, an onsite visit willbe made to verify the actions taken after the Pre-Approval Review visit.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Application Withdrawal</ITAG>If the applicant cannot meet the requirements for participation in oneof the VPP or for any reason does not wish to continue the approval process,reasonable time shall be allowed for application withdrawal as providedfor in III.H.4., before recommendation is made to the Assistant Secretary.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Application Approval</ITAG>If, in the opinion of the Pre-Approval Review team, the applicant has metthe qualifications requirements of the VPP applied for or an alternativeVPP acceptable to the applicant, the team's recommendation will be madeto the Regional Administrator, who, on concurrence, will recommend approvalto the Director of Federal-State Operations. The Director of Federal-StateOperations shall review the report for consistent application of the qualificationrequirements and, on concurrence, will forward the recommendation to theAssistant Secretary to approve participation. Approval will occur on theday that the Assistant Secretary signs a letter informing the applicantof approval.K. Application Denial1. Should the Assistant Secretary, for any reason, reject the FSO and/orRegional recommendation to approve, a letter from the Assistant Secretarydenying approval will be sent to the applicant. The denial will occur asof the date of the letter.2. Should an applicant appeal to the Assistant Secretary a finding by theteam that qualifications are not met, the Director of Federal-State Operationswill forward the appeal to the Assistant Secretary, along with the team'srecommendation of denial.If the Assistant Secretary accepts the recommendation to deny approval,the denial will occur as of the date the Assistant Secretary signs a letterinforming the applicant of the decision.L. Inspection Requirements<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Programmed Inspections</ITAG>Participating work sites will be removed from OSHA's programmed inspectionlists.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Workplace Complaints</ITAG>Employee complaints to OSHA will be handled by enforcement personnel inaccordance with normal OSHA enforcement procedures.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Chemical Leaks/Spills</ITAG>Any significant chemical leaks spills will be handled by enforcement personnelin accordance with normal OSHA enforcement procedures.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Fatalities and Catastrophes</ITAG>All fatalities and catastrophes will be handled by enforcement personnelin accordance with normal OSHA enforcement procedures.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Referrals</ITAG>Although the history of the VPP indicates that safety and health problemsdiscovered during contact with worksites for VPP purposes are resolvedcooperatively, OSHA must reserve the right, where the safety and healthof employees is seriously endangered and site management refuses to correctthe situation, to refer the situation to the Assistant Secretary for reviewand enforcement action if warranted.a. The employer will be informed in advance that a referral will be madeto the Assistant Secretary and that enforcement action may result.b. Because companies with excellent safety and health programs that areinterested in participating in the VPP are not likely to refuse to addressa serious problem in a cooperative spirit, a situation of this type isunlikely to occur. It is important, however, for interested employers andemployees to be aware of and understand OSHA's obligation in the eventthat such a situation should occur.c. Where a cooperative spirit does not exist between OSHA and a company,VPP participation is not appropriate. Therefore, if a company in this situationdoes not choose to withdraw from VPP consideration, VPP participation shallbe denied or terminated.M. Post-Approval Assistance<ITAG tagnum="81">1. OSHA Contact Person</ITAG>An OSHA official will be assigned to each VPP participating worksite asContact Person. This person will be available to assist the participant,as needed, to assure smooth interface with OSHA and to provide expertiseas required.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Problem Solving</ITAG>If a problem comes to the attention of the OSHA Contact Person, eitherthrough evaluation efforts, review of injury rates, records of OSHA complaintinspections, chemical leaks/spills or accident investigations, or by requestof the VPP participant, the Contract Person will attempt to assist theparticipant in resolving the problem, including, if necessary, arrangingwith the participant for an onsite visit to assess the problem and itspossible causes.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Scheduled Onsite Assistance</ITAG>In some cases, such as in the Demonstration Program, in the constructionprogram or when needed for the Merit Program, a schedule of onsite assistancevisits shall be agreed upon before approval.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Significant Organizational or Ownership Changes</ITAG>Whenever significant changes are made in ownership or organizational structureat a VPP site, the Contact Person should make an onsite assistance visitto determine the impact of the changes on VPP participation.N. Evaluation<ITAG tagnum="81">1. The Star Program</ITAG>a. <T3>Purpose. </T3>(1) To determine continued qualification for the StarProgram.(2) To document results of program participation in terms of the evaluationcriteria and other striking aspects of the site program or its results.(3) To identify any problems which have the potential of adversely affectingcontinued Star Program qualifications and to determine if those problemsrequire additional evaluations.b. <T3>Frequency. </T3>Star Programs shall be evaluated every three years(except when serious problems have been identified which require an earlierevaluation) with an annual review of injury incidence and lost workdayinjury case rates which shall include a recalculation of the latest three-yearaverages.c. <T3>Measures of Effectiveness. </T3>The following factors will be usedin the evaluation of Star Program participants:(1) Continued compliance with the program requirements;(2) Satisfaction of the participants;(3) Nature and validity of any complaints received by OSHA;(4) Nature and resolution of problems that may have come to OSHA's attentionsince approval or the last evaluation; and(5) The effectiveness of employee participation programs.d. <T3>Description of Evaluation. </T3>OSHA's evaluation of Star Program participantswill consist mainly of an onsite visit of similar duration and scope ofthe Pre-Approval Program Review described in III.I.2. Documentation ofprogram implementation from pre-approval review or the previous evaluationwill be reviewed.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. The Merit Program</ITAG>a. <T3>Purpose. </T3>(1) To determine continued qualification for the MeritProgram, or to determine whether the applicant may be approved for theStar Program.(2) To determine whether adequate progress has been made toward the agreed-upongoals.(3) To identify any problems in the safety and health program or its implementationwhich need resolution in order to continue qualification or meet agreed-upongoals.(4) To document program improvements and/or improved results.(5) To provide advice and suggestions for improvements that might be made.b. <T3>Frequency. </T3>All merit programs will be evaluated annually for theduration of the period of approval, except where the participant requestsan evaluation before the annual evaluation for the purpose of determiningwhether the Star qualifications have been met.c. <T3>Measure of Effectiveness.</T3> The following factors will be used inthe evaluation of Merit Programs:(1) Continued adequacy of the safety and health program to address thepotential hazards of the workplace;(2) Comparison of rates to the industry average; (3) Satisfaction of the participants;(4) Nature and validity of any complaints received by OSHA; (5) Nature resolution of problems that have come to OSHA's attention;(6) Effectiveness of the employee participation program; and,(7) Progress made toward goals specified in the pre-approval or previousevaluation report.d. <T3>Description of Evaluation. </T3>OSHA's evaluation will consist mainlyof an onsite visit of duration and content similar to the Pre-ApprovalReview described in III.I.2.O. Termination or Post-Approval Withdrawal<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Reason for Termination </ITAG>a. Completion of covered construction work at the site will terminate aconstruction industry approval.b. Sale of the approved site to another company or any management changethat eradicates or significantly weakens the safety and health programmay terminate the approval.c. The participating site management, or the duly authorized collectivebargaining agent where applicable, may terminate participation for anyreason.d. OSHA may terminate participation for cause.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Cause for OSHA Termination</ITAG>a. <T3>Star Program.</T3> Termination by OSHA will occur when a significantfailure to maintain the safety and health program in accordance with theprogram requirements has been identified.b. <T3>Merit Program. </T3>Termination by OSHA will occur when:(1) A significant failure to maintain the safety and health program inaccordance with the program requirements has been identified; or,(2) No significant progress has been made toward the goals; or(3) The term of approval has expired.c. <T3>The Voluntary Protection Demonstration Program. </T3>Termination byOSHA will occur when:(1) OSHA determines that continuation of the experiment will:(a) Endanger workers at the covered site(s); and/or,(b) Be unlikely to result in inclusion into the Star Program; or,(2) The period of approval has expired.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Notification </ITAG>OSHA will provide the participant and other relevant parties 30 days noticeof intent to terminate participation unless:(a) Other terms for termination were agreed-upon before approval; or(b) A set period for approval is expiring or construction has been completed.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Post-approval Withdrawal</ITAG>Upon receipt of notice of intent to terminate, or for any other reason,a participant may withdraw from the VPP by submitting written notificationto the assigned Contract Person.P. ReinstatementReinstatement requires reapplication.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 29th day of June.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John A. Pendergrass,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-15513 Filed 7-11-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-26-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>