<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88712-0003 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-12-88.f2.A1002</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Parts 272 and 273</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Amdt. No. 289]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Food Stamp Program; Simplified Application and Standardized BenefitProjects</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Food and Nutrition Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This final rule establishes procedures for conductingprojects using simplified food stamp application and benefit determinationprocedures for recipients of certain types of categorical aid. These projects,which are operational alternatives to normal procedures, are authorizedby Subsection 8(e) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended by section1520 Pub. L. 98-198, the Food Security Act of 1985 (7 U.S.C. 2017(e)).The projects' goals are improved administrative efficiency and reducederror rates.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>This action is effective August 11, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Russ Gardiner, Supervisor, Research,Demonstration and Evaluation Projects Section, Administration and DesignBranch, Program Development Division, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria,Va. 22302, Telephone: (703) 756-3387.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Classification</ITAG>Executive Order 12291This final rule has been reviewed under the Executive Order 12291 and Secretary'sMemorandum No. 1512-1, and has been classified not major because the provisionswill not result in: (1) An annual effect on the economy of $100 millionor more; (2) a major increase in costs or prices for consumers, industries,Federal, State or local governments, or geographical regions; or (3) significantadverse effects on competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation,or on the ability of United States-based enterprises to compete with foreign-basedenterprises in domestic or export markets. These provisions will not significantlyraise the Food Stamp Program's total benefit and administrative expenses.It is expected that the operation of these projects will result in administrativecost savings and error reduction in the Food Stamp Program (FSP). The projectswill be operated in a maximum of five States and five political subdivisions.Because these provisions will deal only with the administration of theFSP in these sites, they will not affect industry or trade in any substantivemanner.Executive Order 12372The Food Stamp Program is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistanceunder No. 10551. For the reasons set forth in the final rule and relatedNotice to 7 CFR Part 3015, Subpart V (46 FR 29115), this program is excludedfrom the scope of Executive Order 12372 which requires intergovernmentalconsultation with State and local officials.Regulatory Flexibility ActThis final rule has been reviewed with regard to the requirements of theRegulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96-354, 94 Stat. 1164, September 19,1980). Anna Kondratas, Administrator, Food and Nurtrition Service (FNS),has certified that the action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The rule establishes proceduresunder which State and local agencies will operate Simplified Applicationand Standardized Benefit Projects. As participation is voluntary and someadministrative cost savings should result, there should be no significantadverse impact on the workload, staffing needs, or paperwork of participatingState or county agencies.Reporting and RecordkeepingThe reporting and recordkeeping requirements contained in andSection; 273.23(1)of this regulation which come under the provisions of the Paperwork ReductionAct of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3507) will be submitted to OMB for their reviewand approval. They will not be enforced until such time as OMB approvalis received.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>On April 23, 1987, a proposed rule for the Simplified Application/StandardizedBenefit (SA/SB) Projects was published at 52 FR 13450. Interested partieswere given 60 days to provided comments. A total of 15 comment letterswere received from State and local agencies and public interest groupsduring the comment period; all of the letters contained more than one comment.The major concerns raised are discussed below. Commentors on the proposedregulations were also provided with a draft copy of the SA/SB Work PlanGuide (WPG). (The WPG will be used by potential operators in developingproposals for operating SA/SB Projects.) Comments received on the WPG havealso been considered in developing this final rule.An explanation of the rationale for the rule is contained in the preambleof the proposed rule. While part of it is reprinted below for the sakeof clarity, the reader should refer to that preamble for a full understandingof the provisions of this rulemaking.Section 17(d) of the Food Stamp Act, as amended by Pub. L. 97-98 (December21, 1981) authorized the Secretary to conduct a Simplified ApplicationDemonstration Project. The Simplified Application Demonstration Projectwas an attempt to reduce the administrative burden of food stamp benefitcalculations by simplifying program rules. The demonstration project testedhow different approaches to standardizing and simplifying policy affectbenefits, administrative costs, and errors in the FSP. Four sites_the Stateof Illinois, the State of Oklahoma, and San Diego and Fresno Counties,California_participated in the demonstration. Although each developed andimplemented its own version of policy simplification, all four focusedon simplifying the process of determining food stamp benefit levels forhouseholds that are already eligible for other programs, particularly Aidto Families with Dependent Children (AFDC). The legislation allowed theparticipating sponsors to decide which categories of households would beproject eligible_households all of whose members received AFDC, SupplementalSecurity Income (SSI) and/or Medicaid (pure households); or householdsonly some of whose members received AFDC, SSI and/or Medicaid (mixed households).In Illinois, program simplification entailed assigning food stamp benefitsto pure AFDC households based on standard-benefit tables under which allhouseholds within certain categories received the same food stamp allotment.In Oklahoma, income equal to the maximum State AFDC payment (plus any applicableAFDC ``$30 and \1/3\'' earned income disregard) was used as the food stampgross-income standard for AFDC households. Income equal to countable SSIincome plus the State-supplemental payment was used as the food stamp gross-incomestandard for SSI/Medicaid households. The California sites used AFDC incomedefinitions to establish FSP eligibility and benefit levels. The San Diegoproject involved both pure and mixed AFDC households; only pure AFDC householdswere project eligible in Fresno. The evaluation of the demonstration showedthat simplified procedures could, depending upon the type of benefit standardizationimplemented, significantly reduce administrative costs and error rates.The 1985 Food Security Act (Pub. L. 99-198, December 23, 1985) establishedthe use of simplified application and standardized benefit procedures asan operational alternative. By-and-large, the operational guidelines containedin the legislation authorizing the Simplified Application Demonstration(Pub. L. 97-98) were repeated in the new legislation (Pub. L. 99-198).Rather than establish simplified application and standardized benefit proceduresas operational alternatives available to all States, the 1985 legislationspecifically limits operation to a maximum of five States and five politicalsubdivisions. Because of this limitation, FNS will competitively selectoperational sites.General Project Related ConcernsThe majority of the commentors expressed strong support for the project.They believed that the project's goals_administrative cost savings throughsimplification, error reduction, and protection of the poorest households_representeda needed ``new direction'' in program administration. Not unexpectedly,particular support was expressed by State agency commentors for the project'spotential for reducing error rates. Three commentors expressed concernregarding the ability of State agencies to meet those goals while maintainingprogram costs at current levels. FNS acknowledges that simultaneous achievementof these outcomes will be difficult but not impossible.Several of the commentors supported the objective of administrative costsavings. Of those commentors, one favored options which also increase programbenefits and another cautioned against cutting benefits to achieve programsimplification. The statute requires that average allotments by householdsize not decrease from current levels: Congressional direction requiresthat the poorest of the poor households not be harmed as a result of standardization.Due to fiscal constraints, a significant increase in program costs cannotbe permitted. An amount equal to the Federal savings realized in administrativefunds can be added to current benefit costs; however, additional benefitincreases should be kept to a minimum. Household protection is achievedby establishing a goal for benefit losses_no household would lose benefitsof more than $10 or 20 percent, whichever is less. This goal is containedin the Work Plan Guide and will be used in evaluating project proposals.One commentor suggested that the project's parameters be expanded to allowbenefits to be provided in cash rather than coupons. We wish to emphasizethat these projects are operational alternatives and not demonstrations.The authorizing legislation does not permit cash benefits, therefore regulationsissued pursuant to 8(e) cannot authorize cash benefits.Several commentors acknowledged that the legislation itself places restrictionson the level of allowable simplification, but expressed concern that FNSnot add to those restrictions. In finalizing these regulations, we haveattempted to provide State agencies as much flexibility as possible totailor their SA/SB systems to existing conditions. We have combined thisoperational flexibility with specific limitations on the level of benefitchanges which will be permissible. Taken in combination, State and localproject operators will be allowed to take whatever path they feel is mostadministratively advantageous as long as recipient benefits and rightsare properly protected.Program Administration_andSection; 273.23(b)Two commentors expressed dissatisfaction that operation of the projectis limited to a maximum of five States and five political subdivisions.Congress has clearly established this limitation in legislation and, therefore,we are unable to change this provision.Although not specifically stated in the proposed regulations, the preamblestated that potential project operators would have 90 days to prepare andsubmit their SA/SB Work Plans. Two commentors objected to this timeframe;stating that it was insufficient time in which to develop benefit methodologies,assess their impact, and clear the submission through the appropriate internalchannels. Six months was suggested as an alternative. Since the draft ofthe Work Plan Guide has been available since late July 1987, we believesix months is unnecessarily long for Work Plan development. Since 90 daysmay, in some instances, prove to be inadequate time, the regulations havebeen revised to provide 120 days for Work Plan submission. Political subdivisionshave been provided an additional 30 days since these proposals must clearthrough the State agency.One commentor asked whether State agencies could submit a single applicationwhich could be evaluated as either a State or project area proposal. BecauseFNS is expecting to receive a large number of proposals, various panelswill review the State and project area proposals. Hence, separate applicationsfor each proposed project will be necessary. If a project area within aState and the State agency both win their categories, the State agencywill be given the option of deciding which type of project they wish tooperate.Many of the commentors had strong opinions regarding the selection criteriaset forth in the proposed regulation. They were particularly concernedabout the weight assigned to ``net Federal costs.'' Following the generalconcerns discussed above, the commentors stated that achievement of the``zero-net Federal cost'' requirement would be difficult, if not impossible.Suggestions for additional selection criteria included: not harming thepoorest of the poor; simplifying the application and the application process;household impacts; project management plans and staffing; organizationalcapability; site population; administrative savings; error reduction; varietyof household types and benefit methodologies; and monitoring and evaluationplanning. The draft of the Work Plan Guide (WPG) expanded on the evaluationcriteria contained in the proposed regulations, specifically includingmany of these criteria. In particular, the WPG criteria addressed the project'seffect on benefits, from a total cost standpoint and an individual householdstandpoint; the impact of the project's design on processing proceduresand demands made of applicants; creativity of design; administrative savings;technical quality; and operational potential. Dispersion of the sites amongthe FNS Regional Offices was added as a final criteria to serve as a delineatorshould more than 10 proposals of similar quality exist.While the selection criteria contained in the draft Work Plan Guide incorporatedthe majority of comments received on the proposed regulations, two areasdeserve additional consideration. The first is administrative cost savings.Several commentors believed that the emphasis placed on administrativecost savings would make it very difficult for State agencies with low per-casecosts to compete. They believed that because their costs are so low, itwould be difficult to achieve high administrative savings from either apercentage or absolute standpoint. Further, they believed that holdingbenefit increases to such small amounts would be difficult. One commentoroffered a solution to the first problem by suggesting that administrativecost savings be weighted to produce a factor accounting for differencesin States' current administrative costs. To accomplish this, the ratiobetween a State agency's current administrative cost to project cost savingswould be multiplied by the ratio between a State agency's administrativecost to the National average administrative cost. It was never FNS' intentionthat State agencies with low administrative costs be penalized in the selectionprocess. In fact, percentage changes rather than absolute cost changeswere used as evaluation factors in the draft Work Plan Guide. We agreethat this commentor's approach strengthens the criteria and have incorporatedthis suggestion. However, we do not see any options with regard to limitingprogram cost increases, particularly given current Federal budget constraints.The second area needing further discussion concerns the use of error reductionas a selection criteria. Several commentors believed that since error reductionwas a project goal, its achievement should be considered in site selection.As we discussed in the preamble to the proposed regulations, we do notwant to reward States with high error rates by making error reduction aselection criteria. A natural effect of simplified procedures will be thereduction of error. This error reduction will not, however, have an impacton program costs since error is reduced by eliminating rather than correctingerrors in eligibility and benefit determination.Contents of the Work Plan_andSection; 273.23(c)Substantive comments on the Work Plan have been addressed in other areasof this preamble. However, several commentors suggested that a more completedescription of the Work Plan contents be included. This has been done;the final regulations provide an outline of what will be required in theWork Plan. The Simplified Application/Standardized Benefit Notice providesfurther information and the Work Plan Guide is incorporated herein by thisreference and is available by contacting Mr. Gardiner at the above citedaddress.The final regulation establishes a requirement to update the Work Plan,as circumstances dictate, to modify the benefit determination methodology.Such changes would have to be approved in advance by FNS.Project Eligible Households_andSection; 273.23(d)Comments concerning households eligible for inclusion in this project generallyfavored expansion of eligible categories; however, one commentor expressedreservations about including ``mixed'' households, i.e., a household whichcontains some members receiving neither AFDC, SSI nor Medicaid, due toanticipated complications in evaluating project effects. Three commentorssuggested that State agencies be allowed to designate households receivingState Assistance as project eligible. Another commentor recommended thatNon-Public Assistance households be allowed to participate in the project,but only to the extent of allowing a standardized shelter deduction. Thelegislation specifically identifies those categories of households whichmay be project eligible. Eligibility is limited to households which includeone or more members who are recipients of AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid. Consequently,participants in State programs are eligible for inclusion in this projectonly if they are part of such households. FNS recognizes that inclusionof ``mixed'' households will require special procedures; State agenciesare free to exclude them if they wish. However, if a State agency includesmixed households in the eligible household universe, it accepts responsibilityfor designing adequate procedures regarding income and benefits to meetproject requirements.Determining Food Stamp Program Eligibility_andSection; 273.23(e)Three commentors addressed themselves to the income definitions establishedin the proposed regulations and discussed in the preamble. One commentorwas concerned the SSI income exclusions were not allowed in determininga household's income; this was considered particularly puzzling since AFDCincome exclusions were allowed. Upon further reflection, we believe thatan error was made in not excluding such income and the regulations arerevised accordingly to achieve consistency. Further, to ensure the integrityof income calculation procedures, each potential sponsor will be requiredto document in the Work Plan how gross and net income calculations willbe handled. Another commentor pointed out that deemed income should bespecifically excluded when the unit having the deemed income is part ofthe food stamp household supplying the deemed income, e.g., shelter. Thiswas our intention and, in fact, this was the policy followed during thedemonstration. The regulations have been rewritten to so specify. A thirdcommentor asked that we allow the disregard of the $50 child support pass-throughwithout additional cost to the State agency. State agencies may developtheir benefit methodologies so as to disregard such income, i.e., usingthe maximum aid payable as a surrogate figure for gross income. However,since there is a need to keep program cost increases to a minimum, theimpact of this policy must be closely evaluated and consideration mustbe given to how such a benefit increase could be offset without harmingother households. States choosing to do this need to be concerned aboutthe impact it will have on total program costs and the project's limitationon program cost increases. Further discussion of this issue is found belowin andSection; 273.23(f), <T3>Benefit Determination Methodologies</T3>. The last comment was directedtoward categorically-eligible project-eligible households. The commentorfelt that such households should be exempt from the gross and net incomerequirements. That was, in fact, our intention in drafting the regulationand this point has been clarified.Three comments were received on the non-financial eligibility criteria.Two commentors suggested that each AFDC unit be considered a separate foodstamp household. This, they believed, would result in even greater simplificationand coordination of program rules. The new provisions of the Stewart B.McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (Pub. L. 100-77, enacted July 22, 1987),may address these comments. Under this law, a parent, with his/her minorchildren, may live together with the parent's sibling and yet be considereda separate household if the parent with minor children purchases food andprepares meals separately from the parent's siblings. Similarly, threegenerations living together may form two separate households if the parentwith minor children purchases and prepares meals separately from the children'sgrandparent(s). Further changes to ``household definition'' cannot be madefor project purposes since the major provisions which define ``householdconcept'' are governed by statute. A final commentor requested furtherclarification on the applicability of non-financial eligibility criteriato categorically-eligible, project-eligible households. This has been clarifiedto reflect the fact that all categorically-eligible, households must meetthe non-financial eligibility criteria contained in other parts of theregulations.Benefit Levels_andSection; 273.23(f)Almost all of the commentors addressed this section of the regulations.The general theme of most State agency commentors was that FNS should decreasethe level of specificity established in the proposed regulations. Theybelieved that State agencies should be given flexibility in determiningspecific project features such as subcategories, who is the poorest ofthe poor, and how to establish specific deduction amounts. The advocategroup which commented expressed concern about the potential impact of theproject on participant benefits, stating correctly that the projects' purposewas to simplify administration, not to make significant changes in householdbenefit levels. FNS concurs with both of these positions; the final regulationshave been rewritten to reflect these concerns. State and local operatorswill be given flexibility to make specific determinations on subcategoriesand households needing special protection. Given the familiarity Stateand local agencies have with the characteristics of their caseload, theyare in the best position to make such determinations. However, to ensurethat Congressional direction on household protection is met, FNS will retainapproval rights on benefit determination methodologies. A maximum benefitreduction of $10 or 20 percent, whichever is less, has been establishedas a goal for benefit changes and has been included in the regulatory language.While FNS may consider waivers to slightly modify this provision, adherenceto the goal is important to project selection. One commentor felt thatthis goal (which was included in the draft Work Plan Guide) was unrealisticand unnecessary, suggesting instead that an average dollar amount, by householdsize, be used. FNS does not concur in this recommendation, believing itnecessary to clearly establish parameters for State agencies to use asthey develop their benefit methodologies, particularly given the above-statedflexbility. FNS recognizes that it will be difficult to maintain costsat current levels while adhering to the caveats that (1) average benefitsbe no less than averages would have been and (2) the poorest of the poornot be harmed as a result of standardization. While FNS will not mandatea preferred solution to this dilemma, State agencies are encouraged touse information known to them, e.g., households with a $50 child supportpass-through, households having AFDC benefits recouped, in developing theirbenefit methodologies and/or household categories. By using available AFDCinformation, the need for additional food stamp information can be minimized.One commentor requested that 100 households be established as a base numberbelow which the use of averages in determining benefit levels is impractical.Rather than establishing such a hard and fast number, the Department believesthat it is best to allow State agencies discretion in this area.One commentor suggested that State agencies be allowed to ``grandfather''existing cases which have allotments outside of ``normal'' benefit levels.State agencies are welcome to propose such grandfathering in their WorkPlans, but they must be able to describe why such cases are anomalies.The final regulations note the various parameters which must be consideredin developing benefit methodologies. FNS believes that State agency ingenuityin developing benefit methodologies and household subcategories will allowtheir simultaneous achievement.Household Notification_andSection; 273.23(g)Three comments were received concerning household notification. One commentorsuggested waiving the requirement for a timely notice of adverse actionwhen a benefit decrease results from an increased AFDC payment. The commentorbelieved that since the overall effect was an increase in the total amountof funds available to the household, advance notification was not necessary.A second comment, which was similar, asked that a State agency be allowedto terminate food stamp benefits when AFDC benefits are terminated. Recipienthouseholds are entitled to timely notice of adverse action, and this rightwill not be abrogated by this rule. Therefore, these comments have notbeen accepted. The third comment suggested that States be allowed to phase-inSA/SB provisions if a point-in-time conversion is impractical. This isacceptable to FNS; potential project operators are free to provide forthis in their Work Plans.Application Processing Procedures_andSection; 273.23(h)Several commentors addressed themselves to the application procedures discussedin the proposed regulations. One felt that households should not be askedto formally indicate a desire to receive food stamps, but should be askedorally at the time of the initial interview. This same commentor suggestedthat the AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid applications contain a tear-off sheet whichwould allow a household to establish its date of application. FNS continuesto believe it is important that households indicate in writing their desireto receive food stamps, both to prevent their receipt by households notdesiring to receive them and to establish a clear requirement for actionon the part of the State agency. Therefore, as under current regulations,project-eligible households will be required to ``file'' a food stamp applicationby indicating in writing their desire to receive food stamps. While wedo not believe it is necessary to incorporate the tear-off sheet conceptin the regulations, it will be included as a suggestion in the Work PlanGuide.One commentor did not believe the proposed regulations made it clear thatnon-assistance household members would have to provide the informationneeded to determine eligibility. Changes have been made, as necessary,to clarify this point.A final issue involves the processing of SSI households. One comment specificallyaddressed the processing of mixed-SSI households by the Social SecurityAdministration (SSA). We have had various conversations with SSA staffregarding SSA's possible role in the project; however, we have been unableto offer any specificity regarding State agency proposals. Based on thethree circumstances discussed below, interface with SSA may be difficult.First, households jointly applying for SSI and food stamps will not beproject eligible because their SSI eligibility will not have been determinedand it is unlikely that it will be determined within the food stamp processingperiod. As under current joint processing procedures, SSA will take foodstamp applications from ``pure'' households but will refer ``mixed'' householdsto the State agency. Second, since SSI redeterminations are generally madeless frequently than food stamp recertifications, they do not seem to bea vehicle which could be used for food stamp recertifications. Third, SSIapplications are generally stored in central locations within a year ofapproval. It would be difficult, if not impossible, to access such applicationsif a currently eligible SSI household indicates a desire to receive foodstamps. Thus, although SSI application information could be used, the informationwill generally be drawn from the State Data Exchange (SDX) tape ratherthan being taken directly from the application itself. The regulationshave been reworded to reflect the use of the information on the SDX taperather than the application itself.If, as in Oklahoma, the State agency is administering a State SSI supplementationprogram, the State agency would have maximum flexibility in determininghow applications and recertifications for the SSI population, whether pureor mixed, would be handled. Although it appears that there may be problemsin attempting SSI/FS simplification, SSA has indicated that they are willingto work toward accomplishing this end.Regulatory Requirements_andSection; 273.23(i)A number of commentors addressed the regulatory requirements section. OneState agency commentor recommended allowing State agencies to require recipientcooperation in verifying all information normally required, whether ornot it is needed to determine food stamp eligibility and/or allotmentsunder their simplified application procedures. (An example would be torequire verification of shelter expenses when a standardized excess shelterdeduction is assigned to all households.) We do not believe it appropriatethat State agencies require recipients to verify information not neededto determine eligibility and/or allotments. These factors are no longerpertinent for food stamp purposes. Verification of such factors would onlyserve to unnecessarily increase administrative costs. The program simplificationachieved through SA/SB Projects should benefit both State agencies andapplicants/recipients.Three commentors suggested that Monthly Reporting/change reporting requirementsbe allowed to vary based on project designs. FNS concurs. Changes in reportingrequirements should correspond with changes associated with SA/SB procedures.Project operators should incorporate adjustments to these requirementsin their Work Plans, specifying any needed waivers to current requirements.Quality Control_andSection; 273.23(j)Several commentors expressed support for using the error rate attributableto project-eligible households in calculating a State's error rate forquality control purposes. However, one commentor doubted that SA/SB procedureswould reduce the error rate as much as predicted. A final commentor expressedconcern that State agencies would be held fiscally responsible (throughthe error rate sanction system) for erroneous information collected onSSI households by the SSA. Based on the results from the Simplified ApplicationDemonstration, FNS continues to believe that the project has the potentialfor having a significant positive impact on a State agency's error rate.With regard to errors made by SSA, an interim regulation (52 FR 29657)is pertinent. This regulation states, at 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(v), that errorsmade as a result of information obtained through the Federal InformationExchange (FIX), specifically BENDEX and SDX systems information, are excludedfrom liability determinations if the State agency correctly processed theinformation.Evaluation_andSection; 273.23(l)One commentor expressed concern regarding the lack of emphasis on projectevaluation. They believed that a rigorous evaluation was necessary to builda strong case for project expansion. They suggested that State agenciesbe required to include an evaluation component in their Work Plan and thatthe evaluation component be fairly heavily weighted in selection criteria.FNS continues to believe that an evaluation of the scope conducted duringthe demonstration is unnecessary. Current plans are for each site to performa self-evaluation, verifying the projected impact information providedin their Work Plans. This self-evaluation would be conducted during thethree-month period following project implementation, thus allowing theimpact date to be relatively free from the influence of other changes.The evaluation would assess the project's actual impact on administrativecosts, benefits, and participation and confirm the project's estimatedimpact on error rates. Information on the actual error rate impact willbe collected annually in accordance with the schedule established at andSection;275.21(d), entitled <T3>Quality control review report, Annual results.</T3>FNS will select an independent evaluation contractor who will assist inproject evaluation. The contractor will be responsible for coordinatingproject sites' data and assisting FNS in the overall evaluation of theprojects.Reporting Requirements_andSection; 273.23(m)Two commentors addressed project reporting requirements. Legislation specificallyrequires USDA to evaluate the impact of the projects on recipient households,administrative costs, and error rates. One commentor felt it would be difficult,if not impossible, to report the project's actual impact on error rates,administrative costs and participants, particularly in future years. Nocontrol group will exist against which to compare project outcomes. Nosuggestions were made, however, on how to collect the impact data. Giventhe potential for the ``erosion'' of the data over time, FNS is in agreementwith the commentor. Thus, the reporting requirement for the project isbeing revised. As stated earlier, there will be an initial self-evaluationof the project's impact on benefit levels, administrative costs and participation.Ongoing reporting will address only error rate impacts. This will be aminimal reporting burden, requiring that States identify project-eligiblehouseholds during the quality control review process. Project sites wouldbe required to submit a separate report on the error rates attributableto project-eligible households on the same reporting schedule establishedin andSection; 275.21(d).State Agency Monitoring_andSection; 273.23(n)This section has been rewritten to clarify that project operations willbe monitored in accordance with the monitoring requirements establishedin Part 275.Termination_andSection; 273.23(o)Two comments were received concerning the project's timeframes and projecttermination. One commentor requested clarification of timeframes. Legislationmakes the SA/SB Project an ongoing program alternative; consequently, thereare no timeframes. States and political subdivisions selected by FNS willbe encouraged to implement this policy provision in a timely fashion andimplementation timeframes will be specified in project proposals. Regardingtermination, one commentor agreed that FNS should be able to terminatea project, but suggested that a State or political subdivision should alsobe given the right to terminate. FNS agrees and language has been addedto provide States and political subdivisions the right to terminate theirparticipation.A further provision has been added to clarify what will happen should aproject be terminated or choose to terminate. In such instances, FNS reservesthe right to select another project site based either on the initial applicationor a subsequent solicitation.ImplementationState agencies wishing to conduct a Simplified Application/StandardizedBenefit (SA/SB) Project must submit an application to FNS by November 9,1988. Local agencies shall be given an additional 30 days to allow forclearance through the State agency. The application shall take the formof a Work Plan, the contents of which are discussed in the SA/SB Noticepublished simultaneously with this rulemaking.SA/SB Projects have no mandatory implementation date. Rather, FNS is authorizedto conduct such projects. The actual project implementation dates dependupon the timetables developed by State and local agencies chosen to operatethe projects. The rule's effective date is established as 30 days subsequentto publication.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>7 CFR Part 272Alaska, Civil Rights, Food Stamps, Grant programs-social programs, Reportingand recordkeeping requirements.7 CFR Part 273Administrative practice and procedure, Aliens, Claims, Food Stamps, Fraud,Grant programs-social programs, Penalties, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Social Security, Students.Accordingly, 7 CFR Parts 272 and 273 are amended as follows:1. The authority citation for Parts 272 and 273 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>7 U.S.C. 2011-2029.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 272_[AMENDED]</ITAG>2. In andSection; 272.1, a new paragraph (g)(100) is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General terms and conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) <T3>Implementation</T3>. * * *(100) Amendment 289.(i) This rule is effective August 11, 1988.(ii) State agency Work Plans setting forth proposals for conducting SimplifiedApplication/Standardized Benefit Projects must be postmarked no later thanNovember 9, 1988. Local agency Work Plans must be postmarked no later thanDecember 9, 1988.3. In andSection; 272.2, a new sentence is added at the end of paragraph(a)(2) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plan of operation.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General Purpose and Content</T3>. * * *(2) <T3>Content</T3>. * * * State agencies and/or political subdivisions selectedto operate a Simplified Application/Standardized Benefit Project shallinclude that Project's Work Plan in the State Plan of Operation.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 273_CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLDS</ITAG>4. Section 273.23 is added to read as follows.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Simplified application and standardized benefit projects.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General</T3>. This subpart establishes rules under which SimplifiedApplication and Standardized Benefit Projects shall operate. State agenciesand political subdivisions chosen as project operators may designate householdscontaining members receiving AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid benefits as projecteligible. Project eligible households shall have their food stamp eligibilitydetermined using simplified application procedures. Food stamp eligibilityshall be determined using information contained in their AFDC, or Medicaidapplication, or, in the case of SSI, on the State Data Exchange (SDX) tape,and any appropriate addendum. Project-eligible households shall be consideredcategorically food stamp resource eligible based on their eligibility forthese other programs and shall be required to meet food stamp income eligibilitystandards. However, income definitions appropriate to the AFDC, SSI orMedicaid programs shall be used instead of food stamp income definitionsin determining eligibility. In addition, such households shall, as a conditionof program eligibility, meet and/or fulfill all food stamp nonfinancialeligibility requirements. (Project-eligible households defined as categoricallyeligible in andSection; 273.2 (j) and (k) of these regulations are not requiredto meet the income eligibility standards.) To further simplify programadministration, benefits provided to such households may be standardizedby category of assistance and household size.(b) <T3>Program administration</T3>. (1) Simplified application and standardizedbenefit procedures are applicable in five States and five political subdivisions.For the purpose of this section, a political subdivision is a project areaas defined in andSection; 271.2 of these regulations.(2) State agencies and political subdivisions seeking to operate a SimplifiedApplication and Standardized Benefit Project shall submit Work Plans toFNS in accordance with the requirements of this section.(3) FNS shall evaluate Work Plans according to the criteria set forth inthe Simplified Application/Standardized Benefit Notice of Intent.(4) Political subdivisions shall submit their Work Plans to FNS throughtheir respective State agencies for review and approval.(5) A State agency selected by FNS to operate a Simplified Applicationand Standardized Benefit Project shall include the Work Plan in its StatePlan of Operations. A political subdivision chosen to operate a SimplifiedApplication and Standardized Benefit Project shall assure that the responsibleState agency include that political subdivision's project Work Plan inits own State Plan of Operations. The Work Plan shall be updated, as needed,to reflect changes in the benefit methodology, subject to prior FNS approval.(c) <T3>Contents of the work plan. </T3>The Work Plan submitted by each applicantshall contain the following information:(1) Background information on the proposed site's characteristics, currentoperating procedures, and a general description of the proposed procedures;(2) A description of the proposed project design, including the benefitmethodology, households which will be project eligible, operational procedures,and the need for waivers;(3) An implementation and monitoring plan describing tasks, staffing anda timetable for implementation;(4) An estimate of project impacts including implementation costs and,on an annual basis, operating costs, administrative costs, error reduction,and benefit changes; and (5) A statement signed by the State official with authority to commit theState or political subdivisions to the project's operation.(d) <T3>Project-eligible households. </T3>Each operating agency shall decidewhich of the following categories of household shall be eligible to participatein the project.(1) Households all of whose members receive AFDC benefits under part Aof title IV of the Social Security Act;(2) Households all of whose members receive SSI benefits under title XVIof the Social Security Act;(3) Households all of whose members receive Medicaid benefits under titleXIX of the Social Security Act;(4) Households each of whose members receive one or more of the following:AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid benefits (multiple-benefit households); and (5) Households only some of whose members receive AFDC, SSI, and/or Medicaidbenefits (mixed households).(e) <T3>Determining Food Stamp Program eligibility.</T3> Under the SimplifiedApplication and Standardized Benefit Project, project eligible householdsshall have their food stamp eligibility determined using the followingcriteria.(1) Certain households, at the operating agency's option, which containmembers receiving AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid benefits, shall be designatedproject eligible and need not make separate application for food stampbenefits. Once such households indicate in writing a desire to receivefood stamps, their eligibility will be determined based on informationcontained in their application for AFDC or Medicaid benefits or, in thecase of SSI, on the State Data Exchange (SDX) tape. AFDC or Medicaid applicationsmay need to be modified, or be subject to an addendum in order to accommodateany additional information required by the operating agency.(2) The income definitions and resource requirements prescribed under andSection;273.9 (b) and (c) and andSection; 273.8 are inapplicable to project-eligiblehouseholds. Project-eligible households which have met the resource requirementsof the AFDC, SSI, and/or Medicaid programs shall be considered to havesatisfied the food stamp resource requirements. Gross income less any allowedexclusions, as defined by the appropriate categorical aid program, shallbe used to determine food stamp income eligibility (unless the projecthousehold is categorically income eligible as defined in andSection; 273.2(j) and (k)) and benefit levels. Deemed income, as defined under AFDC,SSI or Medicaid rules, shall be excluded to the extent that householdswith such income are part of the food stamp household providing the deemedincome.(3) Project-eligible households which are not categorically income eligibleshall meet the gross and net income standards prescribed in andSection; 273.9(a).Net income shall be determined by subtracting from gross income eitheractual or standardized deduction amounts. If standardized deduction amountsare used, they may be initially determined using recent historical dataon deductions claimed by such households. Such deductions must be updated,as necessary, on at least an annual basis. Such deductions shall include:(i) The current standard deduction for all households;(ii) An excess shelter deduction and a dependent care deduction for householdsnot containing an elderly or disabled member;(iii) A dependent care deduction, an uncapped excess shelter deductionand a medical deduction for households containing a qualified elderly ordisabled member; and(iv) A standardized or actual earned income deduction for households containingmembers with earned income.(4) All non-financial food stamp eligibility requirements shall be applicableto project-eligible households.(f) <T3>Benefit levels. </T3>(1) In establishing benefits for project eligiblehouseholds, either the appropriate State standard of need (maximum aidpayment) or gross income as determined for the appropriate categoricalaid program plus the value of any monetary categorical benefits received,if any, may be used as the gross income amount. If mixed households aredesignated project eligible, procedures shall be developed to include ashousehold income the income of those household members not receiving categoricalaid.(2) If allotments are standardized, the average allotment for each categoryof household, by household size, shall be no less than average allotmentswould have been were the project not in operation.(3) Benefit methodologies shall be constructed to ensure that benefitsreceived by households having higher than average allotments under normalprogram rules are not significantly reduced as a result of standardization.(4) Benefit methodologies shall be structured to ensure that decreasesin household benefits are not reduced by more than $10 or 20%, whicheveris less.(5) The methodology to be used in developing benefit levels shall be determinedby the operating agency but shall be subject to FNS approval. (6) With FNS approval, operating agencies may develop an alternate methodologyfor standardizing allotments/deductions for specific sizes and categoriesof households where such size and category is so small as to make the useof average deductions and/or allotments impractical.(7) FNS may require operating agencies to revise their standardized allotmentsduring the course of the project to reflect changes in items such as householdcharacteristics, the Thrifty Food Plan, deduction amounts, the benefitreduction rate, or benefit levels in AFDC or SSI. Such changes will bedocumented by revising the Work Plan amendment to the State Plan of Operations.(g) <T3>Household notification. </T3>All certified project-eligible householdsresiding in the selected project sites shall be provided with a notice,prior to project commencement, informing them of the revised proceduresand household requirements under the project. If household allotments areto be standardized, the notice shall also provide specific informationon the value of the newly computed benefit and the formula used to calculatethe benefit. The notice shall meet the requirements of a notice of adverseaction as set forth in andSection; 273.13(a)(2).(h) <T3>Application processing procedures. </T3>(1) The operating agency shallallow project-eligible households to indicate in writing their desire toreceive food stamps. Such households shall be notified in writing, at thetime such indication is made, that information contained in their AFDC,SSI, or Medicaid application will be the basis of their food stamp eligibilitydetermination. If mixed households are included in the project-eligibleuniverse, the project operator shall develop a procedure to collect thenecessary information on household members not receiving categorical aid.(2) The operating agency may use simplified application and standardizedbenefit procedures only for those households containing at least one membercertified to receive either AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid benefits. If simplifiedprocedures are to be used, the State agency shall make all eligibilitydeterminations for households jointly applying for food stamps and AFDC,SSI, or Medicaid benefits within the 30-day food stamp processing period.If a household's eligibility for AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid cannot be establishedwithin the 30-day period, normal food stamp application, certification,and benefit determination procedures shall be used and benefits shall beissued within 30 days if the household is eligible. Households which arejointly applying for AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid, and which qualify for expeditedservice, shall be certified for food stamps using procedures prescribedat andSection; 273.2(i). However, if the State agency can process the applicationof an expedited service household for categorical assistance within theexpedited period prescribed at andSection; 273.2(i), it may use simplifiedapplication and standardized benefit procedures to certify the householdfor food stamp benefits.(i) <T3>Regulatory requirements. </T3>(1) All Food Stamp Program regulationsshall remain in effect unless they are expressly altered by the provisionsof this section or the provisions contained within the approved SA/SB WorkPlan.(2) <T3>Certification periods for mixed households.</T3> At the option of theoperating agency, mixed households may be assigned certification periodsof up to one year. Such households, if circumstances warrant, may be requiredto attend a face-to-face interview on a schedule which would conform tocertification periods normally assigned such households as specified inandSection; 273.10(f). At the time of the interview, the household shallbe required to complete a modified application and provide additional informationin accordance with andSection; 273.2(f). If the household fails to complywith the interview review requirement or if information obtained indicatesa revision in household eligibility or benefits, action will be taken inaccordance withandSection; 273.13, Notice of Adverse Action.(j) <T3>Quality control. </T3>(1) Project eligible households selected forquality control review shall be reviewed by the State agency using specialprocedures, based on project requirements, which have been developed bythe State agency and approved by FNS.(2) The error rate(s) determined using the special quality control reviewprocedures shall be included when determining the State agency's overallerror rate. (k) <T3>Funding. </T3>Operating agencies shall be reimbursed for project costsat the rates prescribed in andSection; 277.4.(l) <T3>Evaluation. </T3>Each project site shall conduct a self-evaluationof the project's impact on benefits, administrative costs and participation.Such evaluation shall be conducted within three months of project implementation.The results of the self-evaluation shall be sent to FNS within six monthsof project implementation. The impact of the project on project-eligiblehouseholds' error rates shall be reported on an annual basis in accordancewith andSection; 273.23(m).(m) <T3>Reporting requirements. </T3>Operating agencies shall be required toprepare and submit to FNS an annual report on the error rate attributableto project-eligible households. The timing of such reports shall coincidewith the due date for the annual quality control report prescribed in andSection;275.21(d).(n) <T3>State agency monitoring. </T3>Monitoring shall be undertaken to ensurecompliance with these regulations and the Work Plan submitted to and approvedby FNS. Project monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriatesections of Part 275, Performance Reporting System, of these regulations.At a minimum, onsite reviews of the Simplified Application and StandardizedBenefit Project shall be conducted once within six months of the project'simplementation and then in accordance with the Management Evaluation reviewschedule for the project area.(o) <T3>Termination. </T3>(1) FNS may terminate project operations for anyreason and at any time on 60 days written notice to the administering Stateagency or political subdivision. State or local agencies may also chooseto terminate their participation with 60 days written notice to FNS. Ineither such event, operating agencies shall be given sufficient time toreturn to normal operations in an orderly fashion.(2) If termination occurs, FNS may select another site for project operations.Such selection shall be based on either previously received project proposalsor proposals received under a new solicitation.<ITAG tagnum="6">Anna Kondratas, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator, Food and Nutrition Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: July 5, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-15540 Filed 7-11-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-30-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>