<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88801-0014 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-01-88.f2.A1013</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of the Secretary</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">32 CFR Part 199</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[DoD 6010.8-R, Amdt. 12]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS);Participation Requirements for Residential Treatment Centers (RTC)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of the Secretary, DoD.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This final rule will revise DoD 6010.8-R (32 CFR 199)which implements the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the UniformedServices. The rule clarifies participation requirements and establishesa new reimbursement system for payment of RTC care while providing safeguardsto ensure continued benefit access and quality of care. An RTC is a facilityorganized and professionally staffed to provide residential treatment ofmental disorders to children and adolescents who have sufficient intellectualpotential to respond to active psychiatric treatment. The rule will alsoensure that CHAMPUS beneficiaries are not discriminated against solelyon the basis of the program payment methodology. The new payment systemwill provide reasonable reimbursement for high quality care for CHAMPUSbeneficiaries.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>This amendment is effective as of September 1, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>David E. Bennett, Office of ProgramDevelopment, OCHAMPUS, Aurora, Colorado 80045-6900, telephone (303)-361-3537.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>In FR Doc. 77-7834, appearing in the<T4>Federal Register</T4> on April 4, 1977 (42 FR 17972), the Office ofthe Secretary of Defense published its regulation, DoD 6010.8-R, ``Implementationof the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS),''as part 199 of this title. 32 CFR Part 199 (DoD 6010.8-R) was reissuedin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on July 1, 1986 (51 FR 24008).In FR Doc. 87-27853 appearing in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on December 4, 1987 (52 FR 46098), the Officeof the Secretary of Defense published for public comment a proposed amendmentthat clarified the participation requirements of RTCs and established anew reimbursement system for RTC care. The agency received numerous requestsfrom RTCs and the organizations representing them for extension of thepublic comment period past the original January 4, 1988, deadline. Theyfelt that the comment period was inadequate for public comment becauseof the lengthy holiday season. In FR Doc. 88-923, appearing in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on January 19, 1988 (53 FR 1378), the commentperiod was extended to February 18, 1988, to ensure that all interestedparties had an opportunity to make their views known.It is important to point out that the rates developed under the new reimbursementmethodology are in fact a liberalization of the most favored rate conceptunder the old participation agreement. Under the terms of the old participationagreement, which has been in use since 1977, the most favorable rate hasbeen considered essentially synonymous with the lowest rate offered toany other individual or payor. This position has been upheld in a FinalDecision of the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs)issued in 1983. The lowest rate was often alleged to represent artificiallyset state rates and rates provided to an insignificant amount of business.In order to address these concerns, our approach was to establish a ratehigh enough to cover a reasonable portion of an RTC's total business basedupon total patient days and charges to all payors. The rate high enoughto cover one-third of the total patient days was determined the most reasonable.It was felt the rate set at 33\1/3\ percent avoided subsidies and excessiveprofit-taking.The proposed reimbursement methodology: (1) Provides the potential forcontrol over rapidly increasing costs for mental health care within theDepartment of Defense; (2) ensures that CHAMPUS beneficiaries are not subjectto exaggerated or unjustified costs for RTC care solely because of theCHAMPUS entitlement; and (3) provides for a rate of reimbursement for allparticipating RTCs which reflects a reasonable amount consistent with ratescharged by their own peers nationally and with reimbursement they wereaccepting from other third-party payors. In many instances the rates determinedunder the new system were identical to the billed charges. CHAMPUS simplywishes to avoid shifting to CHAMPUS beneficiaries an RTC's cost for providingcare to other patients.The rates established under the new system reflect the actual chargingpractices of the RTCs adjusted by an appropriate Consumer Price Index formedical care. The proposed capped amount is a reasonable one, for it protectsCHAMPUS from having to subsidize low rates charged for a very substantialportion of the RTC's patient days, without limiting CHAMPUS rates to theabsolute lowest rates charged to other payors. The new reimbursement methodologyprovides a reasonable method of obtaining RTC services for CHAMPUS beneficiariesat a fair cost to the government, and an enhancement of the government'sability to monitor the quality and appropriateness of RTC services providedto such beneficiaries. <ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>The change in reimbursement policy was brought about by a culmination ofproblems and concerns over the RTC benefit dating back to as early as 1979.This included General Accounting Office (GAO) and Defense Audit Service(DAS) findings that led OCHAMPUS to believe that the current RTC paymentsystem was not cost effective and needed revision. Under the current system,RTCs are allowed to set their own per diem rates, which range from $60to $700, and to be reimbursed for unlimited professional fees and otherancillary charges. In order to achieve consistency of practice, OCHAMPUSdeveloped a rate which was: (1) Prospective; (2) uniform; (3) all-inclusive;and (4) administratively feasible for OCHAMPUS and the RTCs.The rate established for each individual RTC reflected both the institutionaland professional charges which were submitted per an OCHAMPUS request ofOctober 18, 1985. The RTCs were specifically instructed to submit the chargesof individual mental health providers which were not employed by or contractedwith their facility, along with the frequency of their occurrence.OCHAMPUS attempted to implement the new reimbursement rates in April of1986 by sending our new participation agreements to all CHAMPUS authorizedRTCs notifying them of their individual rates and capped amount. By July1, 1986, 74 agreements had been signed and returned to OCHAMPUS (89 percentof the mailed participation agreements). However, on June 30, 1986, OCHAMPUSwas enjoined for implementing the proposed RTC payment methodology becauseof a civil action filed by various interested parties. The District Courtfound on summary judgment the OCHAMPUS failed to comply with the rulemakingprovisions of the Administrative Procedures Act (APA). OCHAMPUS was, therefore,enjoined from implementing the revised participation agreement and reimbursementsystem until such time that the requirements of the APA were met. The DistrictCourt's decision has been appealed to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals.OCHAMPUS believed at the time it issued the new participation agreementthat it had the requisite authority and that it was proper to do so. OCHAMPUSstill believes its position is correct; however, pending the resolutionof the appeal, OCHAMPUS has complied with the District Court's decisionby publishing a proposed rule in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.Until there is a decision in the appeal, it will not be known if the DistrictCourt's decision will be reversed. In the event that the District Court'sdecision is reversed, OCHAMPUS has the option of recouping any paymentsto RTCS in excess of the payments that would have been made had the DistrictCourt not enjoined the implementation of the payment provisions.Whether the District Court decision is upheld on appeal or reversed, theeffective date of a final rule on reimbursement provisions for RTC carewill be applicable. Any recoupment, if the District Court is reversed,will be from July 1, 1986 (the original effective date of the new participationagreement), to the effective date of the final rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Review of Comments</ITAG>As a result of the publication of the proposed rule, the following commentswere received from interested RTCs, associations, agencies and individuals.1. Several commentors contend that the all-inclusive rate concept wouldinterfere adversely with the physician-patient relationship and the physician-RTCrelationship. It is suggested that placing the ``economic risk'' of providingboth institutional and professional mental health services on RTCs maycause the quality of care to suffer because RTCs may compromise on qualityfor economic reasons.This argument is not solely against the use of an all-inclusive rate, butagainst the use of any prospective payment system. The preference for separatereimbursement of individual professionals is based on the premise thatsuch professionals' reimbursement would not be subject to any dollar limits.Under such a system, neither RTCs nor individual professionals would needto concern themselves with the cost of the professionals' services. Suchcosts would only be of concern to CHAMPUS and to patients, both of whomshare in paying those costs. The new payment system places the incentiveto economize with the only parties in a position to economize: the providersof services. Further, it places the responsibility for cost containmentsquarely on the shoulders of the providers with ultimate responsibilityfor the provision of the services in question: the RTCs.The quality of care (services) would not be affected by the all-inclusiverate since CHAMPUS regulations already impose on RTCs an all-inclusiveresponsibility for providing such services, whether through their own employeesor through outside professionals. Under these regulations, there is noreason to regard anyone other than the RTC as the provider of such services.This is not a drastic change from care provided in the past since a majorityof CHAMPUS-approved RTCs were already billing for their services on anall inclusive basis before OCHAMPUS proposed the all inclusive rate requirement.The movement for reimbursement of private practitioners to a single all-inclusiveper diem rate for RTC care was done, in part, to increase the RTC's accountabilityfor ensuring a high quality of care and to avoid fragmentation of treatment.The all-inclusive system places to total responsibility for treatment ofpatients with the RTCs, consistent with their licensure and certificationrequirements.Under current CHAMPUS standards RTCs are required to develop and establisha patient specific treatment plan which outlines in detail the needs ofeach patient and how the RTC will meet those needs. Under a recent modificationto its contract, effective August 1, 1988, the CHAMPUS mental health reviewcontractor will review each treatment plan and authorize care only in thosecases where treatment is justified and determined medically necessary andappropriate. RTCs are also required to provide sufficient professionalstaff to ensure the treatment plan is carried out. This includes the medicaldirectors. OCHAMPUS will closely monitor each RTC patient under the newagreement to ensure that appropriate treatment continues to be availableand provided in all cases. RTCs will also be required to meet the JointCommission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) standardsfor psychiatric facilities serving children and adolescents, and OCHAMPUSRTC standards, both of which require the RTC to provide the professionalstaff necessary to ensure the proper care, treatment, and safety of allpatients. These major safeguards would ensure the continuation of highquality care under the proposed reimbursement methodology.The all-inclusive per diem limit developed by OCHAMPUS was specificallycomputed to take into account the individual circumstances of each RTC.All participating RTCs were asked to provide specific information concerningtheir charges, both professional and institutional. The professional chargedata represented an average overall charge based on estimated utilizationpatterns for each facility. This type of payment methodology allows fordiffering intensity of care; i.e., some patients will require less thanthe average, while some will require more than the average number of treatmentsessions per week. It has never been OCHAMPUS' intent to exclude professional providers fromcaring for patients in RTCs. It is, rather, to design a reimbursement methodologythat reflects the philosophy that residential treatment is a total therapeuticprogram. Each RTC is completely free to determine how it will provide services,either through its own staff or through arrangements with professionaland ancillary providers in the community. 2. Another commentor felt that an all-inclusive rate concept would resultin a relationship between an RTC and its medical staff which could be construedas the unlawful corporate practice of medicine. Assuming that some state laws prohibit corporate care providers from controllingthe professional practice of their professional staff, there is no apparentreason why such laws would apply differently depending upon whether suchstaff are employees or independent contractors. Thus, it should make nodifference under such laws whether CHAMPUS payment rates encompass allRTC services or only those provided through RTC employees. It is the CHAMPUSregulation that has always made the RTC ultimately responsible for theprovision of all RTC services, thus requiring the RTC to control the provisionof all its services. 3. Other commentors felt that the all-inclusive rate was inconsistent withCHAMPUS statute and regulations; advancing the argument that the statuteand regulations clearly contemplate and require separate payment ratesfor institutional and non-institutional, professional services. OCHAMPUS is not required to recognize the separate forms of reimbursableRTC services_those provided by an RTC, and those provided at an RTC byindividual professionals. While the CHAMPUS regulations allow for reimbursementof RTC services, all such services are encompassed in the regulatory definitionof an RTC, and the facility must provide all services to qualify as anRTC. It is entirely consistent with both CHAMPUS statute and regulationsto treat all RTC services as being provided by the RTC and to reimburseonly the RTC for services. Neither the Dependents' Medical Care Act, northe regulations promulgated thereunder bar a cap on RTC reimbursement.Rather, they accord the Secretary of Defense full discretion to set reimbursementrates and standards so long as they are reasonable. Since the majorityof RTCs billed their services on an all-inclusive basis prior to the newparticipation provisions, it cannot be construed as unreasonable. The goalof cost containment by setting an outside limit on reimbursement is plainlya valid one. The statute is silent on the method and rates of reimbursementfor RTCs, leaving it up to the Secretary to develop a fair standard. 4. Some commenters felt that the all-inclusive rate would limit accessoutside professional to RTC patients, resulting in a decrease in qualityof care. In developing the new reimbursement methodology, OCHAMPUS relied in parton a study done by a private consultant. In its report it was not shownthat RTC treatment was enhanced by psychotherapy from the outside professionalsor that the majority of RTCs providing therapy through in-house professionalstaff were delivering inadequate treatment. A large majority of RTCs arealready providing psychotherapy on an in-house (all-inclusive) basis withoutany demonstrable loss in quality of care. However, the new participationrequirements do not preclude the use of independent professionals, as longas their services are billed to and paid by CHAMPUS on an all-inclusivebasis. 5. Some commentors had objections to the alternative cap on reimbursementimposed by the new participation requirements, the so-called ``most-favoredrate'', or 33\1/3\ percent cap. This cap limits payment to the lowest rate charged by the RTC to any otherpayor that is high enough to cover one-third of the total patient daysfor the year ending on February 28, 1985. The cap is a reasonable one,for it protects OCHAMPUS from having to subsidize low rates charged fora very substantial portion of an RTC's patient days, without limiting CHAMPUSrates to the absolute lowest rates charged to other payors. The prior versionof the health care provider contracts (participation agreements) also containeda ``most favorable rate'' limit, and the ``most favorable rate'' limitin the proposed rule, in short, allows a higher rate than the one thatwas contained in the old agreement. If an RTC accepts a relatively lowrate from a payor representing as much as one-third of the RTC's patientdays, CHAMPUS should not have to pay higher rates, and thus subsidize patientscovered by the lower rates. The 33\1/3\ percent was based on detailed analysisof utilization and charge data, along with projected availability of RTCcare. 6. Some commenters assumed that each RTC must be reimbursed on the basisof the reasonable costs or charges actually incurred during the periodfor which reimbursement is made. The governing statutes and regulations do not impose any such requirement.They permit OCHAMPUS to determine a reasonable market value for RTC servicesbased upon RTC costs and charges during a base period, and to limit reimbursementaccordingly_to limit each RTC's reimbursement rate based upon its baseperiod data, and impose a single per diem, per-patient cap on all RTCs.The new participation requirements are consistent to applicable law andare reasonable. 7. Some commentors complained that the proposed rates do not include anyadjustments for the type and level of services provided. An RTC may haveseveral programs in which the rates vary based upon the staffing and physicalplant requirements of the unit. Under the governing regulations, RTC services constitute a single levelof care. While costs and charges associated with RTC care undoubtedly varysomewhat from patient to patient, it does not follow that reimbursementrates must be different for each patient or each category of patients definedby the RTC in oder to be reasonable. A single rate for a given RTC, basedon average charge date from that RTC, reflects the various charges describedin such data and the patient mix giving rise to those charges. This typeof averaging technique takes into account the varying levels (intensity)of care; i.e., some patients will require less than the average, whilesome will require more than the average number of treatment sessions perweek. Although it might have been possible to develop different rates fordifferent categories of RTC patients, such an approach would also involveaveraging_within multiple smaller categories instead of a single largercategory_because no two patients have identical needs. A single rate foreach RTC at least has the advantage of simplicity. There is no apparentcountervailing advantage of multiple rates.8. Several commentors complained that OCHAMPUS does not allow individualRTC appeals with regard to adjustments, extraordinary factors, and omissions.Only mathematical errors in rate calculation were subject to administrativeappeals.Participating RTCs were informed of the proposed changes in the reimbursementsystem, including the all-inclusive rate and recommended payment cap. AllRTCs were requested to provide specific charge and utilization data, includingprofessional services, which could be used to determine individual ratesfor each RTC and ultimately the payment cap amount. The RTCs were requestedto identify all payors for whom a rate was established and accepted, whatthe rate was, and the number of patient days actually provided at the rate.If the rates did not include all charges, the RTCs were requested to identifythe charges not included. Also, charges for educational services were identifiedand excluded. The data submitted by the RTCs were reviewed for completenessand reliability. Each of the RTCs was informed of the importance of thedata requested in the determination of its individual rates, as well asthe capped amount. OCHAMPUS staff were also available to answer any questionsthe RTCs might have had regarding the proposed methodology and data requirement.The RTCs were allowed a reasonable period of time for submission of alldata.It was felt that adjustments of the rates for on-going cost increased andextraordinary factors would result in perpetual, continuous and unpredictablerate changes, and would be inconsistent with the very concept of prospectivereimbursement rates. Allowing adjustments after the designated based periodfor other than mathematical errors in rate calculations would have givenRTCs an incentive to incur additional costs during that period in orderto increase the basis for their rates.The incentive to incur additional costs/charges in anticipation of a cappedper diem can be substantiated by the dramatic increase in RTC rates experiencedby the CHAMPUS program since it was enjoined from implementation of therevised participation agreement back in June of 1986. Since then, rateshave risen from 10 to 104 percent, with an average increase of 43 percent.At this rate of increase, it is projected that government expendituresfor RTC care could exceed $85 million by the end of fiscal year 1988. Becauseof the delay in implementation alone, the program has forefeited a projectedcost savings of more that $15 million.The new RTC participation requirements provide for a rate of reimbursementfor all participating RTCs which reflects a reasonable amount consistentwith rates charged by their peers nationally and with reimbursement thatthey were already accepting from other third-party payors. If the circumstancesof some RTCs prevent them from bringing their rates down to the range typicalof most RTCs, it does not follow that CHAMPUS must pay rates of the highest-pricedRTCs.9. One commentor felt that the field audits of the ``Top 10 RTCs'' didnot provide an adequate basis for change in the RTC payment system sincethe administrative appeal process regarding such audits has not even commencedfor some of the providers and has not been completed for others.The results of the multi-year financial audits of the ``Top 10 RTCs'' wasby no means the sole basis for changing the RTC reimbursement system. Itwas the culmination of problems and concerns over the RTC benefit datingback to as early as 1979. This included General Accounting Office (GAO)and Defense Audit Service (DAS) findings that improvements were neededin the management of funding of psychiatric care; RTCs were not collectingcost-shares from beneficiaries, resulting in higher charges to CHAMPUS;and no control over provider rates existed. The findings of the top tenRTC audit reports only served to identify the serious deficiencies in OCHAMPUS'ability to adequately monitor RTC costs and charging practices, and thelikelihood that substantial over-payment for RTC care in general existedunder the current system. These audits, along with subsequent appeals,also demonstrated that the prior participation agreement did not clearlyestablish the RTC's responsibilities.10. Several commentors challenged the two caps on reimbursement_the perdiem cap of $266 and the individual RTC rates_because CHAMPUS failed toconsider a case mix (service mix), staffing and labor cost differencesin establishing each RTC's rate. There is no logical basis for establishing these types of differentiationsunder the new prospective payment system. The proposed rates already reflecta variety of factors, such as staffing ratios and case mix, since all RTCsare reimbursed for their actual charges unless they exceed the capped amount.The capped amount should cover the reasonable cost of most, it not all,of the RTCs.These facts were substantiated in a study conducted for us by a privateresearch firm. It was found that RTC rates (billed charges) were widelydisparate and could not be related to any valid basis (for example, regionalcost differences) to justify the range of charges, particularly those atthe higher end of the spectrum. For example, the range of charges withinthe State of Virginia, a high use state for RTC care, ranged from approximately$188 per day to over $417 per day. In California, another high use state,charges ranged from $78 to $185. Interestingly, the highest charges inthese states represented only the RTC's charges and did not include theseparate billing by psychiatrists and other mental health providers.During the base period (March 1, 1984, through February 28, 1985) CHAMPUSRTC rates ranged from $55 to $489 with a mean of $172 and a standard deviationof $90, while the average length of stay of CHAMPUS beneficiaries rangedfrom 52 days to 411 days with a mean of 179 days and a standard deviationof 90 days. Both rates and length of stay exhibited extreme variabilitysupporting past GAO and DAS audits.In a previous study of all RTC care in the United States, the NationalInstitute of Mental Health (NIMH) found that total expenditures for RTCcare were aggregated in the following manner: (1) 62 percent allocatedto salaries; (2) 33 percent for other operating expenses; and (3) 5 percentfor capital expenditures. The proportion of salaries to total expenditureswas found to vary inversely to the size of the RTC; i.e., 25 beds_66 percent,100 beds_58 percent. Bed size was also found to affect cost per day andaverage length of stay. In facilities less than 25 beds, inpatient costsper day amounted to $73, and $23,814 per inpatient stay, with average lengthof stay (ALOS) at 354 days. In larger facilities (100 beds or more) costswere $45 per inpatient day and $31,997 per inpatient stay, with ALOS at734 days. Nearly all of the differences attributed to total expendituresper patient day in RTCs, which differed as to bedcount, were differencesin salary expenditure per patient day. The study showed strong implicationsfor cost containment in the RTC reimbursement system. If salaries couldbe controlled without diminishing quality of care and if length of staycould be standardized and made a more accountable variable, then CHAMPUScould better oversee its RTC benefit.Because of the implication of this study, RTC utilization data were analyzedto determine if rates and lengths of stay were related to the size of theRTC (bed size). It was found that there was neither a relationship betweenrate and bed size nor length of stay and bed size, refuting the NIMH findings.This tends to indicate that fixed costs (salaries) are not the determiningfactors in RTC rate setting. This finding is consistent with past GAO andDAS audits which found RTC rates to be unreasonable and without basis.11. Several commentors expressed concern that implementation of the proposedRTC participation requirements would cause a substantial reduction in availabilityof RTC care for CHAMPUS beneficiaries.Prior to the District Court's injunction, all currently participating RTCswere notified in writing of their individual rates, provided with the rationalefor the rates, and provided two copies of the final participation agreementsfor signature and return by June 1, 1986. Although many of the RTCs objectedto various aspects of the reimbursement methodology, 89 percent of themagreed to provide care by signing and returning the participation agreement.Since participation requirements in both the proposed and final rule affordincreased flexibility for reimbursement of educational costs and geographicallydistant family therapy, OCHAMPUS does not anticipate a significant reductionin the availability of RTC care.Because all participating RTCs must meet the regulatory standards of care,it cannot be argued that inadequate care will result if the highest-pricedRTCs terminate their participation, even assuming that the latter can claimsome qualitative superiority. All RTCs should be able to properly carefor all patients appropriately placed in an RTC. RTC placement is not appropriatefor patients whose needs exceed those contemplated by the Regulatory standards.Nor can it be argued that termination of high-priced RTCs will result ingeographical shortages of RTC services. OCHAMPUS found a wide disparityin RTC rates not only nationally, but also within states and regions, andthat disparity was not related to regional cost differences.12. One commentor felt that an interim participation agreement was notneeded to recognize new RTCs applying for CHAMPUS authorization.As was mentioned in a previous response, past GAO and DAS audits, alongwith other contracted studies, identified serious deficiencies in OCHAMPUS'ability to adequately monitor RTC costs and charging practices, and showeda likelihood for substantial over-payment for RTC care in general existedunder the current system. These findings, along with subsequent appeals,demonstrated that the prior participation agreement did not clearly establishRTC responsibilities consistent with the CHAMPUS RTC standards and regulations.The reimbursement provisions of the interim participation agreement areessentially the same as those contained under the old agreement (most favorablerate concept). It was felt that the interim participation agreement wouldbetter convey to new RTCs what was expected of them under CHAMPUS standardsand regulations. This agreement was issued to enhance the qualify of careunder the CHAMPUS RTC program.13. One commentor felt that it would be a hardship on an RTC to have therapeuticleave funding reduced by 25 percent after the 3-day limit. The only costthat the facility may save would be on food. Staff, utilities and generaloperations must continue on a full cost pattern.The payment provisions appearing in the proposed rule represent a liberalizationof recommendations made by a private consulting firm. In accordance withCHAMPUS policy, it was recommended that RTCs be paid at 75 percent of theirper diem rate for therapeutic absences. It was further recommended thatCHAMPUS consider a limit on the number of therapeutic leave days allowableper calendar year and on consecutive leave days. They assumed that childrenable to leave the RTC for more than 10 consecutive days (except in specialcircumstances) no longer require the specialized environment of a residentialtreatment center. The Director of OCHAMPUS made a modification to the finalreimbursement provisions to continue payment at the full per diem ratefor approved absences not exceeding three calendar days. Payment of 75percent of the established daily charge beginning with the fourth day ofabsence was felt to be reasonable to cover room and board costs duringthe patient's absence.14. One commentor recommended that we consider establishing an upper limitfor the length of reimbursable therapeutic leave.An upper limit for the length of reimbursable therapeutic leave was consideredin the development of the proposed rule. However, it was felt that an upperlimit was unnecessary since all RTC cases required extensive authorizationreview. The RTC is required to submit a detailed treatment plan for eachCHAMPUS patient within 30 days of admission. This includes any anticipatedtherapeutic absences. Periodic medical/utilization reviews are also conductedafter 6 months of treatment. All therapeutic absences are reviewed individuallyand approved when they are determined to be medically appropriate. Thisapproach is consistent with existing CHAMPUS regulation.15. Another commentor felt that the proposed reimbursement methodologyunfairly penalized long-standing providers. It allows new facilities toestablish their own charge, provided it is not above the CHAMPUS per diemcap, because there is no rate history.It cannot be disputed that RTCs which began operation after February 28,1985, will be subject to a different base period than those in operationprior to that date. Under a prospective payment system this is inevitable.However, the calculation of all RTC rates is procedurally consistent andadjusted by an appropriate inflation factor (Consumer Price Index_Urbanfor medical care) based on the particular base period used.Individual RTC rates, along with a capped amount, will be adjusted by appropriateannual CPI-Us for medical care to bring them forward to the effective dateof the final rule. The inflation factor is used to bring equity to theprospective payment system. The new payment system provides a rate of reimbursementfor all participating RTCs (both long-standing and new) which reflectsa reasonable amount consistent with rates charged by their own peers nationallyand with reimbursement they are already accepting from other third-partypayors. The rates established still reflect the actual charging practicesof the RTCs subject to an all-inclusive capped amount.Looking at this from a different perspective, new facilities may contendthat rates charged during the startup period (first 6 to 12 months) maynot adequately reflect the true operations of the facility. 16. Several commentors felt that the 60-day inpatient mental health limitationforced them to make costly adjustments in their operations in order toaccommodate the influx of patients who had previously been or would otherwisebe in hospitals.Pub. L. 98-94, the Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1984, amendedtitle 10, chapter 55, United States Code. This Public Law stated that,with certain exceptions, no CHAMPUS funds may be expended for inpatientmental health services in excess of 60 days annually for each beneficiarywho receives inpatient mental health services. It was similar to a provisionthat was contained in Pub. L. 97-77, the Defense Appropriations Act forFiscal Year 1983, which restricted the funds available to CHAMPUS to payinpatient mental health services, beginning January 1, 1983. These commentorscontend that this 60-day inpatient psychiatric limitation has increasedannual FTR expenditures due to the fact that children requiring psychologicallynecessary care in hospitals were driven by the limitation into less expensiveRTCs. OCHAMPUS does not argue this point; however, it is felt that therewas a sufficient time lag between implementation of the 60-day inpatientmental health limitation and the base period used in calculating the prospectiverate to reflect any adjustments in operations required as a result of thisinflux of hospital patients. The inpatient mental health limitation wentinto effect for inpatient admissions beginning on and after January 1,1983, while the base period for calculation of prospective rates was fromMarch 1, 1984, through February 28, 1985. The RTCs had sufficient timeto adjust their charges for increases in level of care brought about bythe limitation.17. One commentor felt that CHAMPUS should acknowledge that other populations(groups) can be served by an RTC and that the 21-year age restriction isspecific to CHAMPUS.CHAMPUS only acknowledges RTC programs as defined by its Regulation, policy,standards and participation agreement. The age restriction (under the ageof 21) was set in a precedent setting final appeal decision and incorporatedinto the definition of residential treatment centers.18. One commentor stated that the CPI-U used to update the per diem ratesdoes not recognize regional differences in wages or costs.As was previously stated, the RTC rates (billed charges) were widely disparateand could not be related to any valid basis (for example, regional costdifferences) to justify the rate charges, particularly those at the higherend of the spectrum. Since regional differences in wages or costs did notappear to have a bearing on RTCs' charges, national CPI-Us were used toupdate the rates.Because of the delay in implementation of the all-inclusive reimbursementsystem, appropriate annual CPI-U inflation factors for medical care willbe used to adjust both individual rates and a capped amount up throughFebruary of 1988.19. One commentor felt that the proposed rule, if implemented, would bein violation of the court order since there were substantive issues inthe decision concerning the proposed new participation agreement and paymentmethodology which went beyond the failure to comply with the AdministrativeProcedures Act (APA).The District Court chose to limit its discussion of many procedural andsubstantive issues in the policy changes in question to the government'snon-compliance with APA rulemaking requirements. The District Court invalidatedCHAMPUS' issuance of new standard contract provisions solely on the basisof procedural requirements for rulemaking under 5 U.S.C. 553. OCHAMPUS believed at the time it issued the new RTC participation agreementthat it had the requisite authority to do so. OCHAMPUS still believes itsposition is correct; however, pending the resolution of the appeal in theTenth Circuit Court of Appeals, OCHAMPUS is complying with the DistrictCourt's decision. The proposed and final amendments are being publishedin compliance with the Court's decision. 20. One commentor wondered if a family therapist could bill individuallyfor care provided to a family outside the RTC. If an RTC accepts a child for admission whose parents are geographicallydistant, the facility must document its plans for including the familyin therapy, in accordance with RTC standards and the appropriate medicalcare standard. If one or both parents reside at a significant distancefrom the child, the RTC has the flexibility of setting up therapy withthe parents at the distant locality, while the child is in treatment inthe RTC. The parent's therapist and child's therapist must collaboratein all cases. Collaboration between therapists is the responsibility ofthe RTC and must be documented in the medical records. All family therapymust be authorized and approved by the CHAMPUS mental health review contractorat the time the RTC treatment plan is submitted in order for cost-sharingto occur. A decision has been made to exclude the payment of geographically distantfamily therapy from the all-inclusive RTC rate because of the significantdistance involved and administrative flexibility required to make thistype of treatment feasible. The family therapist may bill individuallyfrom the RTC if the therapy is provided to one or both of the parents residinga minimum of 250 miles from the location of the RTC. It was felt that 250miles could generally be driven in approximately five hours, which wouldallow a parent to drive to the RTC and participate in family therapy andreturn home the next day. This trip could easily be accomplished duringthe weekend. However, the therapy must still be authorized by the CHAMPUSmental health review contractor. The contractor will send authorizationsto the geographically responsible fiscal intermediary (FI). For cases inwhich there are two FIs because of differing geographical locations, acopy of the appropriate authorization will be sent to each. 21. Several commentors felt that education is an essential part of thetotal therapeutic program and should be allowed in the reimbursement methodology.Payment of educational services are specifically excluded by the CHAMPUSregulation for beneficiaries eligible for payment directly or indirectlyby a local, state or federal government. These provisions are not new.CHAMPUS has never been authorized to pay for educational services underthe Basic Program, and in those instances where audits have determinedthat payment has been made in error, corrective action has been taken.However, this exclusion has an exception: it allows payment to RTCs forsuch services ``when appropriate education is not available from or notpayable by the cognizant public entity.'' Thus, in reality, the regulationand new participation requirements do not exclude such services from reimbursement,but merely make CHAMPUS the payor of last resort. This is a proper rolefor CHAMPUS to play, in view of the fact that free education, includingspecial education, is ordinarily available in local school systems. Under this exception the sponsor seeking a waiver, with the help of theRTC, would have to demonstrate that the school district in which the CHAMPUSbeneficiary was last enrolled refused to pay for the educational componentof the child's RTC care. All actions must be supported by documentation,which must include copies of all correspondence with cognizant public officialsand denials of reimbursement. Requests for payment of educational costsmust be referred to the CHAMPUS mental health review contractor for determinationof the applicability of CHAMPUS benefits. If coverage of educational servicesare approved by the contractor, payment will be allowed outside the all-inclusivefacility rate. However, the amount paid shall not exceed the RTC's most-favorablerate to any other patient, agency, or organization for educational services.22. A group of commentors questioned why a separate cap for reimbursementfor the physician component and the RTC component on a per diem basis couldnot be as effective as one all-inclusive rate. Separate caps would require a total revamping of the CHAMPUS professionalprovider relationships and of the claims adjudication and payment processfor RTC mental health claims. Instead of 70 to 80 RTC agreements, OCHAMPUSwould need to negotiate and establish agreements with each of hundredsof professional providers, some of whom may have only one CHAMPUS RTC patientin a year. With any exceptions to the inclusive cap, pressures would occurto expand the exceptions to all RTCs so that savings would sharply decreasewhile administrative costs climbed. To be consistent in achieving the goalsof a capped professional payment, CHAMPUS would need to limit RTC patientprofessional care to providers who agree to the binding participation agreementsas a condition for CHAMPUS payment. With an inclusive cap, there is one RTC claim for a given patient for agiven time period, usually a month. With separate caps, the RTC claimswould be augmented by claims from the professionals involved, with thenecessity of identifying those claims from among the approximately 8 millionreceived by CHAMPUS claims processors so that the special processing theywould require could take place. CHAMPUS fiscal intermediaries would alsoexperience difficulty in marrying-up professional claims with correspondinginstitutional billing since many professional providers do not bill inneat monthly intervals. They could not be processed in the normal systemthat uses prevailing payment limits. A new claims processing system wouldneed to be established or the claims would have to be hand processed, eitherof which would entail administrative costs roughly estimated at five timesgreater than those incurred with an inclusive rate. This increased claimsprocessing cost does not include the costs of negotiating and maintainingthe hundreds of separate individual professional agreements. 23. On May 26, 1988, the Director, OCHAMPUS, and members of his staff metwith representatives of the National Association of Psychiatric TreatmentCenters for Children (NAPTCC) to review and discuss their proposed alternativepayment system for CHAMPUS services. Although their proposal was not adopted,OCHAMPUS did agree to review and evaluate any future hard data that theNAPTCC might wish to submit regarding significant changes in the levelof RTC care. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Regulation Changes </ITAG>Pursuant to the Court's decision, OCHAMPUS is proceeding with the generalnotice of final rulemaking. The major provisions of the RTC reimbursementsystem are being incorported into the CHAMPUS regulation, along with thesafeguards needed to ensure continued benefit access and quality of care.A provision is also being included which will ensure that CHAMPUS beneficiariesare not discriminated against solely on the basis of program payment methodology.In the final rule, the all-inclusive per diem rate will still encompassthe RTC's daily charge for RTC inpatient care and all mental health treatmentdetermined necessary and rendered as part of the treatment plan establishedfor the patient and accepted by OCHAMPUS. However, payment of geographicallydistant family therapy will be allowed outside the all-inclusive RTC ratebecause of the significant distance involved and the need for administrativeflexibility. The family therapist may bill individually from the RTC ifthe therapy is provided to one or both of the parents residing a minimumof 250 miles from the location of the RTC. Plans for distant family therapymust be documented in the patient's medical records. The RTC is still responsiblefor setting up the sessions and for making sure that there is collaborationbetween the parent's therapist and the child's therapist. Payment for geographicallydistant family therapy will be cost-shared on an inpatient basis, subjectto the prevailing charge in the state in which the service was rendered.Payment of educational services will also be allowed outside the all-inclusiverate if it is not available from or payable by other local, state or federalgovernments. However, the amount paid shall not exceed the RTC's most favorablerate to any other patient, agency, or organization for educational services.The all-inclusive rate includes charges for the routine medical managementof a beneficiary while residing in an RTC. Services provided by medicalprofessionals employed by or contracted with the RTC are part of the all-inclusiveper diem rate and cannot be billed separately. These routine medical servicesare made available to all children entering the facility and are designedto maintain the general health and welfare of the patient population. Examplesof this type of care are: (1) Routine health and physical examinationsprovided by RTC medical staff; (2) in-house pharmaceutical services; and(3) other ancillary medical services routinely provided to the RTC population.Otherwise covered medical services related to a nonmental health conditionand rendered by an independent provider outside the RTC are payable inaddition to the all-inclusive per diem rate. This includes medical consultations,laboratory tests, radiology and pharmaceutical services. Professional chargesfor medical visits or consultations must be billed by the independent professionalprovider. The remaining ancillary charges may either be billed by the independentprovider or through the RTC. However, if the RTC is billing for the service,it must identify the provider by name, the related medical diagnosis andthe specific medical procedure rendered. For example, if a child was injuredwhile playing basketball, he or she might need medical care for the injuryor suspected injury. Another example is where a child has a serious earinfection and must see an Ear, Nose and Throat Specialist. The specialistwould bill CHAMPUS directly for his or her service. The medication prescribedby the specialist may be billed through the RTC as long as the provideris identified. The billing must also include the specific medical diagnosisalong with the name and strength of the medication. However, if the medicationis routinely dispensed out of the RTC pharmacy or nurse's station it wouldfall under the all-inclusive rate. Under the new reimbursement system, one of the following two alternativemethods will be used in determining individual RTC rates: 1. RTCs Participating in CHAMPUS During Base Period The per diem rate for an RTC participating in CHAMPUS during the base periodof March 1, 1984, through February 28, 1985, will be based on the actualcharging practices during that 12-month period. This base period was chosen:(1) Because it corresponded to the base period used in our previous study;and (2) because the drastic increase in RTC charges in the last three yearscould not be justified by national health care statistics. The individualRTC rate will be the lower of either the CHAMPUS rate in effect on February28, 1985, or the rate high enough to cover at least one-third of the totalpatient days of care provided by the RTC during the 12 months ending February28, 1985. Under either methodology, the rate will be subject to a maximumcap. These rates will be adjusted by annual inflation factors reflectingthe national Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners (CPI-U) for medicalcare for the 3-year period ending February 29, 1988. 2. RTCs New to CHAMPUS After February 28, 1985 For RTCs new to the CHAMPUS program, one of the following two alternativemethods will be used in determining their individual rates: A. The rates of RTCs which were in operation during the base period (March1, 1984 through February 28, 1985) will be calculated based on the actualcharging practices of the RTC during the 12 months ending February 28,1985. The RTC's rate will be the lower of either the rate high enough tocover at least one-third of its total patient days of care provided duringthe 12 months and inflated by the CPI-U, or the OCHAMPUS determined, cappedper diem. B. The rates for RTCs which began operation after February 28, 1985, orbegan operation before February 28, 1985, but had less than 6 months ofoperation by February 28, 1985, will be based on the actual charging practicesduring their first 6 to 12 consecutive months, with 6 months being theminimum time in operation for certification under the CHAMPUS program.A period of less than 12 months will be used only when the RTC has beenin operation for less than 12 months. Once a full 12 months is availablethe rate will be recalculated. The rates would be calculated the same asin A above except a different base period would be used and the rate wouldbe adjusted by appropriate annual CPI-U factors for medical care to bringit forward to February 29, 1988.3. Calculation of Capped Per Diem AmountThe OCHAMPUS determined capped per diem amount was set at the 80th percentileof all established CHAMPUS rates, weighted by the total CHAMPUS days providedat each rate during the base period and adjusted by appropriate annualCPI-Us for medical care for the 3-year period ending February 29, 1988.The annual CPI-U inflation factors are being used to update the RTC's individualrates, as well as the capped amount, because of the anticipated delay intheir implementation.All routine and special education costs are excluded from reimbursementexcept in individual cases where appropriate education is not availablethrough other local, state, or federal agencies. Under the new educationalprovisions, RTCs will have greater responsibility for ensuring that beneficiariestake maximum advantage of their rights to a free and appropriate publiceducation.A provision is also being incorporated into the Regulation regarding therapeuticabsences. Under this provision CHAMPUS will continue payment at the fullper diem rate for approved absences not exceeding three calendar days.Those in excess of this time frame will be paid at 75 percent of the establisheddaily charge beginning with the fourth day of absence.There will be a grandfathering period for those CHAMPUS patients who arereceiving care in an RTC at the time the new reimbursement methodologyis adopted. To ensure continued care of these beneficiaries, payment atthe current rate, including separate payment for professional services,will continue for all beneficiaries admitted prior to the implementationdate, until discharge, transfer or until two months of care have elapsed,whichever occurs first.Clarifying language is being adopted in the Regulation to further definethe level of care provided in an RTC and to establish an appropriate agelimit for beneficiaries receiving care in this type of facility.We feel that the new participation requirements will not have a significanteconomic impact on either the institutional or professional componentsof RTC treatment. The prospective reimbursement methodology was designedto take into account the individual circumstances of each RTC. All participatingRTCs were asked to provide specific information concerning their charges,both professional and institutional. The professional charge data representedan average overall charge based on estimated utilization patterns for eachfacility. The all-inclusive nature of this new payment methodology willnot prevent the treatment of RTC patients by community practitioners. Theonly change will be that community practitioners will look directly tothe RTC, rather than to CHAMPUS, for reimbursement. The all-inclusive ratewas adopted to ensure that professional services are not duplicated andare provided in accordance with established CHAMPUS standards.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>Less than 0.13 percent of CHAMPUS institutional providers and less than0.04 percent of CHAMPUS individual professional providers will be affectedby this amendment. Although several RTCs have expressed concerns over thenew system and the potential impact on their method of doing business,approximately 80 percent of the currently approved RTCs have indicatedthat they will continue their participation in the program. A majorityof CHAMPUS approved RTCs already bill their services on an all-inclusivebasis. Since the net impact on both institutional and professional componentsof RTC care will not be significant, the Secretary certifies that thisproposed rule, if promulgated as a final rule, will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities under the criteriaof the Regulatory Flexibility Act. It is not, therefore, a ``major rule''under Executive Order 12291.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 32 CFR Part 199</ITAG>Health insurance, Military personnel, Handicapped.Accordingly, 32 CFR, Part 199, is proposed to be amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 199_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 199 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>10 U.S.C. 1079, 1086, 5 U.S.C. 301.</ITAG>2. Paragraph (b) of andSection; 199.2 is amended by adding definitions for``all-inclusive per diem rate,'' ``capped rate,'' and ``mental health therapeuticabsence'' in alphabetical order as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 199.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) Specific definitions.<T3>All-Inclusive Per Diem Rate. </T3>The OCHAMPUS determined rate thatencompasses the daily charge for inpatient care and, unless specificallyexcepted, all other treatment determined necessary and rendered as partof the treatment plan established for a patient, and accepted by OCHAMPUS.<T3>Capped Rate. </T3>The maximum per diem or all-inclusive rate that CHAMPUSwill allow for care.<T3>Mental Health Therapeutic Absence. </T3>A therapeutically planned absencefrom the inpatient setting. The patient is not discharged from the facilityand may be away for periods of several hours to several days. The purposeof the therapeutic absence is to give the patient an opportunity to testhis or her ability to function outside the inpatient setting before theactual discharge.3. Section 199.4 is amended by revising paragraph (g)(6) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 199.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Basic Program benefits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) * * *(6) <T3>Therapeutic absences</T3>. Therapeutic absences from an inpatient facility,except when such absences are specifically included in a treatment planapproved by the Director, OCHAMPUS, or a designee. For cost-sharing provisionsrefer to andSection; 199.14, paragraph (f)(3).<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>4. Section 199.6 is amended by revising paragraphs (b)(4)(vii) introductorytext, introductory text (b)(4)(vii)(A)(<T3>1</T3>), by removing paragraph (b)(4)(vii)(A)(<T3>2</T3>) and redesignating (b)(4)(vii)(A)(<T3>3</T3>) as (b)(4)(vii)(A)(<T3>2</T3>), by redesignating (b)(4)(vii)(A)(<T3>4</T3>) as (b)(4)(vii)(A)(<T3>3</T3>) and revising it, by adding a new paragraph (b)(4)(vii)(A)(<T3>4</T3>), by removing the note under (b)(4)(vii)(B), and by adding newparagraphs (b)(4)(vii)(C) (<T3>6</T3>) and (b)(4)(vii)(D).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 199.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Authorized providers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) * * *(4) * * *(vii) <T3>Residential treatment centers</T3>. A residential treatment center(RTC) is a facility, or distinct part of a facility, that provides to childrenand adolescents under the age of 21, a total, 24-hour therapeutically plannedgroup living and learning situation where distinct and individualized psychotherapeuticinterventions can take place. Residential treatment is a specific levelof care to be differentiated from acute, intermediate and long term hospitalcare, where the least restrictive environment is maintained to allow fornormalization of the patient's surroundings. The RTC must be both physicallyand programmatically distinct if it is a part or subunit of a larger treatmentprogram. An RTC is organized and professionally staffed to provide residentialtreatment of mental disorders to children and adolescents who have sufficientintellectual potential to respond to active treatment (that is, for whommedical opinion or medical evidence can reasonably conclude that treatmentof the mental disorder will result in an improved ability to function outsidethe RTC), for whom outpatient, partial hospitalization or other level ofinpatient treatment is not appropriate, and for whom a protected and structuredenvironment is medically or psychologically necessary.(A) * * *(<T3>1</T3>) Be accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of HealthcareOrganizations under the Consolidated Standards Manual for Child, Adolescent,and Adult Psychiatric, Alcoholism, and Drug Abuse Facilities and FacilitiesServing the Mentally Retarded;<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(<T3>3</T3>) Have entered into a Participation Agreement with OCHAMPUS withinwhich the RTC agrees, in part, to:(<T3>i</T3>) Render residential treatment center inpatient services to eligibleCHAMPUS beneficiaries in need of such services, in accordance with theparticipation agreement and the CHAMPUS regulation.(<T3>ii</T3>) Accept payment for its services based upon the methodologyprovided in andSection; 199.14, paragraph (f) or such other method as determinedby the Director, OCHAMPUS;(<T3>iii</T3>) Accept the CHAMPUS all-inclusive per diem rate as paymentin full and collect from the CHAMPUS beneficiary or the family of the CHAMPUSbeneficiary only those amounts that represent the beneficiary's liability,as defined in andSection; 199.4, and charges for services and supplies thatare not a benefit of CHAMPUS;(<T3>iv</T3>) Make all reasonable efforts acceptable to the Director, OCHAMPUS,to collect those amounts which represent the beneficiary's liability, asdefined in andSection; 199.4;(<T3>v</T3>) Comply with the provisions of Section 199.8, and submit claimsfirst to all health insurance coverage to which the beneficiary is entitledthat is primary to CHAMPUS;(<T3>vi</T3>) Submit claims for services provided to CHAMPUS beneficiariesat least every 30 days. If claims are not submitted at least every 30 days,the RTC agrees not to bill the beneficiary or the beneficiary's familyfor any amounts disallowed by CHAMPUS;(<T3>vii</T3>) Designate an individual who will act as liaison for CHAMPUSinquiries. The RTC shall inform OCHAMPUS in writing of the designated individual;(<T3>viii</T3>) Furnish OCHAMPUS with cost data certified to by an independentaccounting firm or other agency as authorized by the Director, OCHAMPUS;(<T3>ix</T3>) Grant the Director, OCHAMPUS, or designee, the right to conductquality assurance audits or accounting audits with full access to patientsand records to determine the quality and cost-effectiveness of care rendered.The audits may be conducted on a scheduled or unscheduled (unannounced)basis. This right to audit/review includes, but is not limited to:(<T3>aa</T3>) Examination of fiscal and all other records of the RTC whichwould confirm compliance with the participation agreement and designationas an authorized CHAMPUS RTC provider;(<T3>bb</T3>) Conducting such audits of RTC records including clinical,financial, and census records, as may be necessary to determine the natureof the services being provided, and the basis for charges and claims againstthe United States for services provided CHAMPUS beneficiaries;(<T3>cc</T3>) Examining reports of evaluations and inspections conductedby federal, state and local government, and private agencies and organizations;(<T3>dd</T3>) Conducting on-site inspections of the facilities of the RTCand interviewing employees, members of the staff, contractors, board members,volunteers, and patients, as required.(<T3>ee</T3>) Audits conducted by the United States General Accounting Office.(<T3>4</T3>) Be licensed and operational for a minimum period of six months.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(C) * * *(<T3>6</T3>) The child's admission to the RTC is authorized by the DirectorOCHAMPUS, or designee.(D) Under the terms of the participation agreement, RTCs must provide thefollowing safeguards for continued benefit access and quality of care:(<T3>1</T3>) Assure that any and all eligible beneficiaries receive carewhich complies with standards in paragraphs (b)(4)(vii)(A) (<T3>1</T3>) through (<T3>4</T3>) and (b)(4)(vii)(C);(<T3>2</T3>) Provide inpatient services to CHAMPUS beneficiaries in thesame manner it provides inpatient services to all other patients;(<T3>3</T3>) Not discriminate against CHAMPUS beneficiaries in any manner,including admission practices, placement in special or separate wings orrooms, or provisions of special or limited treatment.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>5. Section 199.14 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (f), (g), and(h) as (g), (h), and (i), adding new paragraph (f), and by redesignatingnewly designated paragraph (g)(2) as (g)(3), and adding new paragraph (g)(2)to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 199.14</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Provider reimbursement methods.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) <T3>Reimbursement of residential treatment centers</T3>. The CHAMPUS rateis the per diem rate that CHAMPUS will authorize for all mental healthservices rendered to a patient and the patient's family as part of thetotal treatment plan submitted by a CHAMPUS-approved RTC, and approvedby the Director OCHAMPUS, or designee.(1) The all-inclusive per diem rate for RTCs operating or participatingin CHAMPUS during the base period of March 1, 1984, through February 28,1985, will be the lowest of the following conditions:(i) The CHAMPUS rate paid to the RTC for all-inclusive services as of March1, 1985, adjusted to include an increase reflecting the annual nationalConsumer Price Indices for Urban Wage Earners (CPI-U) for medical carefor the 3-year period ending February 29, 1988; or(ii) The per diem rate accepted by the RTC from any other agency or organization(public or private) or individual that is high enough to cover one-thirdof the total patient days during the 12-month period ending February 28,1985, adjusted by the CPI-U; or (iii) An OCHAMPUS determined capped per diem set at the 80th percentileof all established CHAMPUS RTC rates nationally, weighted by total CHAMPUSdays provided at each rate during the base period discussed in (f)(1) above.(2) The all-inclusive per diem rates for RTCs which began operation afterFebruary 28, 1985, or began operation before February 28, 1985, but hadless than 6 months of operation by February 28, 1985, will be calculatedbased on the lower of the per diem rate accepted by the RTC that is highenough to cover one-third of the total patient days during its first 6to 12 consecutive months of operation adjusted by the CPI-U, or the OCHAMPUSdetermined capped amount. A period of less than 12 months will be usedonly when the RTC has been in operation for less than 12 months. Once afull 12 months is available, the rate will be recalculated.(3) The first three days of each approved therapeutic absence will be allowedat 100 percent of the CHAMPUS determined all-inclusive per diem rate. Beginningwith day four, reimbursement will be at 75 percent of that rate.(4) All educational costs, whether they include routine education or specialeducation costs, are excluded from reimbursement except when appropriateeducation is not available from, or not payable by, a cognizant publicentity.(i) The RTC shall exclude educational costs from its daily costs.(ii) The RTC's accounting system must be adequate to assure CHAMPUS isnot billed for educational costs.(iii) The RTC may request payment of educational costs on an individualcase basis from the Director, OCHAMPUS, or designee, when appropriate educationis not available from, or not payable by, a cognizant public entity. Toqualify for reimbursement of educational costs in individual cases, theRTC shall comply with the application procedures established by the Director,OCHAMPUS, or designee, including, but not limited to, the following:(A) As part of its admission procedures, the RTC must counsel and assistthe beneficiary and the beneficiary's family in the necessary proceduresfor assuring their rights to a free and appropriate public education.(B) The RTC must document any reasons why an individual beneficiary cannotattend public educational facilities and, in such a case, why alternativeeducational arrangements have not been provided by the cognizant publicentity.(C) If reimbursement of educational costs is approved for an individualbeneficiary by the Director, OCHAMPUS, or designee, such educational costsshall be shown separately from the RTC's daily costs on the CHAMPUS claim.The amount paid shall not exceed the RTC's most-favorable rate to any otherpatient, agency, or organization for special or general educational serviceswhichever is appropriate.(D) If the RTC fails to request CHAMPUS approval of the educational costson an individual case, the RTC agrees not to bill the beneficiary or thebeneficiary's family for any amounts disallowed by CHAMPUS. Requests forpayment of educational costs must be referred to the Director, OCHAMPUS,or designee for review and a determination of the applicability of CHAMPUSbenefits.(5) Any future adjustments to the RTC rates will be limited to annual changesin the CPI-U for medical care, at the discretion of the Director, OCHAMPUS,or designee.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) * * *(2) <T3>All-inclusive rate</T3>. Claims from individual health-care professionalproviders for services rendered to CHAMPUS beneficiaries residing in anRTC that is either being reimbursed on an all-inclusive per diem rate,or is billing an all-inclusive per diem rate, shall be denied; with theexception of independent health-care professionals providing geographicallydistant family therapy to a family member residing a minimum of 250 milesfrom the RTC or covered medical services related to a nonmental healthcondition rendered outside the RTC. Reimbursement for individual professionalservices is included in the rate paid the institutional provider.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">L.M. Bynum,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Alternate OSD Federal Register Liaison Officer, Department of Defense.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">July 27, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-17228 Filed 7-29-88; 8:45]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3810-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>