<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88106-0023 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-06-88.f2.A1022</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 563 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 87-1298] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Individual Regulatory Capital Requirements; Capital Directives </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">Date: December 22, 1987. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (``Board''), as theoperating head of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (``FSLIC''or ``Corporation''), is adopting rules to implement its authority to setand enforce regulatory capital requirements for all institutions the accountsof which are insured by the FSLIC (``insured institution(s)'' or ``institution(s)'').The Board is adopting these regulations pursuant to the authority grantedit by section 406 of the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987, Pub.L. No. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552 (``CEBA'') and pursuant to the Board's generalauthority to promulgate regulations under 12 U.S.C 1437(a), 1725(a), and1730. These regulations implement the authority granted the Board and the FSLICby section 406 of CEBA to vary the minimum regulatory capital requirementsof an individual insured institution as may be necessary or appropriatein light of the particular circumstances of the insured institution. Theyalso establish procedures for implementing the authority granted by section406 to issue a directive and enforce a plan for increasing an individualinsured institution's capital level.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>February 5, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>John F. Connolly, Deputy Directorfor Capital and Finance, (202) 377-6465, Regulations and Legislation Division,Office of General Counsel; Marianne Roche, Deputy Director, Office of Enforcement,(202) 653-2609; Donald G. Edwards, Director, Financial and QuantitativeAnalysis, (202) 377-6914, Edward A. Hjerpe III, Financial Economist, (202)377-6976, Office of Policy and Economic Research, Federal Home Loan BankBoard, 1700 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20552; or Ben F. Dixon, PolicyAnalyst, (202) 778-2519, Carol Larson, Professional Accounting Fellow,(202) 778-2535, Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision,Federal Home Loan Bank System, 900 Nineteenth Street, NW., Washington,DC 20006.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The Board today is adopting rules toimplement the express authority granted to it by section 406 of CEBA toset minimum capital requirements for insured institutions on a case-by-casebasis and to issue capital directives mandating capital compliance. Theseregulations strengthen the Board's ability to require insured institutionsto achieve and maintain an amount of capital consistent with sound financialpractice and commensurate with the financial risk of loss to which suchinstitutions expose themselves, depositors, and the FSLIC. In August 1986when the Board adopted its general capital regulation, andSection; 563.13,the Board set forth its analysis of the policy reasons that make adequatecapital of critical importance to the safety and soundness of insured institutionsand the FSLIC deposit insurance fund.\1\<NOTE/>  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ On August 15, 1986, the Board adopted its revised regulatorycapital regulation [hereinafter, ``capital regulation''] establishing thelevels of capital required for all insured institutions. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 86-857, 51 FR 33565-88 (September 22, 1986),<T3>codified at </T3>12 CFR 563.13. The Board determined that it was essentialfor insured institutions to reach 6 percent capitalization before riskadjustment (increased for concentration of higher credit risk assets anddecreased for reductions in interest rate risk) as quickly as feasible,thereby more closely approximating the minimum capital requirements imposedby Federal banking regulators. <ITAG tagnum="28">On June 10, 1987, the Board proposed to amend the capital regulationto compute industry profitability by using the median return on assetsof all insured institutions that are solvent under generally accepted accountingprinciples instead of using the average return on assets of all insuredinstitutions. 52 FR 23845 (June 25, 1987). The Board wishes to advise allinsured institutions and other interested parties that it may adopt thisproposal after consideration of comments received either in conjunctionwith other changes to andSection; 563.13 or by separate Board action. </ITAG>Those same policies support the adoption of these regulations explicitlygiving the Board authority to establish individual capital requirementsand to enforce the Board's capital regulations by issuing capital directives.Individually established capital requirements are crucial to ensuring thatinsured institutions have adequate capital to absorb the risk of loss fromtheir selected business strategies and decisions. Although andSection;563.13sets forth a type of objective, risk-based capital scheme, no uniform formulacan take into account sufficiently the continuously changing financialpositions and risk postures of the more than three thousand insured institutionsunder the Board's supervision.With the enactment of section 406 of CEBA, which amends both section 5of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (``HOLA''), 12 U.S.C. 1464, and section407 of the National Housing Act, (``NHA''), 12 U.S.C. 1730, Congress hasexplicitly empowered the Board and the Corporation to exercise much morediscretion with respect to the required capital levels of individual insuredinstitutions.\2\<NOTE/> Sections 406(a) and 406(b) provide, in part, that the Boardand the Corporation may set the required capital level of an insured institutionon a case-by-case basis as it ``determines to be necessary or appropriatefor such insured institution in light of the particular circumstances ofthe insured institution.'' \3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Section 403(b) of the NHA, 12 U.S.C. 1726(b), providesthe FSLIC with express authority to require an institution to provide adequatereserves in a form satisfactory to the FSLIC. This statutory provisiongave the Board broad discretion in prescribing such reserves, which couldhave been set on a case-by-case basis. Section 406 of CEBA, however, providesexpress authority to do so.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ All Federal savings and loan associations and Federalsavings banks are chartered and regulated under the HOLA and the regulationspromulgated pursuant thereto. Most of these same institutions are alsoinsured by the FSLIC and required to comply with the NHA and its implementingregulations. Federal savings banks that are insured by the Federal DepositInsurance Corporation are encompassed within the definition of insuredinstitution in andSection; 561.1, unless expressly exempted by a specificregulation. The Board as the regulatory authority under the HOLA and asthe operating head of the FSLIC under the NHA is implementing identicalprovisions of section 406 of CEBA regarding Federal associations and insuredinstitutions, as with its current capital regulation, by adopting theseregulations for all insured institutions (including Federal associations)under its insurance regulations. Since the passage of section 908 of the International Lending SupervisionAct of 1983 (``ILSA''), Pub. L. No. 98-181, 97 Stat. 1278, <T3>codified at</T3>, 12 U.S.C. 3907, the Federal banking regulators havehad the explicit authority to set the minimum capital requirements of individualbanks on a case-by-case basis. Pursuant to section 908 of ILSA, the Officeof the Comptroller of the Currency (``OCC''), the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation (``FDIC''), and the Federal Reserve Board (``FRB'') have promulgatedregulations requiring banking institutions generally to achieve and maintaina minimum acceptable ratio of total capital to total assets of six percent, and a minimum primary capital ratio of five and one-half per centof adjusted total assets.\4\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The Board is aware that these banking regulators haverecently proposed to revise their minimum capital requirements to includerisk-based capital guidelines. The Board intends to monitor closely theprogress of these regulatory initiatives, consistent with.the intent ofsection 406 of CEBA. Section 908 of ILSA specifically provides, however, that the bank regulatorsmay ``establish such minimum levels of capital for a banking institutionas the appropriate Federal banking agency, in its discretion, deems tobe necessary or appropriate in light of the particular circumstances ofthe banking institution.'' ILSA at 908(a)(2).\5\<NOTE/> In accordance with that statutory provision, the implementingregulations adopted by the Federal banking agencies authorize the discretionaryexercise of broad power to require different capital ratios for banks.For example, the relevant OCC regulations, 12 CFR 3.1 <T3>et seq.,</T3> set forth examples of instances in which capital ratioshigher than the generally applicable ratios may be appropriate: these includethe capital ratios for a newly chartered bank, a bank receiving specialsupervisory attention, or a bank having a high proportion of off-balancesheet risks. 12 CFR 3.10 (1987).\6\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ The legislative history of section 908 of ILSA demonstratesthat it was a specific legislative response to a judicial decision thatbrought into question the authority of a Federal bank regulator to establishan individualized minimum capital requirement for a particular bank. <T3>See First National Bank of Bellaire v. Comptroller of the Currency,</T3>697 F.2d 674 (5th Cir. 1983).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ <T3>See also </T3>the regulations of the FDIC at 12 CFR 325.1 <T3>et seq.</T3> and the guidelines of the FRB at Appendix A to 12 CFRPart 225. With section 406 of CEBA, which is closely patterned after section 908of ILSA, Congress has expressly provided the Board and the Corporationwith the authority to vary insured institutions' minimum capital requirementson a case-by-case basis. Therefore, in accordance with the authority Congressexplicitly conferred in the new legislation and in the interest of thesafety and soundness of all insured institutions and the integrity of theFSLIC insurance fund, the Board today is adopting these regulations establishingprocedures for increasing the required capital level of any given insuredinstitution as its particular circumstances may warrant. The Board believes that these rules comport with the congressional mandate,set forth in section 406 of CEBA, that the Board establish minimum capitalrequirements for insured institutions consistent with the other bankingagencies' capital requirements. This new express statutory authority issupported by lengthy congressional hearings and extensive testimony onthe public need for effective supervision of FSLIC-insured institutions.In enacting section 406 of CEBA, Congress granted the Board supplementalauthority to strengthen its supervisory efforts. Moreover, Congress viewsthis authority as a critical component of the effective supervision ofa Federal system of deposit insurance where ``capital is the touchstoneof financial integrity and guardian of the guarantee of Federal insurance.''\7\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ 133 Cong. Rec. S11,208; S11,210 (daily ed. August 4, 1987).The Board notes that the rules it is adopting today are substantially similarto the rules adopted by the OCC, the FDIC, and the FRB to implement theirauthority to set case-by-case capital requirements and to issue capitaldirectives. The Board has carefully considered those rules, which wereadopted in final form after full consideration of public comment, and believesthat those rules and their supporting evidentiary records serve as appropriatemodels for, and provide additional support for, the rules the Board isadopting today. <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Summary of the Proposed Rule </ITAG>On October 5, 1987, the Board proposed rules pursuant to section 406 ofCEBA to help protect the FSLIC insurance fund and insured institutions'depositors in the wake of the serious financial situation that currentlybesets the depository insurance system.\8\<NOTE/> The Board requested comments on all aspects of the proposal.Furthermore, on November 3-4, 1987, it held a public hearing relating tothese and other regulations that it proposed in order to implement CEBA.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ Board Res. No. 87-1045, 52 FR 39105 (October 5, 1987).The Board is setting forth below a summary of its proposed regulation togetherwith a discussion of the comments received and the Board's modificationsmade to the proposal in adopting these final rules. A. Case-by-Case Capital Requirements for Individual Insured InstitutionsThe Board is adopting andSection; 563.14 pursuant to its authority undersection 406 of CEBA to set the capital requirement of Federal associations,or acting as operating head of FSLIC, to set the capital requirements ofinsured institutions at whatever amounts or capital-to-asset ratios theBoard determines to be necessary or appropriate in light of the particularcircumstances of the association or insured institution. The power to setsuch requirements is crucial to the safety and soundness of insured institutions.The Board's proposed regulation described the proposed procedure for settingindividual minimum capital requirements higher than those set forth inandSection; 563.13. It provided for notification to institutions by theirPrincipal Supervisory Agents (``PSA(s)'') of their proposed individualminimum capital requirements, subsequent response by insured institutions,and the establishment of individual minimum capital requirements for institutionsby their PSAs with the concurrence of the Federal Home Loan Bank System'sOffice of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision (``ORPOS''). The Board proposed to delegate the authority to determine appropriate individualminimum capital requirements for insured institutions to the PSAs becausethey and their staffs generally are most familiar with the specific financial,economic, and operational characteristics of insured institutions withintheir districts that may demonstrate a need for increased capital. Underthe proposed regulation, the concurrence of ORPOS would be necessary beforea higher minimum individual capital requirement could be set because thatOffice is responsible on the national level for matters relating to theexamination and supervision of insured institutions and, through involvementin this process, can promote uniform national application of this authorityto set individual minimum capital requirements. In the further interestof consistent national use of this power, the Board stated that it wouldestablish guidelines through ORPOS to control the PSAs' exercise of theirdelegated authority under proposed andSection; 563.14(b). The proposed rule also set out examples of situations where higher minimumcapital levels may be necessary or appropriate and examples of the factorsthat the PSAs might consider in deciding upon an appropriate individualminimum capital requirement for an insured institution. The proposed regulationestablished individual minimum capital requirements and provided that aninsured institution would have reasonable opportunity to respond to itsnotification of a proposed individual minimum capital requirement and tosubmit any supporting documentation supporting its response. B. Capital Directives Also pursuant to section 406 of CEBA, the Board proposed a process forthe issuance of capital directives and capital plans enforceable undersection 5(d)(8) of the HOLA, 12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(8), or section 407(k) ofthe NHA, 12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(8), or section 407(k) of the NHA, 12 U.S.C.1730(k), as appropriate, in the same manner and to the same extent as finalcease-and-desist orders issued by the Board or Corporation.\9\<NOTE/> These capital directives and capital plans, similar to cease-and-desistorders, may be enforced through petition to the appropriate United Statesdistrict court or through the imposition of civil money penalties of upto $1,000 a day against the institution or against any officer, director,or employee/agent or other person participating in the conduct of the affairsof an institution that violates the directive or the plan. <T3>See </T3>12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(8) and 1730(k). <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\9\ A major difference between these capital directives andplans and cease-and-desist orders is that cease-and-desist orders may beissued only by consent or after notice and a hearing on the record. Capitaldirectives may be issued by consent or in accordance with andSection; 563.14a,which establishes a written hearing process which is not required by statute.Because of the powerful and sensitive nature of formal enforcement powers,the Board wanted to ensure that its capital directive authority was usedin a uniform manner nationwide and with adequate and appropriate attentionto the rights of the institutions involved. In order to ensure judicioususe of this authority, the Board proposed to establish a written hearingprocess, which would begin after referral of a case by a PSA. Then, theOffice of Enforcement would initiate the process of issuing a capital directiveby notifying an insured institution of the Board's intent to issue a directive,would provide an opportunity for the institution to respond, would reviewthe institution's response to that notification, and in coordination withORPOS would make a recommendation for final Board action. The Board explainedthe involvement of these two offices by stating that the Office of Enforcementhas specialized knowledge and unique expertise in the use of the Board'sformal enforcement powers and that ORPOS has parallel experience and expertiseconcerning the examination and supervision of insured institutions. TheBoard proposed to reserve for itself the final decision to issue a capitaldirective in proposed or modified form. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Summary of Comments; Response To Comments </ITAG>The Board received 54 comments on its proposed regulation to implementits authority to set capital requirements on an institution-by-institutionbasis and to issue capital directives. These comments were received byletter and through testimony at the Board's hearing on the proposed regulationsunder CEBA held on November 3-4, 1987. Comments were received from 33 insuredinstitutions, 14 trade associations, 1 economic consulting firm, and 3law firms. Of these comments, 8 supported the proposed regulation and 9opposed the proposal. The other 37 addressed specific problems with theproposal or made specific recommendations. The Board has also consideredas part of this rulemaking the 26 comments received in response to theBoard's proposal in May 1987 to impose individual capital requirementsas part of the classification of assets regulation,\10\<NOTE/> a provision that was deleted from the classification of assetsregulation under CEBA that the Board adopted yesterday.\11\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\10\ Board Res. No. 87-527, 52 FR 18369 (May 15, 1987). <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\11\ Board Res. No. 87-1296 (December 21, 1987). A. IndividualMinimum Capital Requirements <ITAG tagnum="81">Delegation, Guidelines, and Appeals </ITAG>A large number of commenters expressed their views on the appropriate rolesof the Board, ORPOS, and the PSAs in setting individual capital requirementsfor insured institutions. Some strongly urged the Board to retain its responsibilityto review PSAs' actions to ensure that the power to set individual minimumcapital requirements is used uniformly across the country under a fair,national policy. Some of these commenters opposed any delegation to thePSAs because it would allow them to act unfairly, excessively, and arbitrarilywithout Board oversight for consistency and abuse of discretion. Othercommenters felt  that the capital scheme under andSection; 563.13 establishedobjective national criteria and that the power to set individual capitalrequirements was unnecessary because the PSAs already have adequate authorityto control institutions' capital levels. A substantial number of commenters stated that this Board review shouldbe provided by establishing a process for institutions to appeal to theBoard decisions by the PSAs setting individual minimum capital requirementsor ruling that changed circumstances justifying modification do not exist.Several commenters specifically endorsed the concept of an appeal to theBoard if the individual capital requirement imposed by a PSA would increasean institution's capital requirement by some threshold amount, usually100 basis points. Some said that ORPOS involvement was not adequate retentionof Board review authority and did not substitute for an appeal. Other commentersexhorted the Board to continue its efforts to increase the level and qualityof the field examination and supervisory staff because that is the bestway to ensure that the system of individual capital requirements for institutionsis fairly and effectively utilized.On the other hand, a substantial number of commenters supported the Board'sdelegation to the PSAs of the authority to set individual minimum capitalrequirements with the concurrence of ORPOS, as a national oversight authority,in individual determinations. Others objected to ORPOS involvement on thenational level in individual decisions that should be made by the PSAsat the Federal Home Loan Bank level. A number of commenters holding eitherof these opinions expressed strong views that the power to set individualcapital requirements must be a flexible, effective tool for the PSAs touse in conjunction with their other examination and supervisory efforts.These commenters said that Congress intended this new power to be usedin an efficient, flexible manner in dealing with the myriad problems facingthe Board and the FSLIC that must be addressed promptly and effectivelyin the interest of safety and soundness. Many of these commenters recognizedthat such individually established capital requirements can effectivelysupplement the general capital scheme established under andSection; 563.13by tailoring capital requirements to deal with the risk exposure from thetremendously diverse financial and operational situations of over threethousand institutions. A large majority of commenters, including both those supporting the proposedregulation and those addressing specific problems with the proposal, stressedthat fair and effective implementation and use of the authority to setindividual minimum capital requirements depends on the Board's developmentof specific guidelines to be applied by the PSAs in setting such individualminimum capital requirements. Some commenters also expressed detailed objectionsto the use of certain terms and criteria, particularly criteria appearingto overlap with the components of andSection; 563.13. Many of these commenterssaid that the Board must develop such guidelines to define terms, quantifycriteria, and give specific details to implement the general standardscontained in the proposed regulation. They said that such guidelines areessential for the Board to ensure fair, uniform use of the power to setsuch capital requirements by the PSAs under ORPOS and Board oversight.This was the major criticism of the regulation by many commenters, whoappeared to favor, or at least not to oppose, the proposal if such guidelineswere adopted. One commenter said that Congress contemplated that the Boardwould adopt such specific standards through this rulemaking and that theBoard should not adopt a final rule until it had been reproposed with specificcriteria. Some said that demanding additional capital would be unnecessaryand redundant because of the capital required by andSection; 563.13 and thevaluation allowances reserved against assets requiring classification.After carefully considering these comments, the Board has decided to fulfillits oversight responsibilities and to promote system-wide uniformity bydeveloping, through ORPOS, comprehensive guidelines for the setting ofindividual minimum capital requirements and by requiring ORPOS concurrencein the setting of such requirements until guidelines have been developedand implemented to the Board's satisfaction. The Board also will closelymonitor PSAs' use of this authority through the ORPOS oversight function.Exercise of the Board's oversight authority in this way insures a fairprocess while enabling the PSAs to use the power to set individual capitalrequirements as the strong, flexible tool able to deal with the variedand unique circumstances of insured institutions, thereby supplementingPSAs' other examination and supervisory efforts, as Congress intended inadopting section 406 of CEBA. Furthermore, this regulation, including thelist of criteria justifying imposition of such a capital requirement andthe factors for consideration, is closely patterned after those adoptedby the Federal banking regulators in implementing virtually identical statutoryauthority under ILSA. The guidelines written by ORPOS will provide more specific details anddefinitions of the criteria so as to allow enhanced business planning byinsured institutions with reasonable certainty of the regulatory capitalramifications of alternative business decisions. Section 563.14 has beenmodified to eliminate certain provisions expressly overlapping componentsof andSection; 563.13. The guidelines, moreover, will also clarify that additionalcapital will not be required under andSection; 563.14 for the risks adequatelyaddressed by andSection; 563.13.\12\<NOTE/> Establishment of these guidelines together with the Board'smonitoring of PSA use of the power to set individual capital requirementswill constitute the key method by which the Board will oversee fair, uniformuse of this authority in conformance with sound national policies. Theseguidelines must be flexible and be continuously updated to deal effectivelywith the many changing problems confronting insured institutions and theFSLIC. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\12\ For example, interest rate risk is dealt with in andSection;563.13 through the maturity matching credit for relatively low interest-raterisk exposure as measured by the one-year and three-year cumulative hedgedgaps. The granting of such a credit to institutions with relatively lowexposure to interest rate risk should not preclude imposition of an increasedindividual capital requirement on an institution exposing itself and theFSLIC to a high degree of interest-rate risk. Commenters devoted substantial discussion to the question of who shouldhave the power to set individual capital requirements and why the Board'sinvolvement is needed either through making the initial decisions or byreviewing such decisions upon appeal. In response, the Board notes thatCongress gave it the explicit authority to set individual capital requirementsfor use in a flexible and efficient manner in conjunction with the Board'sother supervisory tools in addressing the varied problems presented bydiverse institutions posing serious threats to the safety and soundnessof themselves, depositors, and the FSLIC deposit insurance system. In 1985,the Board transferred its examination staff to the Federal Home Loan Banksunder the authority of the PSAs, which traditionally performed the Board'ssupervisory function. As recognized by commenters, since this transferthe Board has devoted great attention to increasing the size and improvingthe quality and training of these staffs. The Board undertook this majorstaff enhancement effort because it has vested the PSAs and their examinationand supervisory staffs with primary responsibility for the crucial missionof conducting the Board's examination and supervisory efforts in orderto ensure the safety and soundness of insured institutions, depositors,and the FSLIC insurance fund. Therefore, the Board strongly believes thatthe PSAs and their staffs must be authorized within the Board's guidelinesand under Board oversight to use the power to establish individual capitalrequirements in conjunction with other examination and supervisory actionsin furtherance of this mission. This process fulfills the Board's legal responsibilities without providingfor appeals to the Board because it ensures that the power to set individualcapital requirements will not be used in an arbitrary and capricious mannerand that there is no abuse of agency discretion. Contrary to the assertionsof some commenters, a formal appeal mechanism (which, according to somecomments should involve an adjudicatory administrative hearing on the record)is not needed to prevent arbitrary and capricious action or an abuse ofagency discretion. Accordingly, the Board has decided that an appeal tothe Board would not increase insured institutions' protection from unfair,unequal treatment in exercise of this authority but could deter PSA useof this important supervisory tool.Furthermore, the Board is legally empowered to delegate the exercise ofthis power and this decision is a logical, reasonable decision in lightof the Board's delegation of its other examination and supervisory effortsto the PSAs with the full knowledge of Congress. Moreover, although theBoard has carefully reviewed and considered comments received on its proposeddelegation of authority, such delegation generally is within agency discretionand is not subject to the notice and comment requirements of section 553of the Administrative Procedures Act, 5 U.S.C. 553. Finally, the Board has determined that the current rulemaking has satisfiedthe intent of CEBA and that it is consistent with the law and appropriateagency process for the Board to adopt this final regulation and then todevelop guidelines providing more specific details. Such guidelines arebeing developed in part in response to comments received in this rulemakingand will continuously be reviewed and updated to deal with problems facingthe Board and the FSLIC. The proposal and adoption of such detailed, supplementalguidelines before final adoption is not legally necessary, is not feasiblein light of the guidelines evolving nature, and would add undue rigidityto the process. <ITAG tagnum="81">State Involvement </ITAG>Several commenters stated that the proposed regulation violates the dualbanking system by establishing minimum capital requirements for state-charteredinstitutions and issuing directives to such institutions without the solicitationof comments from state thrift supervisors. One commenter asserted thatif a state-chartered institution is involved, a PSA must be required tonotify and consult with the appropriate state supervisor concerning theissuance of a proposed individual minimum capital requirement (proposedandSection; 563.14(d)(1)), the ultimate decision on the proposed requirement(proposedandSection; 563.14(d)(3)), the determination of whether there arechanged circumstances justifying modification of a proposed requirement,and other decisions throughout the capital directive process. Commentersasserted that such involvement of state supervisors is consistent withsection 406 of CEBA because state thrift supervisors already have sucha relationship with other federal banking agencies in exercising theiridentical authority under ILSA. In response to these comments and consistent with the Board's initial intent,andSection; 563.14 has been revised to provide expressly for solicitationof comments from, and consideration of comments made by, state thrift supervisorswhen a PSA establishes individual minimum capital requirements for state-chartered,FSLIC-insured institutions. The revised rules also provide that the statethrift supervisors will be advised of final action taken with regard tosuch institutions. <ITAG tagnum="81">Reasonable Use of Authority </ITAG>A number of commenters made recommendations with which the Board agreesin general principle for appropriate use of the authority to set individualcapital requirements. The Board is setting forth these recommendationsto reflect the Board's general intent for use of this authority. A numberof commenters stated that the PSAs must be aware of the current state ofthe capital markets and the prices for thrifts debt and equity securitieswhen establishing a schedule for thrifts to raise additional external capital.PSAs must also be aware that raising capital through retained earningsof the capital markets takes time and that the feasibility of raising capitaland the cost of such capital depends on market demand. Of course, an institution'sneed for adequate capital is not affected by the feasibility of raisingsuch capital. Other commenters said that a PSA should base his judgment as to the capitalnecessitated by a particular type and extent of investment on his evaluationof the institution's overall portfolio, operations, loss record, management,and regulatory compliance record. Some commenters said that institutionsshould be able to work informally with their PSAs to reach a voluntaryagreement before initiation of the formal process to set an individualminimum capital requirement or to issue a capital directive. Commenterssaid that PSAs should not substitute their determinations for the businessjudgment of insured institutions. Other commenters said that the PSAs shouldbe cognizant of the effect of regulatory actions on an institution's abilityto attract investors and acquirors, particularly the effects on requireddisclosure under the securities laws. A number of commenters said that PSAs should inform institutions of thespecific causes for setting higher individual capital requirements andthat such requirements should ``sunset'' when the specific causes havebeen remedied. In response to these comments and to clarify the Board'sinitial intention, andSection; 563.14 has been revised to require a PSA tonotify an institution of the specific cause for imposition of an individualminimum capital requirement and of the remedial action the institutioncould take to eliminate the need for continued applicability of such arequirement. The Board expects PSAs to terminate individual minimum requirementsif an institution has remedied the initial cause for the individual requirementand if no other cause exists justifying the increased capital requirement.The Board will monitor these practices through ORPOS in its oversight role.<ITAG tagnum="81">Notice and Response Procedures </ITAG>A number of commenters raised issues regarding the notice-and-responseprocedure involved when a PSA seeks to issue an individual minimum capitalrequirement. Some asserted that institutions should have 30 days for responsefrom receipt of the notice of a proposed individual minimum capital requirement,rather than from the date the notice is sent by the PSA. This is consistentwith the capital directive process and has been incorporated in the finalregulation. Other commenters stated that the PSA must respond to comments and alternativesuggestions made by the insured institution. Commenters recommended thatwhen notice of a proposed increase capital requirement and the documentationsupporting the need for that higher capital requirement is sent to ORPOS,it should simultaneously be forwarded to the insured institution alongwith the notifying letter. The Board has clarified in this regulation itsinitial intention that the PSAs' decisions address issues raised in theresponses received within the response period from the insured institutionand the appropriate state thrift supervisor, if a state-chartered institutionis involved. The Board believes, however, that providing to institutionsthe internal memoranda and documentation forwarded by the PSA to ORPOSwould be inadvisable, as reflected by the Board's established proceduresand disclosure practices for other supervisory or enforcement actions,and also would inhibit to the public's detriment the communication betweenthe PSAs and ORPOS in setting individual capital requirements or betweenPSAs and the Office of Enforcement and ORPOS in dealing with capital directives.Some comments made regarding the timeframe and procedures were that 30days is too short a response period and that this period should only beshortened for sufficient cause. The Board believes 30 days is an appropriateresponse period for an institution to respond, but has modified andSection;563.14 to permit the PSA to extend the response period for good cause.The Board also agrees with a number of commenters who said that the responseperiod should not be shortened to less than 30 days without good cause,language actually included in the regulation. The Board, however, disagreeswith commenters who stated that the PSA should only be able to set an individualrequirement within a certain number of days of an examination or must makea final decision on establishment of an individual capital requirementwithin a designated number of days (generally 60 days) from receipt ofan institution's response. Both of these suggestions would impose unnecessaryrigidity into the process and would not make adequate allowance for thevaried circumstances that may be involved in instances where an individualrequirement is proposed. Furthermore, it would not provide material benefitto institutions because even if the period for final decision passed, itwould only take 30 days to initiate and finalize a new capital requirement.The Board through ORPOS, however, will monitor PSAs' practices in thisregard. B. Capital Directives A number of commenters stated that by granting capital directives the sameforce and effect as cease and desist orders, but not providing for an adjudicatoryhearing on the record before an administrative law judge, as with ceaseand desist proceedings, the Board is denying institutions' due processrights in violation of the Constitution.The Board strongly disagrees with these commenters because they ignorethe written hearing process that the Board has established, a process thatis not required by CEBA and which is consistent with due process and theadministrative procedures of the other Federal banking agencies for issuanceof capital directives. This written hearing process has been adopted bythe Board specifically for the purpose of giving insured institutions andtheir state supervisors full notice of the basis for proposed capital directives,the opportunity to respond by presenting their views and supporting documentationcontradicting the need for issuance of a capital directive, and a finalBoard decision addressing the institution's response and setting forththe Board's reasons for issuing the capital directive. Institutions mayalso submit an alternative plan for increasing their capital. Section 563.14-1also allows for extension of the response period for good cause. Finally,the rule provides that issuance of a capital directive is a final agencyaction. In short, by adopting andSection; 563.14-1 the Board is establishinga written hearing process carefully guarding insured institutions' dueprocess rights. Some commenters expressed concern that because of the drastic effect ofcapital directives, there should be an intermediate process through whichremedial action could be decided upon without formal issuance of a capitaldirective. In light of this comment, the Board wishes to clarify that thecapital directive process is intended to be used in conjunction with othersupervisory and enforcement actions by the PSA and the Board. The Boarddoes not anticipate that capital directives will replace existing supervisoryand enforcement actions that can be used to achieve the same capital increase.This is particularly true if an institution will consent to such an increasewhether through a voluntary supervisory agreement or otherwise. Other commenters stated their concern about the large number of insuredinstitutions that currently are failing to meet their capital requirements(andSection; 563.13) and, therefore, could immediately be subject to capitaldirectives. In light of regional economic problems and the Board's forbearanceregulation, these commenters asserted and the Board generally concurs thatcapital directives should be used consistently with the Board's capitalforbearance policies. A few commenters concurred with the simplified procedure for reducing acapital requirement based on positive changes in circumstances but saidthat the capital directive process should commence again to make the termsof a previously issued directive more severe. This is consistent with theregulation as proposed in that it contemplated an institution's claimingchanged circumstances and that would undoubtedly only occur if the institutionfelt circumstances warranted a lower requirement. A commenter recommended changing the proposed regulation so that finesfor violation of an order may be levied only against the institution andnot against individual officers and directors, or alternatively, eliminatesuch fines altogether. This comment reflects a misunderstanding of theproposal because this rule is not creating the power to assess civil moneypenalties; rather, this power is derived from the Board's existing enforcementpowers under the National Housing Act. This regulation only recognizesthat this power exists and would be supported by a violation of a capitaldirective. C. Relationship Between This Rule and Other Regulations The regulation adopted today gives the Board the authority to establishand enforce individual minimum capital requirements and to treat capitalnoncompliance as an unsafe and unsound practice. In section 404 of CEBA,however, the Congress also mandated a capital forbearance policy. Pursuantto that statutory mandate, the Board is adopting a regulation pursuantto which it will forbear from enforcing its capital requirements if insuredinstitutions that are otherwise financially sound are temporarily unableto meet such requirements for certain statutorily specified reasons.\13\<NOTE/> Such institutions' capital requirements under andSection; 563.13or under andSection; 563.14 would be unaffected by the Board's temporaryforbearance from enforcing such capital requirements. It is enforcementof noncompliance with an institution's capital requirement, and not thelevel of an institution's capital requirement, to which the capital forbearancepolicy applies. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\13\ Board Res. No. 87-1297 (December 22, 1987).Pursuant to section 406 of CEBA, the Board is under a statutory requirementto establish minimum levels of capital for insured institutions consistentwith the purposes of Section 908 of ILSA and the federal banking agencies'capital requirements. The Board has reviewed the comments submitted onwhat action the Board should take to implement this statutory mandate andwill consider them further in deciding upon any further action to implementsection 406 of CEBA. Pending further Board action regarding andSection; 563.13 the Board intendsthat this rule will function in tandem with the existing capital regulation,andSection; 563.13. The Board wishes to clarify that all insured institutionsare currently required to comply with the Board's capital regulation setforth in andSection; 563.13. Only those insured institutions for which anindividual minimum capital requirement has been established, however, wouldbe required to comply with andSection; 563.14. The Board also wishes to clarify that the arbiter process, which is applicableto the classification of assets, does not apply to the setting of individualminimum capital requirements under andSection; 563.14. This is the case evenif the individual minimum capital requirement is based upon an evaluationof the underwriting standards and general overall credit risk of an insuredinstitution's portfolio, or even on the classification of certain assetsor results of the adoption or use of the classification-of-assets system.Section 407 of CEBA explicitly states that the arbiter process appliesonly to subsequent PSA review of individual determinations made by thePSA's staff members regarding appraisals of underwriting collateral, loanclassifications, and loan loss reserves or allowances. As stated above, however, the Board in adopting these regulations has consideredthe comments made concerning the Board's proposal to establish a processfor setting case-by-case capital requirements, which was included in theMay 1987 proposed classification of assets regulation, but which has beeneliminated from the final classification of assets regulation adopted underCEBA in part because of the authority granted to the PSAs by this regulation.In addition, as stated in the Board's proposal, the Board is amending thecapital regulation, andSection; 563.13, to make clear that references throughoutChapter V of Title 12 to regulatory capital levels or requirements shouldbe deemed to require compliance with andSection;andSection; 563.14 and 563.14-1,as well as requirements under andSection; 563.13. The Board, however, willcarefully examine such references to regulatory capital in numerous regulationsand may decide to make technical changes to such requirements to preventunwarranted burdens on insured institutions effects contrary to the Board'sintent and sound public policy. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 604,the Board is providing the following regulatory flexibility analysis: 1. <T3>Need for and objectives of the rule. </T3>These elements are incorporatedabove in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>.  2. <T3>Issues raised by comments and agency assessment and response. </T3>Theseelements are incorporated above in <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2>. 3. <T3>Significant alternatives minimizing small-entity impact and agencyresponse. </T3>The Small Business Administration defines a small financialinstitution as ``a commercial bank or savings and loan association, theassets of which, for the preceding fiscal year, do not exceed $100 million.''13 CFR 121.13(a) (1987). Therefore, the approximate number of small entitiesto which the rule would apply are the 1,651 insured institutions that hadassets totaling $100 million or less as of December 31, 1986. The rule would not impose any unnecessary financial, recordkeeping or administrativeburden on small insured institutions. The rule would authorize the Boardand the Corporation to vary any insured institution's capital requirementon a case-by-case basis, require a plan from any insured institution forcapital compliance, treat a failure to comply with a capital requirementas an unsafe and unsound practice, and issue a directive to enforce capitalcompliance. The rule would treat small institutions in a manner similarto large ones. The safety and soundness of both small and large institutionsnecessitates adequate capital appropriately adjusted for risk. The amountof capital required, however, is generally proportionate to an institution'slevel of liabilities and investments. There would be no disproportionateeconomic or regulatory impact on small institutions. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 563 </ITAG>Bank deposit insurance, Investments, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,Savings and loan associations. Accordingly, the Board hereby amends Part 563, Subchapter D, Chapter V,Title 12, Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below: <ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER D_FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 563_OPERATIONS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 563 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 1, 47 Stat. 725, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1421 <T3>et seq.</T3>); sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5B, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec.4, 80 Stat. 824, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425b); sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, asamended (12 U.S.C. 1437); sec. 2, 48 Stat. 128, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1462);sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs. 401-407, 48 Stat.1255-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1730); sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1730a); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR, 1943-1948Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>2. Amend andSection; 563.13 by revising paragraph (a) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Regulatory capital requirement. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Scope. </T3>This section sets forth the requirement for the maintenanceby insured institutions, as defined in andSection; 561.1 of this subchapter,of regulatory capital, as defined in andSection; 561.13 of this subchapter.An insured institution's regulatory capital requirement under this sectionmay be superseded or modified by an individual capital requirement establishedunder andSection; 563.14. Any reference in this chapter of Title 12 to compliancewith the capital requirements of andSection; 563.13 shall be deemed to requirecompliance with this section as superseded or modified by an individualminimum capital requirement established under andSection; 563.14 or by acapital directive issued pursuant to andSection; 563.14-1. Compliance withthe requirements of this section and andSection; 563.14, if applicable, shallbe deemed to constitute compliance with the reserve requirements of section403(b) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1726(b)). <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>3. Amend Part 563 by adding a new andSection; 563.14 and andSection; 563.14-1to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.14</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Individual minimum capital requirements. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Purpose and scope. </T3>(1) The rules and procedures specified in thissection apply to the establishment of an individual minimum capital requirementfor an insured institution that varies from the requirement that wouldotherwise apply to the insured institution under andSection; 563.13. Pursuantto 12 U.S.C. 1464(s) and 1730(t), the Board, as operating head of the Corporation,delegates authority to the Principal Supervisory Agents (``PSA(s)'') toestablish, with the prior written concurrence of the Federal Home LoanBank System's Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversight and Supervision (``ORPOS''),such individual minimum capital requirements for insured institutions asare necessary or appropriate on a case-by-case basis in light of the particularcircumstances of each insured institution. Under the Board's oversight,ORPOS shall establish guidelines for the exercise by the PSAs of the authoritygranted by this section to set individual minimum capital requirementsin a fair, uniform manner consistent with the Board's national policies.(2) Upon adoption and satisfactory implementation of such guidelines underthe oversight of the Board, the Board may delegate, in all or in part,exclusively to the PSAs the authority to set individual minimum capitalrequirements in conformance with the guidelines without the requirementfor case-by-case concurrence by ORPOS, and the Board subsequently may terminatesuch delegation. Under such delegation, a PSA's decision would constitutefinal agency action. After such delegation, ORPOS under the Board's oversightwould retain control over the guidelines for PSA action and would overseeimplementation of and compliance with the guidelines. ORPOS would continueto be notified of individual minimum capital requirements set by the PSAs.(b) <T3>Appropriate considerations for establishing individual minimum capitalrequirements. </T3>Minimum capital levels higher than those required underandSection; 563.13 may be appropriate for individual insured institutions.Increased individual minimum capital requirements may be established upona determination that the insured institution's capital is or may becomeinadequate in view of its circumstances. For example, higher capital levelsmay be appropriate for: (1) An insured institution receiving special supervisory attention; (2) An insured institution that has or is expected to have losses resultingin capital inadequacy; (3) An insured institution that has a high degree of exposure to interest-raterisk, prepayment risk, credit risk, or similar risks; or a high proportionof off-balance sheet risk, especially standby letters of credit; (4) An insured institution that has poor liquidity or cash flow; (5) An insured institution growing, either internally or through acquisitions,at such a rate that supervisory problems are presented that are not dealtwith adequately by andSection; 563.13-1 of this part or other Board regulations;(6) An insured institution that may be adversely affected by the activitiesor condition of its holding company, affiliate(s), subsidiaries, or otherpersons or institutions with which it has significant business relationships,including concentrations of credit; (7) An insured institution with a portfolio reflecting weak credit qualityor a significant likelihood of financial loss, or that has loans in nonperformingstatus or on which borrowers fail to comply with repayment terms; (8) An insured institution that has inadequate underwriting policies, standards,or procedures for its loans and investments; or (9) An insured institution that has a record of operational losses thatexceeds the average of other, similarly situated, insured institutions;has management deficiencies; or has a poor record of supervisory compliance.(c) <T3>Standards for determination of appropriate individual minimum capitalrequirements. </T3>The appropriate minimum capital level for an individualinsured institution cannot be determined solely through the applicationof a rigid mathematical formula or wholly objective criteria. The decisionis necessarily based, in part, on subjective judgment grounded in agencyexpertise. The factors to be considered in the determination will varyin each case and may include, for example: (1) The conditions or circumstances leading to the determination that ahigher minimum capital requirement is appropriate or necessary for theinsured institution; (2) The exigency of those circumstances or potential problems; (3) The overall condition, management strength, and future prospects ofthe insured institution and, if applicable, its holding company, subsidiaries,and affiliates;(4) The insured institution's liquidity, capital and other indicators offinancial stability, particularly as compared with those of similarly situatedinsured institutions; and (5) The policies and practices of the insured institution's directors,officers, and senior management as well as the internal control and internalaudit systems for implementation of such adopted policies and practices.(d) <T3>Procedures</T3>_(1) <T3>Notification.</T3> When a PSA determines that a minimum capital requirementdifferent from that set forth in andSection; 563.13 is necessary or appropriatefor a particular insured institution and is in accordance with any guidelines,the PSA shall notify the insured institution in writing of its proposedindividual minimum capital requirement; the schedule for compliance withthe new requirement; and the specific causes for determining that the higherindividual minimum capital requirement is necessary or appropriate forthe insured institution. At the same time, the PSA shall forward to ORPOSa copy of the notifying letter, along with the documentation supportingthe need for such a higher capital requirement. The PSA shall also forwardthe notifying letter to the appropriate state supervisor if a state-charteredinsured institution would be subject to an individual minimum capital requirement.(2) <T3>Response. </T3>(i) The response shall include any information thatthe insured institution wants the PSA to consider in deciding whether toestablish or to amend an individual minimum capital requirement for theinsured institution, what the individual capital requirement should be,and, if applicable, what compliance schedule is appropriate for achievingthe required capital level. The responses of the insured institution andappropriate state supervisor must be in writing and must be delivered tothe PSA within 30 days after the date on which the notification was received.The PSA shall then forward a copy of these responses to ORPOS. The PSAmay extend the time period for good cause. The time period for responseby the insured institution may be shortened for good cause: (A) When, in the opinion of the PSA, the condition of the insured institutionso requires, and the PSA informs the insured institution of the shortenedresponse period in the notice; (B) With the consent of the insured institution; or (C) When the insured institution already has advised the PSA that it cannotor will not achieve its applicable minimum capital requirement. (ii) Failure to respond within 30 days, or such other time period as maybe specified by the PSA, may constitute a waiver of any objections to theproposed individual minimum capital requirement or to the schedule forcomplying with it, unless the PSA has provided an extension of the responseperiod for good cause. (3) <T3>Decision. </T3>After expiration of the response period, the PSA shalldecide whether or not he believes the proposed individual minimum capitalrequirement should be established for the insured institution, or whetherthat proposed requirement should be adopted in modified form, based ona review of the insured institution's response and other relevant information.The PSA's decision shall address comments received within the responseperiod from the insured institution and the appropriate state supervisor(if a state-chartered institution is involved) and shall state the levelof capital required, the schedule for compliance with this requirement,and any specific remedial action the institution could take to eliminatethe need for continued applicability of the individual minimum capitalrequirement. The PSA shall send a copy of the recommended final determinationto ORPOS, which must concur before the decision becomes effective and iscommunicated to the insured institution and to the appropriate state supervisor(if a state-chartered institution is involved). The PSA shall provide theinsured institution with a written decision on the individual minimum capitalrequirement, addressing the substantive comments made by the insured institutionand setting forth the decision and the basis for that decision. Upon receiptof this decision, the individual minimum capital requirement becomes effectiveand binding upon the insured institution. This decision represents finalagency action. (4) <T3>Failure to comply. </T3>Failure to satisfy an individual minimum capitalrequirement, or to meet any required incremental additions to capital undera schedule for compliance with such an individual minimum capital requirement,shall constitute a legal basis for issuing a capital directive pursuantto andSection; 563.14-1. (5) <T3>Change in circumstances. </T3>If, after a decision is made under paragraph(d)(3) of this section, there is a change in the circumstances affectingthe insured institution's capital adequacy or its ability to reach itsrequired minimum capital level by the specified date, the PSA may, withthe concurrence of ORPOS, amend the individual minimum capital requirementor the insured institution's schedule for such compliance. As set forthin paragraph (a)(1) of this section with regard to the initial settingof an individual capital requirement, this authority may also be delegatedexclusively to the PSAs without the need for ORPOS concurrence in individualdeterminations. The PSA may decline to consider an insured institution'srequest for such changes that are not based on a significant change incircumstances or that are repetitive or frivolous. The PSA shall notifyORPOS of the request and his decision. Pending the PSA's reexaminationof the original decision, that original decision and any compliance scheduleestablished thereunder shall continue in full force and effect. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.14-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Capital directives. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Issuance of a Capital Directive</T3>_(1) <T3>Purpose.</T3> In addition to any other action authorized by law, theBoard, as operating head of the Corporation, after referral of an appropriatecase by a Principal Supervisory Agent (``PSA'') and based on a recommendationof the Board's Office of Enforcement developed in coordination with theFederal Home Loan Bank System's Office of Regulatory Policy, Oversightand Supervision (``ORPOS''), may issue a capital directive to an insuredinstitution that does not have an amount of capital satisfying its minimumcapital requirement. Issuance of such a capital directive may be basedon an institution's noncompliance with a capital requirement establishedunder andSection; 563.13, andSection; 563.14, by a written agreement under12 U.S.C. 1730(e) or 1464(d)(2), or as a condition for approval of an application.A capital directive may order an insured institution to: (i) Achieve its minimum capital requirement by a specified date; (ii) Adhere to the compliance schedule for achieving its individual minimumcapital requirement; (iii) Submit and adhere to a capital plan acceptable to the Board describingthe means and a time schedule by which the institution shall reach itsrequired capital level; (iv) Take other action, including but not limited to, reducing the institution'sassets or its rate of liability growth, or imposing restrictions on theinstitution's payment of dividends, in order to cause the institution toreach its required capital level; (v) Take any action authorized under andSection; 563.13(d); or (vi) Take a combination of any of these actions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">A capital directive issued under this section, including a plan submittedpursuant to a capital directive, is enforceable under 12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(8)and 12 U.S.C. 1730(k), as appropriate, in the same manner and to the sameextent as an effective and outstanding cease and desist order which hasbecome final under 12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(2) or 1730(e).(2) <T3>Notice of intent to issue capital directive. </T3>Upon referral ofa case by a PSA, the Office of Enforcement, in coordination with ORPOS,will determine whether to initiate the process of issuing a capital directive.The Office of Enforcement will notify an insured institution in writingby registered mail of its intention to issue a capital directive. If astate-chartered institution is involved, the Office of Enforcement willalso notify and solicit comment from the appropriate state supervisor.The notice will state: (i) The reasons for issuance of the capital directive and (ii) The proposed contents of the capital directive. (3) <T3>Response to notice of intent. </T3>(i) An insured institution may respondto the notice of intent by submitting its own compliance plan, or may proposean alternative plan. The response should also include any information thatthe insured institution wishes the Office of Enforcement to consider andORPOS to review in deciding whether to recommend that the Board issue acapital directive. The appropriate state supervisor may also submit a responseto the Office of Enforcement. These responses must be in writing and bedelivered to the Office of Enforcement within 30 days after receipt ofthe notices. In its discretion, the Office of Enforcement may extend thetime period for the response for good cause. The Office of Enforcementmay, for good cause, shorten the 30-day time period for response by theinsured institution: (A) When, in the opinion of the Office of Enforcement, the condition ofthe insured institution so requires, and the Office of Enforcement informsthe insured institution of the shortened response period in the notice;(B) With the consent of the insured institution; or (C) When the insured institution already has advised the Office of Enforcementthat it cannot or will not achieve its applicable minimum capital requirement.(ii) Failure to respond within 30 days of receipt, or such other time periodas may be specified by the Office of Enforcement, may constitute a waiverof any objections to the capital directive unless the Office of Enforcementgrants an extension of the time period for good cause. (4) <T3>Decision. </T3>After the closing date of the insured institution'sresponse period, or upon receipt of the insured institution's response,if earlier, the Office of Enforcement shall consider the insured institution'sresponse and may seek additional information or clarification of the response.Thereafter, the Board, based on a recommendation from the Office of Enforcementdeveloped in coordination with ORPOS, will determine whether or not toissue a capital directive and, if one is to be issued, whether it shouldbe as originally proposed or in modified form. (5) <T3>Service and effectiveness. </T3>(i) Upon issuance, a capital directivewill be served upon the insured institution. It will include or be accompaniedby a statement of reasons for its issuance and shall address the responsesreceived during the response period. (ii) A capital directive shall become effective upon the expiration of30 days after service upon the insured institution, unless the Office ofEnforcement determines that a shorter effective period is necessary eitheron account of the public interest or in order to achieve the capital directive'spurpose. If the insured institution has consented to issuance of the capitaldirective, it may become effective immediately. A capital directive shallremain in effect and enforceable unless, and then only to the extent that,it is stayed, modified, or terminated by the Board. (6) <T3>Change in circumstances. </T3>Upon a change in circumstances, an insuredinstitution may submit a request to its PSA for the Board to reconsiderthe terms of the capital directive or consider changes in the insured institution'scapital plan issued under a directive for the insured institution to achieveits minimum capital requirement. If the PSA believes such a change is warranted,the PSA shall forward the request to the Office of Enforcement, which mayrecommend that the Board modify the institution's capital requirement ormay refuse to recommend such action if it determines that there are notsignificant changes in circumstances. Pending a decision on reconsideration,the capital directive and capital plan shall continue in full force andeffect. (b) <T3>Relation to other administrative actions. </T3>The Board_ (1) May consider an insured institution's progress in adhering to any capitalplan required under this section whenever such insured institution or anyaffiliate of such insured institution (including any company which controlssuch insured institution) seeks approval for any proposal that would havethe effect of diverting earnings, diminishing capital, or otherwise impedingsuch insured institution's progress in meeting its minimum capital requirement(such as an application under andSection; 563.13-1, or an application forapproval to exceed its applicable equity risk investment threshold pursuantto andSection; 563.9-8(g)); and (2) May disapprove any proposal referred to in paragraph (b)(1) of thissection if the Board determines that the proposal would adversely affectthe ability of the insured institution on a current or <T3>pro forma </T3>basis to satisfy its capital requirement.<ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John F. Ghizzoni, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 87-29867 Filed 12-31-87; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>