<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88901-0038 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-01-88.f2.A1037</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Bureau of Export Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 81-8104, 81-8015]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Actions Affecting Export Privileges; William T. Newkirk et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Summary</ITAG>Pursuant to the July 28, 1988 Default Decision and Order of the AdministrativeLaw Judge, which Decision and Order is affirmed by me, William T. Newkirk,individually and doing business as Kal Tek Labs, with an address at 250Bonita Glen Drive, andplusmin;3D, Chual Vista, California 92010, is deniedall U.S. export provileges for a period of twenty (20) years from the datehereof.<ITAG tagnum="84">Default Order</ITAG>On July 28, 1988, the Administrative Law Judge entered his recommendedDefault Decision and Order in the above referenced matter. That DefaultDecision and Order, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a parthereof, has been referred to me for final action. Having examined the record,and based on the facts of this case, I affirm the Decision and Order ofthe Administrative Law Judge.This constitutes final agency action in this matter.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: August 26, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Paul Freedenberg,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Under Secretary for the Bureau of Export Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Default Decision and Order</ITAG>Appearance for Respondent: William T. Newkirk, 250 Bonita Glen Drive, andplusmin;3D,Chula Vista, California 92010.Appearance for Agency: Joan L. MacKenzie, Esq., Anthony K. Hicks, Esq.,Attorney-Advisors, Office of Chief Counsel for Export Administration, U.S.Department of Commerce, Room H-3329, 14th andamp; Constitution Avenue NW.,Washington, DC 20230.<ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>On February 26, 1988, the Office of Export Enforcement, Bureau of ExportAdministration, United States Department of Commerce (Agency), issued acharging letter to William T. Newkirk, individually and doing businessas Kal Tek Labs (the Respondent). These charges were made pursuant to theauthority of the Export Administration Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. App.2401-2420 (1982 and Supp. III 1985))) (the Act), and the Export AdministrationRegulations (currently codified at 15 CFR Parts 368-389 (1987)) (The Regulations).The record reflects that the charging letter was served upon Respondenton March 10, 1988.Since no answer has been filed, the Agency counsel moved that a defaultorder be entered in these proceedings pursuant to andSection; 388.8 of theRegulations. Section 388.8 of the Regulations provides:<ITAG tagnum="71">Default (a) General</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">If a timely answer is not filed, the department shall file with theAdministrative Law Judge a proposed Order together with the supportingevidence for the allegations in the charging letter. The AdministrativeLaw Judge may require further submissions and shall issue any Order hedeems justified by the evidence of record, any Order so issued shall havethe same force and effect as an Order issued following the dispositionof contested charges.</ITAG>In accordance with this section, Agency counsel filed a Motion for DefaultJudgment on June 3, 1988. The Agency also submitted documentary evidenceto support the allegations made in the charging letter. A copy of the above-mentionedMotion for Default Judgment was also sent to the Respondent on June 3,1988. Thereafter, on June 13, 1988 an Order to Show Cause why a defaultorder should not be entered was sent to the Respondent, to which no responsehas been made.On April 5, 1984, the Respondent was charged in a Grand Jury Indictment,entered in the United States District Court for the Central District ofCalifornia, with seventeen counts of conspiring with Man Chung Tong (Tong)to knowingly export electronic testing and calibration equipment from theUnited States to the Republic of Hong Kong without first obtaining therequired validated export license from the Department of Commerce, andwith knowingly submitting false statements to the Department. On or aboutAugust 21, 1984, the Respondent pled guilty to five of these counts (CountsOne through Five of the Indictment) and was sentenced to two years' imprisonmentand fined $50,000.On February 26, 1988, the Agency issued a charging letter alleging thesame violations that were charged in the Grand Jury Indictment, specificallythat Respondent conspired and acted in concert with Tong to acquire U.S.-originelectronic equipment on false representations regarding the licensing ofthe commodities, and then to export the electronic goods to Hong Kong withoutobtaining from the Agency the validated export license that he knew wasrequired by andSection; 372.1(b) of the Regulations. The charging letterdescribes in paragraphs 1 through 6 the unlawful export of six specificsets of equipment exported in ten shipments, and the false statements thatwere made to the Agency for the purpose of obtaining licenses to exportthe equipment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Discussion</ITAG>The evidence shows that these alleged unlawful exports and false statementsdid indeed take place.The Indictment and guilty plea describe the scheme the Respondent and Tongused to implement the conspiracy. Tong would place orders with the Respondentfor U.S.-origin electronic equipment wanted by Tong's customers. The Respondentpurchased the equipment from U.S. manufacturers, took delivery of it, andexported the equipment to Tong in Hong Kong, either directly from the UnitedStates, or indirectly through Mexico, knowing that he did not have therequisite export authorization from the Agency. The Respondent effectedthese exports by knowingly submitting false statements to the Agency onthe export documents. After the equipment arrived in Hong Kong, Tong resoldthe electronic equipment to customers in the People's Republic of Chinaand elsewhere. The Respondent has admitted these facts by pleading guiltyto Count One of the Indictment.Paragraph 1 of the charging letter alleges that, on or about October 14,1982, the Respondent exported a Hewlett Packard computer system from theUnited States through Mexico to Tong in Hong Kong without the validatedexport licesne that he knew or had reason to know was required by the Regulations.Respondent obtained the goods by representing that he had a customer inMexico, and preparing a false invoice showing such a sale. Respondent hasadmitted these facts by pleading guilty to Count One of the Indictment(paragraphs 1, 2 and 4) and is therefore collaterally estopped from denyingthose facts. Those facts establish that the Respondent has violated andSection;387.4and 387.6 of the Regulations in connection with this transaction, in thecontext of this administrative proceeding.Paragraph 2 of the charging letter alleges that another unlawful exportoccurred on or about Januay 14, 1983. On or about November 17, 1982, Tong,doing business as Stillwell Development Company, Ltd., submitted PurchaseOrder No. ST00051 to the Respondent for the purchase of two spectrum analyzerswith options. The Respondent submitted an export license application tothe Agency on or about November 22, 1982, to export these spectrum analyzersto Stillwells, Ltd. in Hong Kong. On or about January 14, 1983, while thelicense application was still pending, the Respondent exported the twospectrum analyzers from the United States to Tong in Hong Kong, statingon the Shippers' Export Declaration that this shipment was authorized under``G-DEST''. Because Respondent had applied for an individual validatedlicense, he clearly knew that one was required. Subsequently, the licenseapplication was denied by the Agency on May 26, 1983. The documentary evidencefully supports the allegations in the charging letter. The Respondent pledguilty to the corresponding count in the Indictment (Counts Two and Three),and Respondent is therefore collaterally estopped from denying the factsin those counts. Those facts establish that the Respondent violated andSection;387.4,387.5 and 387.6 of the Regulations in connection with this transaction.Paragraph 3 of the charging letter alleges another violation that followsa similar pattern. On or about November 11, 1982, Tong, doing businessas Scientific Data Systems, Ltd., submitted Purchase Order No. SDS037 tothe Respondent for electronic computer equipment. On or about November16, 1982, Respondent submitted two export license applications (A659118and A659955) to the Agency to export that electronic computer equipmentto Scientific Data Systems, Ltd., in Hong Kong. While these license applicationswere still pending, on or about February 26, 1983, Respondent exportedthe electronic computer equipment from the United States to Tong in HongKong, again stating on the Shippers' Export Declaration that this shipmentwas authorized under ``G-DEST''. The license applications were denied bythe Agency on May 19, 1983. Since the Respondent applied for a validatedexport license, he knew that one was required. The documentary evidencefully supports the allegations in the charging letter. The Respondent pledguilty to the corresponding count in the Indictment, and he is thereforecollaterally estopped from denying the facts in those counts. Those factsestablish that the Respondent violated andSection;387.4, 387.5 and 387.6of the Regulations in connection with this transaction.Paragraph 4 of the charging letter alleges that, on or about December 31,1982, Tong, doing business as Equipment Rental Company, Ltd., submittedPurchase Order No. ER001 to the Respondent for electronic equipment includingoscilloscopes and spectrum analyzers. On or about January 3, 1983, Respondentsubmitted two export license applications (A669213 and A669214) to theAgency seeking authorization to export this equipment to Equipment RentalCompany, Ltd., in Hong Kong. While these license applications were stillpending, the Respondent exported the equipment in two shipments from theUnited States to Tong in Hong Kong on or about April 9, 1983 and on orabout June 4, 1983. He effected these exports by stating on the Shippers'Export Declaration accompanying each shipment that these shipments wereauthorized by validated export license A663561, an export license applicationunrelated to these exports. The license applications for this equipmentwere denied by the Agency on July 29, 1983. The documentary evidence clearlysupports the charges that the Respondent violated andSection;387.4, 387.5and 387.6 of the Regulations in connection with this transaction.Paragraph 5 of the charging letter alleges another similar violation. Onor about February 4, 1983, Tong, doing business as Scientific Data Systems,Ltd., submitted Purchase Order No. SDS063 to the Respondent for electronicequipment, including cathode ray oscilloscopes. On or about January 3,1983, the Respondent submitted an export license application (A677421)to the Agency seeking authorization to export that electronic equipmentto Scientific Data Systems, Ltd., in Hong Kong. This license applicationwas denied by the Agency on May 19, 1983. Both while the license applicationwas still pending, and after it was denied by the Agency, however, theRespondent exported the equipment in four shipments on or about May 7,May 28, June 25 and July 3, 1983, from the United States to Tong in HongKong, stating on the Shippers' Export Declaration accompanying each shipmentthat validated export license A663561 authorized these shipments. In applyingfor a validated exported license and exporting without it, he acted withknowledge that he was violating the Regulations. The documentary evidenceclearly supports the charges that the Respondent violated andSection;387.4,387.5 and 387.6 of the Regulations in connection with this transaction.Paragraph 6 of the charging letter alleges that the Respondent submittedto the Agency a validated export license application (A648884) on or aboutOctober 7, 1982, to ship 20 cathode ray oscilloscopes to a customer inMexico. On or about June 22, 1983, the Respondent exported from the UnitedStates through Mexico to Tong in Hong Kong two oscilloscopes and two plug-inunits on the false representation that export license A648884 authorizedthe export. License application A648884 related to a different export toMexico. The Respondent has admitted these facts by pleading guilty to CountOne of the Indictment (paragraph 3), and is therefore collaterally estoppedfrom denying those facts. Those facts establish that the Respondent hasviolated andSection;387.4, 387.5 and 387.6 of the Regulations in connectionwith this transaction.<ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion</ITAG>The exhibits and representations by Agency counsel and the Respondent'sguilty plea fully support the charges made by the Agency in the February26, 1988 charging letter, which alleged that the Respondent knowingly exportedelectronic testing and calibration equipment from the United States tothe Republic of Hong Kong without first obtaining the required validatedexport license from the United States Department of Commerce (andSection;372.1(b) of the Regulations), and knowingly submitted false statementsto the Agency. By doing so the Respondent violated andSection;andSection; 387.4,387.5 and 387.6 of the Regulations with respect to the aforementioned shipments.(15 CFR 387.4, 387.5 and 387.6)The pattern of conduct demonstrated by the violations shows a deliberateand willful intent to violate United States export laws and regulations.The goods unlawfully exported to Hong Kong by the Respondent were controlledfor national security purposes. I find that an Order denying export privilegesfor 20 years from the date that a final order is entered in this proceedingis warranted and is reasonably necessary to protect the public interest,and to achieve effective enforcement of the Export Administration Act,and the Regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Order</ITAG>I. For a period of 20 years from the date of the final Agency action, Respondentand all successors, assignees, officers, partners, representatives, agents,and employees hereby are denied all privileges of participating, directlyor indirectly, in any manner or capacity, in any transaction involvingcommodities or technical data exported from the United States in wholeor in part, or to be exported, or that are otherwise subject to the Regulations.II. Participation prohibited in any such transaction, either in the UnitedStates or abroad, shall include, but not be limited to, participation:(i) As a party or as a representative of a party to a validated exportlicense application;(ii) In preparing or filing any export license application or reexportauthorization, or any document to be submitted therewith;(iii) In obtaining or using any validated or general export license orother export control document;(iv) In carrying on negotiations with respect to, or in receiving, ordering,buying, selling, deliverying, storing, using, or disposing of, in wholeor in part, any commodities or technical data exported from the UnitedStates, or to be exported; and(v) In the financing, forwarding, transporting, or other servicing of suchcommodities or technical data.Such denial of export privileges shall extend to matters which are subjectto the Act and the Regulations.III. After notice and opportunity for comment, such denial of export privilegesmay be made applicable to any person, firm, corporation, or business organizationwith which the Respondent is now or hereafter may be related by affiliation,ownership, control, position of responsibility, or other connection inthe conduct of export trade or related services.IV. All outstanding individual validated export licenses in which Respondent(s)appears or participates, in any manner or capacity, are hereby revokedand shall be returned forthwith to the Office of Export Licensing for cancellation.Further, all of Respondent(s)'s privileges of participating, in any manneror capacity, in any special licensing procedure, including, but not limitedto, distribution licenses, are hereby revoked.V. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other business organization,whether in the United States or elsewhere, without prior disclosure andspecific authorization from the Office of Export Licensing, shall, withrespect to U.S.-origin commodities and technical data, do any of the followingacts, directly or indirectly, or carry on negotiations with respect thereto,in any manner or capacity, on behalf of or in any association with anyRespondent or any related person, or whereby any Respondent or any relatedperson may obtain any benefit therefrom or have any interest or participationtherein, directly or indirectly:(a) Apply for, obtain, transfer, or use any license, Shipper's Export Declaration,bill of lading, or other export control document relating to any export,reexport, transshipment, or diversion of any commodity or technical dataexported in whole or in part, or to be exported by, to, or for any Respondentor related person denied export privileges, or(b) Order, buy, receive, use, sell, deliver, store, dispose of, forward,transport, finance or otherwise service or participate in any export, reexport,transshipment or diversion of any commodity or technical data exportedor to be exported from the United States.VI. This Order as affirmed or modified shall become effective upon entryof the Secretary's final action in this proceeding pursuant to the Act(50 U.S.C. App. 2412(c)(1)).<ITAG tagnum="6">Hugh J. Dolan,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrative Law Judge.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: July 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-19906 Filed 8-31-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-DT-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>