<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR881025-0120 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-25-88.f2.A1119</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-446]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Texas Utilities Electric Co. et at., Commanche Peak Steam ElectricStation, Unit No. 2; Environmental Assessment and Finding of No SignificantImpact</ITAG>The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission or NRC) is consideringthe issuance of an extension to the latest construction completion datespecified in Construction Permit No. CPPR-127 issued to Texas UtilitiesElectric Company (TU Electric), Texas Municipal Power Agency, Brazos ElectricPower Cooperative, Inc., and Tex-La Electric Cooperative of Texas, Inc.(Applicants) for the Comanche Peak Steam Electric Station (CPSES) UnitNo. 2 (the facility) located on Applicants' site in Somervell County, Texas.<ITAG tagnum="84">Environmental Assessment</ITAG>Identification of Proposed ActionThe proposed action would amend the construction permit by extending thelatest construction completion date from August 1, 1987 to August 1, 1992.The proposed action is in response to Applicants' request dated April 29,1987, as supplemented on July 22, September 9, and December 3, 1987 andon June 6, 1988. Construction Permit No. CPPR-126 for the CPSES Unit No.1 is not affected by this action. The Need for the Proposed ActionAlthough construction of Unit No. 2 is not yet fully completed and wastemporarily suspended for about one year beginning in April 1988, the Applicantsmust maintain the construction permit in effect since they have not announcedtermination of the plant. The Applicants state in their request that theproposed action is needed so they can complete the intensive program ofreview and reinspection which was initiated in the fall of 1984 to provideevidence of the safe design and construction of the CPSES Units No. 1 andNo. 2. The temporary direction of resources since mid-1985 to activitiesunder that remedial program to Unit No. 1 rather than to Unit No. 2 hascaused delays which have contributed to the need for the extension of thelatest construction completion date for Unit No. 2. The remedial programwas undertaken by the Applicants to respond to issues raised by the NRCStaff, the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board (ASLB), and other sourcesin the operating license proceeding. Although the operating license proceedingwas dismissed on July 13, 1988,\1\<NOTE/> the review and reinspection program must still be carriedout prior to the CPSES licensing for operation. The Applicants have advisedthe NRC Staff that they anticipate completion of the remedial program forthe CPSES Unit No. 2 before the proposed latest construction completiondate, including reinspection efforts, development of essential documentationregarding the adequacy of facility design and construction, and necessaryredesign, and modification of affected structures, systems, and components.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Based on the ASLB's consideration of a Joint Motion forDismissal of Proceedings by the Applicants, Intervenor (Citizens Associationfor Sound Energy), and the NRC Staff and a Joint Stipulation regardingconditions for dismissal, both filed on July 1, 1988, the ASLB issued aMemorandum and Order (Dismissing Proceedings) on July 13, 1988. This sameorder dismissed the construction permit amendment proceeding relating tothe staff's 1986 granting of an extension to the CPSES Unit No. 1 constructionpermit following an untimely request for extension by the Applicants. EnvironmentalImpacts of the Proposed Action:The environmental impacts associated with construction of the ComanchePeak facility are associated with both units and have been previously evaluatedand discussed in the NRC Staff's Final Environmental Statement (FES) relatedto the proposed CPSES Units No. 1 and No. 2, issued in June 1974, whichcovered the constructon of both units. One of the environmental impacts,groundwater withdrawal, is the subject of a construction permit conditionand will be discussed further below. Since the proposed action concerns the extension of the construction permit,the impacts involved are all non-radiological and are associated with continuedconstruction. There are no new significant impacts associated with theproposed action. The reinspection and modifications required by the Applicant'sremedial program are equivalent to those of a maintenance or repair program.All the remedial program activities will take place within the facility,will not result in impacts to previously undisturbed areas, and will nothave any significant additional environmental impact. However, there areimpacts that would continue during the completion of facility construction,including the reinspection and modification activities. The FES identified four major environmental impacts due to the constructionof both units. Three of the four major environmental construction impactsdiscussed in the FES have already occurred and are not affected by thisproposed action:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Construction-related activities have disturbed about 400 acres ofrangeland and 3,228 acres of land have been used for the construction ofSquaw Creek Reservoir. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_The initial set of transmission lines and the additional plannedline as discussed in the FES are complete.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Pipelines have been relocated and the railroad spur and diversionand return lines between Lake Granbury and Squaw Creek Reservoir have beencompleted.</ITAG>The fourth major environmental impact addressed in the FES is the communityimpact which would continue with the extended construction of the facility.Continuing construction does not involve community impacts different fromor significantly greater than those previously considered. However, thecommunity will be impacted for a longer period of time than was previouslyconsidered as a result of the proposed action. During early 1986, the combinedpeak construction workforce for the site was about 5300. Since then, activitiesrelated to the remedial program have resulted in the current combined workforceof approximately 8000, an increase of 2700 workers, being primarily engineeringand technical personnel rather than construction workers. At the presenttime, this workforce is basically dedicated to completion of Unit No. 1and its preparation for operation, with a small percentage of the workforcebeing devoted to Unit No. 2 activities. The increase is temporary as theApplicants expect the combined workforce to decline as the remedial programnears completion and Unit No. 1 approaches fuel loading (currently plannedfor June 1989). When Unit No. 1 construction is completed and Unit No.2 construction is resumed, the workforce dedicated to Unit No. 2 activitiesmay reach 4500, but the peak workforce for both Units No. 1 and No. 2 combinedis not expected to exceed 8000. The Applicants state that about 85% ofthe current workforce is contractors and consultants who do not live inthe area and use only temporary quarters. While the current workforce levelhas caused a temporary, increased demand for services in the communityand increased traffic on local roads, there are no major impacts due tothe arrival of workers' families and due to demands for services necessaryto support permanent residents (for example, housing and schools).Another environmental impact discussed in the FES is the continued withdrawalof groundwater, an impact which is the subject of a condition in the constructionpermit. Continued construction will not have a significant effect on groundwaterwithdrawal beyond that already considered, even though construction hasextended over a longer period of time than the staff originally anticipated.The construction permits for the CPSES Units No. 1 and No. 2 limit groundwaterusage for the site to 40 gpm on an annual average basis for the durationof construction. The groundwater usage for 1985, 1986, and 1987 has averagedless than half of this amount for the site. Most construction water isbeing supplied by treated water from the Squaw Creek Reservoir, thus reducingthe amount of groundwater being used.The original construction permits allowed an annual average groundwaterwithdrawal rate for the site not exceeding 250 gpm for a period of 5 yearsand then 30 gpm thereafter. In July 1982, the Applicants requested an amendmentto the construction permits increasing the allowable annual average groundwaterwithdrawal rate from 30 gpm to 40 gpm until completion of construction.The increased limit of 40 gpm was established in Amendments No. 6, datedAugust 27, 1982, to Construction Permits CPPR-126 and CPPR-127 for theCPSES Units No. 1 and No. 2, respectively. The staff evaluation of theincreased site limit was predicated, in part, on the latest of the constructioncompletion dates existing at the time, i.e., August 1, 1987 for Unit No.2 (per Order dated April 30, 1982), or 5 years. The Applicants' presentrequest to extend the latest construction completion date of Unit No. 2for 5 years necessitates evaluating the impact of continuing to withdrawgroundwater for an additional 5 years at the annual average rate of 40gpm.The Applicants are withdrawing water from the Twin Mountains aquifer whichis a confined aquifer in the vicinity of the site. From a geologic cross-sectionsupplied by the Applicants, the Staff determined that the aquifer is about200 feet thick, with its upper confining layer about 250 feet below thesurvace. The aquifer still has artesian pressure at the site, but thismay change at the present yearly rate of aquifer decline.The Staff used the Theis non-equilibrium equation in its previous impactassessment of groundwater withdrawal at a the site and which is appropriatefor this case as well. The non-equilibrium equations should be used onlywith unconfined aquifers; however, it is expected to give a conservativeestimate (over estimate) of drawdown in a confined artesian aquifer. Usingthe non-equilibrium equation, the staff calculated a drawdown of 2.8 feetat the nearest offsite well (8000 feet from the power block) for a constantpumping rate of 40 gpm over 5 years.The Staff reviewed water level measurement data from 4 nearby observationwells for the period 1975 to 1987 and determined that even though therewas a steady overall decline in water level for all wells, this declinecould only partially be attributed to onsite pumping of groundwater. Fromthis review of water level data, the staff could also determine that seasonalfluctuations in water level could be of the order of 3 to 10 feet.In addition, it should be noted that the original staff impact evaluationfor the construction permit was based on a five-year annual average withdrawalrate of 250 gmp or 657 andmultiply; 10\8\ gallons, followed by an annualaverage rate of 30 gpm until the end of construction, though this was subsequentlyamended to 40 gpm as discused earlier. As of July 1, 1987, approximately5.29 andmultiply; 10\8\ gallons of groundwater had actually been withdrawn.Five additional years of withdrawal at the rate of 40 gpm would add 105andmultiply; 10\8\ gallons to withdrawal, resulting in a total withdrawalof 6.34 andmultiply; 10\8\ gallons. Hence, total groundwater depletion ofthe aquifer is still less than that assumed in the original constructionpermit impact evaluation for the first 5 years of construction. Based on its evaluation, the Staff has concluded that the calculated impactof continuing to withdraw groundwater at an annual average rate of 40 gpmfor the site until August 1, 1992 is negligible and does result in anysignificant additional environmental impact. Further, the Staff's conclusionis substantiated by groundwater level data collected at the site duringconstruction and periods of large water withdrawal. Based on the foregoing, the NRC Staff has concluded that the proposed actionwould have no significant environmental impact. Since this action wouldonly extend the period of construction activities described in the FES,it does not involve any different impacts or a significant change to thoseimpacts described and analyzed in the original environmental impact statement.Consequently, an environmental impact statement addresing the proposedaction is not required. Alternatives Considered The NRC Staff has considered that a possible alternative to the proposedaction would be for the Commission to deny the request. If this alternativewere executed, the Applicants would not be able to complete constructionof the facility, resulting in the denial of the benefits to be derivedfrom the production of electric power. This alternative would not eliminatethe environmental impacts of construction which have already been incurred.If construction were not completed on the CPSES Unit No. 2, while constructioncontinued on Unit No. 1, the amount of site redress activities that couldbe undertaken to restore some of the area to its natural state would beminimal. This slight environmental benefit would be much outweighed bythe economic losses from denial of the use of a facility that is nearlycomplete. Therefore, the NRC Staff has rejected this alternative. Alternative Use of ResourcesThis action does not involve the use of resources not previously consideredin the FES. Agencies and Persons Contacted The NRC Staff reviewed the Applicants' request and applicable documentsreference therein that support this extension, as well as supplementalinformation provided. The NRC did not consult with other agencies or personsin preparing this assessment.  Finding of No Significant ImpactThe Commission has determined not to prepare an environmental impact statementfor this action. Based on the environmental assessment, the Commissionconcludes that this action will not have a significant effect on the qualityof the human environment. For details with respect this action, see the Applicants' request for extensiondated April 29, 1987, as supplemented on July 22, September 9, and December3, 1987 and on June 6, 1988, available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20555, and thelocal public document room at Somervell County Public Library, Glen Rose,Texas 76043. <ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 17th day of October 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20"> For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Christopher I. Grimes,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Comanche Peak Project Division, Office of Special Projects.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-24611 Filed 10-24-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>