<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88916-0006 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-16-88.f2.A1005</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">10 CFR Part 50</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Emergency Core Cooling Systems; Revisions to Acceptance Criteria</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) is amending itsregulations to allow the use of alternative methods to demonstrate thatthe emergency core cooling system (ECCS) would protect the nuclear reactorcore during a postulated design basis loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA).The Commission is taking this action because research, performed sincethe current rule was written, has shown that calculations performed usingcurrent methods and in accordance with the current requirements resultin estimates of cooling system performance that are significantly moreconservative than estimates based on the improved knowledge gained fromthis research. While the existing methods are conservative, they do notresult in accurate calculation of what would actually occur in a nuclearpower plant during a LOCA and may result in less than optimal ECCS designand operating procedures. In addition, the operation of some nuclear reactorsis being unnecessarily restricted by the rule, resulting in increased costsof electricity generation. This rule, while continuing to allow the useof current methods and requirements, also allows the use of more recentinformation and knowledge to demonstrate that the ECCS would protect thereactor during a LOCA. This amendment, which applies to all applicantsfor and holders of construction permits or operating licenses for lightwater reactors, also relaxes requirements for certain reporting and reanalyseswhich do not contribute to safety.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>October 17, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>L.M. Shotkin, Office of NuclearRegulatory Research, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC20555, telephone (301) 492-3530.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>On March 3, 1987, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>proposed amendments (52 FR 6334) to 10 CFR Part50 and Appendix K. These proposed amendments were motivated by the factthat since the promulgation of andSection; 50.46 of 10 CFR Part 50, ``AcceptanceCriteria for Emergency Core Cooling Systems (ECCS) in Light Water PowerReactors,'' and the acceptable and required features and models specifiedin Appendix K to 10 CFR Part 50, considerable research has been performedthat has greatly increased the understanding of ECCS performance duringa LOCA. It is now confirmed that the methods specified in Appendix K, combinedwith other analysis methods currently in use, are highly conservative andthat the actual cladding temperatures which would occur during a LOCA wouldbe much lower than those calculated using Appendix K methods. In solicitingthe public's comments on the proposed rule, the NRC specifically requestedits views on questions posed by Commissioner Asselstine and the AdvisoryCommittee on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS). The ACRS requested that the Commissionsolicit the public's comments on whether the existing rule should be ``grandfathered''indefinitely. That is:1. Should the conservative ECCS evaluation method of Appendix K be permittedindefinitely or should this aspect of the ECCS rule be phased out aftersome period of time?Commissioner Asselstine requested the public's comments on the following:2. Should this rule change include an explicit degree of conservatism thatmust be applied to the evaluation models?3. This rule change would allow a 5 to 10 percent increase in the fissionproduct inventory that could be released from any core meltdown scenario.Should this rule change explicitly prohibit any increase in approved powerlevels until all severe accident issues and unresolved safety issues areresolved?4. Should the technical basis for this proposed rule change be reviewedby an independent group such as the American Physical Society?<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Public Comments</ITAG>The comment period for the proposed rule revision and the draft regulatoryguide (52 FR 11385) expired on July 1, 1987. Twenty-seven letters addressingthe proposed rule were received by the expiration date, as well as nineresponses to the request for comments on questions in the regulatory guide.A number of late comments were also received. These were also consideredto the extent that new and substantial comments were provided.The public comment on the proposed rule revisions have been divided intothirteen categories and are summarized in the following paragraphs. Categoriesone through four represent the responses to the specific questions posedby the ACRS and Commissioner Asselstine. In general, consideration of thepublic comments resulted in no substantive revision to the proposed rule.1. <T3>Grandfathering of Conservative ECCS Methods of Appendix K (Question1).</T3>Twenty-one of the commenters specifically addressed the ARCS question concerningthe grandfathering of the current Appendix K approach. Seventeen of thesecommenters recommended indefinite grandfathering of the existing AppendixK evaluation models. Most cited the known conservatism as the basis oftheir recommendation. In addition, several commenters stated that in lightof the known conservatisms not allowing continued use of existing AppendixK evaluation models would be unfairly burdensome to licensees who determinethat they would not derive an economic benefit by performing realisticanalysis of ECCS performance. The position of an additional commenter isunclear concerning grandfathering. The remaining commenter was not opposedto grandfathering but thought the question is premature. This commenterbelieves that indefinite use of existing ECCS evaluation methods shouldbe considered when significant experience has been gained with the implementationof the new features of the rule but makes no recommendation as to whatpolicy the Commission should pursue in the meantime.The Commission agrees with the majority of the commenters that existingAppendix K evaluation models should be permitted indefinitely. The Commissionalso believes that the decision to permit continued use of such modelscan and should be made at this time because it believes that both methodsprovide adequate protection of the public health and safety. As describedin the regulatory analysis, the probability of a large break is so low,that the choice of best estimate versus Appendix K has little effect onpublic risk. The TMI action plan calls for industry to improve their smallbreak LOCA evaluation models to be more realistic when evaluating the moreprobable small break accident scenario. This has been done within the contextof andSection; 50.46 and Appendix K compliance and was entirely appropriatesince small breaks are not limiting in design basis performance and a betterunderstanding of small break behavior is a desirable safety goal from arisk perspective. Therefore, the grandfathering provision has been retainedin the final rule.2. <T3>Specification of Explicit Degree of Conservatism (Question 2). </T3>Themajority of the responses to this question indicated that the proposedrule already contains conservatism in the required uncertainty evaluation.The use of additional conservatism would be inconsistent with the objectiveof the rule which is to provide a realistic evaluation of plant responseduring a LOCA. The NRC has not included an additional explicit degree ofconservatism in this rule.3. <T3>Resolution of all Safety Issues Prior to Allowing Power Level Increases(Question 3). </T3>Some commenters pointed out that fission product inventoryis not a direct function of total power, but rather it is the rate of fissionproduct formation that is a direct function of power. Fission product inventoryavailable for release during a core meltdown would be a function of burnup,not total power.Actually, the inventory of fission products is a complex function of bothtime and power and not as simple as described by the commenters. Shortlived isotopes, such as xenon and iodine, quickly reach an equilibriuminventory and total steady state inventory of these fission products isa direct function of power. Inventories of long-lived isotopes, such asstrontium and cesium, are functions of total fuel burnup, as describedby the commenters. Intermediate-lived isotopic inventories are complexfunctions of time, power, and integrated power. In an independent study,documented in chapter XII of NUREG 1230, the staff determined that thechange in risk due to a 5% power increase is negligible. The argumentsabove do not alter the Commission's position that the increase in fissionproducts available for release during a core meltdown caused by a 5% powerincrease is negligible compared to the uncertainty in fission product release.The Commission has decided not to delay the proposed rule revision pendingresolution of all unresolved safety issues or severe accident issues andtherefore will proceed with this final rulemaking, as planned.4. <T3>Independent Review of Technical Basis (Question 4). </T3>Several commentersindicated that the technical basis for the proposed rule has had adequatereview as the research was being performed. A number of commenters statedthat it was the role of the ACRS to perform any review of the proposedrule revision because it is uniquely qualified due to its familiarity withthe research.The Commission agrees that the technical basis has had adequate review,except for the uncertainty methodology which is new and untried exceptfor the General Electric Company's use of an uncertainty evaluation oftheir SAFER code. As a proof of principle and demonstration of feasibility,the ACRS and a second independent peer group has reviewed the uncertaintymethodology developed by the NRC for use in quantifying the uncertaintyof NRC developed thermal hydraulic transient codes. Both the ACRS and thepeer group made generally favorable comments concerning the methodology;however, both groups recognized that a complete demonstration (i.e., applicationto small break LOCA and the reflood portion of large break LOCA) has notyet been accomplished and certain reviewers questioned whether such a demonstrationcould be performed successfully. The only objectives of the NRC methodologydemonstration are to demonstrate feasibility, to develop an audit tool,and to provide the necessary experience to audit licensee submittals. Thestaff does not believe that an NRC demonstration of the methodology isa prerequisite to this rulemaking. Licensees wishing to adopt the bestestimate approach permitted as a result of this rule are neither requiredto use this methodology nor to model their own methodologies after it.This methodology will play an important part in the best-estimate modelreview process. The NRC has determined through twenty years of experiencethat independent analysis with independent methodologies is the most effectiveway to intelligently review new vendor or licensee methodologies. It istherefore appropriate that this new methodology be subjected to stringenttechnical scrutiny, as directed by the Commission. The NRC staff is committedto completing this demonstration by the time that it will be needed toreview licensee submittals and is confident that such a demonstration willbe successful. Based on the paucity of negative response concerning thetechnical basis for the proposed rule revision and generally favorablereview of the NRC uncertainty methodology, the Commission plans no furtherreview of the technical basis.5. <T3>General Comments on Proposed Rule. </T3>Twenty-one commenters madecomments of this nature. The majority of the comments came from the nuclearindustry of which 19 expressed support of the proposed rule. The industryalso strongly supports the specific ECCS rule approach proposed by theNRC. One commenter neither supported nor opposed the proposed approach.One negative comment was received from an anonymous individual within thenuclear industry who implied, without specifics, that the ECCS rule isnot sound and that public comment is not a fair hearing because expertinsiders would be afraid to comment.Based on the absence of any supporting justification for the negative responseand the unprecedented amount of research supporting the rule revision,the NRC does not consider this comment to be valid and has proceeded withthis rulemaking with no major revisions.One commenter suggested that fuel reload suppliers should not be requiredto complete full LOCA/ECCS analyses because the hydraulics are not changedby a fuel change.Although this point is valid, the Commission believes that it is an unworkablesituation to allow fuel suppliers to make use of previous analyses performedby others. It is believed that serious questions of accountability wouldarise in cases where errors are discovered in evaluation models, requestsare made to revise plant technical specifications, or some other questionsregarding the analyses are raised. The NRC believes that shared responsibilityfor evaluation models would not be in the best interest of the public healthand safety and therefore has not implemented the suggestion of this commenter.The NRC received two requests for an extension of the comment period toallow time for review of NUREG-1230, which describes the research supportingthe proposed rule revision.The NRC believes the comment period was sufficient since most of the researchis not new and has been extensively reviewed in the past. Both commenterswere contacted and told that comments received after the comment periodwould be considered if time permitted. Comments from both parties werereceived late and were indeed considered by the NRC.6. <T3>Reporting Requirements. </T3>Some commenters viewed the proposed reportingprocedures as new requirements needing consideration in the backfit analysiswhile others stated that they are a major relaxation and clarificationof existing reporting requirements.The NRC position is that the reporting requirements are new in the sensethat they will now appear in the Code of Federal Regulations. However,in practice, these reporting requirements are indeed a clarification andrelaxation over the current interpretation for the existing requirementsand therefore the net effect of these requirements will be to reduce thefrequency for reporting and reanalysis.A number of commenters requested that only significant errors or changesin the non-conservative direction or only those that result in exceedingthe 2200anddegrees;F limit be required to be reported. In addition, a numberof commenters suggested that the NRC require only annual reporting of significanterrors or changes.The NRC considers a major error or change in any direction a cause forconcern because it raises potential questions about the adequacy of theevaluation model as a whole. Therefore, the NRC requires the reportingof significant errors or changes, in either direction, on a timely basisso that the Commission may make a determination of the safety significance.Thus, the final rule contains no change in this requirement.One commenter recommended that the word ``immediate'' be deleted from therequirement to propose steps to be taken to demonstrate compliance in theevent that the criteria in andSection; 50.46(b) are exceeded.The Commission considers this a very serious condition in which the plantis not in compliance with the regulations and may be operating in an unsafemanner. The word ``immediate'' reflects this seriousness and is furtherdefined by reference in other sections of Part 50.Several commenters questioned the need to report minor or inconsequentialerrors or changes, even on an annual basis, as required in the proposedrule.While errors or changes which result in changes in calculated peak cladtemperatures of less than 50anddegrees;F are not considered to be of immediateconcern, the NRC requires cognizance of such changes or corrections sincethey constitute a deviation from what previously has been reviewed andaccepted. The proposed annual reporting is believed to be a fair compromisebetween the burden of reporting and the Commission's need to be aware ofchanges and error corrections being made to evaluation models. Therefore,the annual reporting of minor errors remains in the final rule.One commenter interpreted the use of the words ``or in the applicationof such a model'' as requiring reporting when facility changes (alreadyreportable under andSection; 50.59), resulting in model input changes, occur.The regulatory language referred to is intended to ensure that applicationsof models to areas not contemplated during initial review of the modeldo not result in errors by extending a model beyond the range that it wasintended. The Commission does not believe that further clarification ofthis requirement is necessary and has not done so in the final rule.Several commenters requested a further relaxation of the reporting requirementby changing the definition of significant code errors from 50anddegrees;Fto 100anddegrees;F.While justification for the 50anddegrees;F criteria is largely judgmental,the NRC believes that it is sufficiently large to screen the code errorcorrections and changes which have little safety significance while providinga mechanism for timely reporting of more serious errors and changes. Since50anddegrees;F is a threshold for reporting and no further action is requiredpending NRC determination of safety significance, the Commission has retainedthis criteria in the final rule.One commenter requested consideration for allowing that the cumulativeeffect of several errors and corrections be applied towards the 50anddegrees;Fthreshold.The requirement, which states that the 50anddegrees;F criteria applies tothe sum of the absolute magnitudes of temperature changes from numerouserror corrections or model changes was formulated specifically becausethe Commission requires knowledge of serious deficiencies in evaluationmodels in use by licensees. Allowing errors or corrections which offsetone another to relieve a licensee of the thirty-day reporting requirement,would be counter to this objective. If this recommendation were accepted,two errors or changes, having a large impact on the calculated peak claddingtemperature but in the opposite direction, would not be reportable if thenet magnitude of their difference was less than 50anddegrees;F. For thisreason, and the fact that no further action (beyond reporting within thirtydays) is required, the Commission retained this requirement in the finalrule.7. <T3>Continued Use of Dougall-Rohsenow.</T3> Five comments that addressedthis aspect of the proposed rule were received. One commenter believedthat this correlation should not be permitted without further verificationand should be phased out. Other commenters supported continued use of thecorrelation subject to the provisions of the proposed rule.The NRC position is that no safety concern is created by continued useof the correlation, as long as the evaluation model is overall conservative.Therefore, the Commission can not justify the burden of requiring licenseesto modify their evaluation models and to perform reanalysis. As discussedin SECY 83-472, current evaluation models contain more conservatisms thanjust those required by Appendix K. However, error corrections or changescould alter the conservatism of the model. Therefore, the Commission believesthat it is necessary to ensure continued overall conservatism in the evaluationmodels as a basis for continued use of the correlation. Therefore, thefinal rule does not modify this requirement except for the correction ofa typographical error identified by one commenter.8. <T3>Uncertainty Evaluation.</T3> The comments received on the uncertaintyevaluation support the proposed rule, particularly the flexibility providedby a non-prescriptive requirement. Therefore, the Commission is publishingthe final rule without modification of this requirement.9. <T3>Acceptance Criteria.</T3> The three comments received on this topicwere all supportive of the existing criteria, as contained in andSection;50.46(b), and thus the Commission did not give consideration to alteringthem in the final rule.10. <T3>Cladding Materials.</T3> Three commenters requested that the Commissionconsider broadening the language of the rule to allow the use of a rangeof zirconium based alloys for cladding material.The Commission believes that this modification is beyond the scope of thecurrent rule revision and should be considered in a separate rulemakingaction in which it would receive appropriate public review and commentprior to implementation. In addition, zircaloy cladding material is specifiedin other portions of the Code of Federal Regulations, such as andSection;50.44. Making a change of this type is more suitable in a broader regulatorycontext. Therefore, the Commission is not broadening the definition ofcladding materials within this rulemaking.11. <T3>Other Suggested Expansions to Rule Scope.</T3> One commenter believesthat hydraulic loads occurring during a LOCA could cause steam generatortubes to rupture and that the NRC should resolve steam generator tube integritysafety issues prior to publishing this rule.Steam generator tubes are designed to withstand LOCA loads at allowed thinning,and there is no evidence to contradict this. If anything, the problem wouldbe with inspection techniques to detect the actual tube thinning and whetherthere is an unacceptably high probability that a tube rupture during aLOCA due to tube thinning is in excess of the design basis. However, therisk from LOCA with concurrent tube rupture will not be greatly affectedby the proposed rule change. As a result of the commenter's concerns, thisissue has been assigned as a generic issue (GI-141) to be prioritized bythe NRC staff. The results of the prioritization process will determineif further action is required.A second commenter believes that the ECCS rule does not adequately addressa plant's long term decay heat removal capability, and recommends a ``short/longterm integrative analysis approach.'' Both the existing requirements andthe proposed rule contain the requirement to provide for long term coolingsubsequent to a LOCA. Small increases in power that may result from theproposed rule should not greatly change decay heat removal requirementsfollowing a LOCA or any other accident or transient. Thus, the issue ofdecay heat removal is not materially impacted by this rulemaking. Moreover,any proposed increase in power resulting from this rule promulgation wouldbe approved only after the licensee demonstrates that decay heat removalcapacities remain adequate. The Commission is planning no further actionwith regard to this issue.12. <T3>Acceptability of Models Approved Under SECY-83-472.</T3> One commenterrequests that the rule language be modified to state explicitly that ECCSevaluation models that have been previously approved under SECY-83-472continue to be acceptable under this rule.SECY 83-472 provides an alternative, acceptable method for developing ECCSevaluation models. Licensees were still required, however, to demonstratethat evaluation models developed using the SECY-83-472 approach compliedwith the requirements of Appendix K to Part 50. This final rule explicitlyfinds that ECCS evaluation models, which have been previously approvedas satisfying the requirements of Appendix K, remain acceptable. Therefore,the Commission sees no need for further clarification of this issue.13. <T3>Comments Received After Comment Period.</T3> Six letters commentingon the proposed rule were received subsequent to the end of the commentperiod. The Commission considered these comments <T3>to the extent that the comments provided substantive information notpreviously considered.</T3>One commenter believes that the proposed andSection;50.46(a)(2) expands thediscretion of the Director of the Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation(NRR) by allowing imposition of immediate effective restrictions on reactoroperation without a prior determination that such action is required toprotect the public health, safety, or interest. NRC's intent is not toalter the responsibilities of the Director of NRR but to simply retainthe description of the scope of the authority that is currently found inandSection;50.46(a)(1)(v). Furthermore, the provisions of andSection;50.46(a)(2)do not specify the procedure to be followed by the Director of NRR. Theseprocedures are set out in Part 2 and remain unchanged by this rulemaking.One commenter believes that the rule is illegal because it is based solelyon cost savings considerations and that there is nothing wrong with largeconservatisms.The Commission disagrees with this assessment. Safety factors are requiredto protect the health and safety of the public when uncertainties in plantresponse exist. As these uncertainties are reduced, it is appropriate tomodify these safety factors to provide more realistic evaluation of actualplant response. The large conservatisms of Appendix K served the publicwell in 1974 when there was great uncertainty in ECCS performance. However,these conservatisms are now known to be very large, and there is no needto ``over regulate'' by maintaining this unnecessary margin. This typeof activity can often result in the expenditure of resources that wouldbe better spent improving safety in other areas. The benefits to safety,while difficult to quantify, are believed to be substantial. While costsavings may have been one factor resulting in the rule change, the Commissionbelieves that the conservatisms contained in the acceptance criteria themselves,as well as those required in the uncertainty evaluation required in thisrule, are adequate to protect the health and safety of the public.This commenter also cites portions of the 1975 General Electric Company'sNuclear Reactor Study (Reed Report), which claims that there is a lackof understanding of phenomena and small safety margins.Many of the conclusions of the ``Reed Report'' were valid in 1975 whenit was written and due to this fact it was difficult to show that sufficientsafety margins existed. Most of the research discussed in NUREG-1230 hasbeen conducted since the ``Reed Report'' was written and has resulted insignificant improvement in understanding LOCA phenomena. We now know thatsignificant margin to the ECCS acceptance criteria exists, particularlyfor the BWR/6 which was of concern in the ``Reed Report.'' The contentsof this report have been reviewed by the Commission on several occasions,most recently in NUREG-1285, and the finding has been made that no newsignificant safety issues are identified. For these reasons, the NRC isproceeding with this rulemaking, as proposed.The same commenter also recommends that credit for ECCS margins be takenin the Individual Plant Examinations (IPE) and not through generic rulemaking.The Commission agrees that plant specific differences may justify the applicationof different margins and that these may be addressed through IndividualPlant Examinations. However, the requirement for licensees to evaluateECCS performance and meet the acceptance criteria specified in 10 CFR 50.46(b)is generic. The Commission believes that margins that may be reduced dueto a better understanding of a reactor's response to a LOCA should be appliedthrough a generic rulemaking action because it allows a broad range oftechnical review of the issues, enhances public participation in the process,and provides a complete public record. Therefore, the Commission has decidedto proceed with the rulemaking as planned.Finally, this commenter questions the experimental basis for this rulebecause full-scale ECCS bypass data is not yet available.The 2D/3D tests which will provide this important data represent a smallportion of the total research upon which this rule relies. Significantresearch on ECCS bypass has already been completed in small scale vesselsand the full-scale work is required only to confirm the smaller scale resultsand quantify any uncertainty due to scale effects. One full-scale ECCSbypass test has already been completed under the 2D/3D program which showedthat more margin exists than expected from the small scale tests. Completionof the full-scale tests only affects the uncertainties in the calculations,and reduces them. Uncertainties must be addressed by licensees in any analysisunder the revised rule whether 2D/3D results are available or not. TheCommission concludes that there is no need to delay the final rule, whileawaiting these data.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Rule Changes</ITAG>Section 50.46 Acceptance Criteria for Emergency Core Cooling Systems forLight Water Reactors.Section 50.46(a)(1) is amended and redesignated andSection;50.46(a)(1)(i)to delete the requirement that the features of Section I of Appendix Kto Part 50 be used to develop the evaluation model. This section now requiresthat an acceptable evaluation model have sufficient supporting justificationto show that the analytical technique realistically describes the behaviorof the reactor system during a LOCA. The NRC expects that the analyticaltechnique will, to the extent practicable, utilize realistic methods andbe based upon applicable experimental data. The amended rule also requiresthat the uncertainty of the calculation be estimated and accounted forwhen comparing the results of the calculation to the temperature limitsand other criteria of andSection;50.46(b) so that there is a high probabilitythat the criteria would not be exceeded. The Commission expects the realisticevaluation model to retain a degree of conservatism consistent with theuncertainty of the calculation. The final rule does not specifically prescribethe analytical methods or uncertainty evaluation techniques to be used.However, guidance has been provided in the form of a Regulatory Guide.\1\<NOTE/> In SECY-83-472, the NRC has found acceptable an approachfor estimating the 95th percentile of the probability distribution. Thispercential is considered adequate to meet the high level of probabilityrequired by the rule. It is also recognized that the probability cannotbe determined using totally rigorous mathematical methods due to the complexityof the calculations. However, the NRC requires that any simplifying assumptionsbe stated so that the Commission may evaluate them to ensure that theyare reasonable. The NRC has independently developed and exercised a methodologyto estimate the uncertainty associated with its own thermal-hydraulic safetycodes. This methodology is described in the ``Compendium of ECCS Research.''\2\<NOTE/> This document also provides reference to the large body ofrelevant thermal-hydraulic research, documents NRC studies on the effectsof reactor power increases on risk, and provides background informationon the ECCS rule. While this method has not been reviewed for acceptabilityfrom the standpoint of safety licensing, it may provide additional guidanceon how the uncertainty may be quantified. In addition to providing guidanceto industry, this work was undertaken to provide a proof of principle anda tool to independently audit submittals. Appendix K, Section II, ``RequiredDocumentation,'' remains generally applicable, with only minor revisionsmade to be consistent with the amended rule.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>1Regulatory Guide, ``Best Estimate Calculations of EmergencyCore Cooling Systems Performance,'' RG 1.157.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>2``Compendium of ECCS Research for Realistic LOCA Analysis,''NUREG-1230, TBP.A new paragraph (ii) has been added to andSection; 50.46(a)(1) to allow thefeatures of Section I of Appendix K to be used in evaluation models asan alternative to performing the uncertainty evaluation specified in theamended andSection; 50.46(a)(1)(i). This method would remain acceptable becauseAppendix K is conservative with respect to the realistic method proposedin the amended andSection; 50.46(a)(1)(i). This would allow both currentand future applicants and licensees to use existing evaluation models ifthey did not need or desire relief from current operating restrictions.In andSection; 50.46, paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) have been revised to eliminateportions of those paragraphs concerned with historical implementation ofthe current file. These provisions have been replaced as described in thefollowing paragraphs. Section 50.46(a)(2) has been revised to indicte that restrictions on reactoroperation may be imposed by the Director of Nuclear Reactor Regulation,if the ECC cooling performance evaluations are not consistent with therequirements of andSection; 50.46(a)(1) (i) and (ii). This section has beenadded to retain similar requirements that have been deleted from andSection;50.46(a)(1)(i) by this rule revision. This section does not specify theprocedures to be followed by the Director. These procedures are found inPart 2 and are unchanged by this rulemaking. The current rule contains no explicit requirements concerning reportingand reanalysis when errors in evaluation models are discovered or changesare made to evaluation models. However, current practice has required reportingof errors and changes and reanalyses with the revised evaluation models.This final rule explicitly sets forth requirements to be followed in theevent of errors or changes. The definition of a significant change is currentlytaken from Appendix K, Section II.1.b which defines a significant changeas one which changes calculated cladding temperature by more than 20 anddegrees;F.The revised andSection; 50.46(a)(3) states specific requirements for reportingand reanalyses when errors in evaluation models are discovered or changesare made to evaluation models. It requires that all changes or errors inapproved evaluation models be reported at least annually and does not requireany further action by the licensee until the error is reported. Thereafter,although reanalysis is not required solely because of such minor error,any subsequent calculated evaluation of ECCS performance requires use ofa model with such error, and any prior errors, corrected. The NRC needsto be apprised of even minor errors or changes in order to ensure thatthey agree with the applicant's or licensee's assessment of the significanceof the error or change and to maintain cognizance of modifications madesubsequent to NRC review of the evaluation model. Past experience has shownthat many errors or changes to evaluation models are very minor and theburden of immediate reporting cannot be justified for these minor errorsbecause they do not affect the immediate safety or operation of the plant.The NRC therefore requires periodic reporting to satisfy NRC's need tobe apprised of changes or errors without imposing an unnecessary burdenon the applicant or licensee. This report is to be filed within one yearof discovery of the error and must be reported each year thereafter untila revised evaluation model or a revised evaluation correcting minor errorsis approved by the NRC staff. Significant errors require more timely attention since they may be importantto the safe operation of the plant and raise questions as to the adequacyof the overall evaluation model. This final rule defines a significanterror or change as one which results in a calculated peak fuel claddingtemperature different by more than 50 anddegrees;F, or an accumulation oferrors and changes such that the sum of the absolute magnitude of the temperaturechanges is greater than 50 anddegrees;F. More timely reporting (30 days)is required for significant errors or changes. This definition of a significantchange is based on NRC's judgment concerning the importance of errors andchanges typically reported to the NRC in the past. This final rule revisionalso allows the NRC to determine the schedule for reanalysis based on theimportance to safety relative to other applicant or licensee requirements.Errors or changes that result in the calculated plant performance exceedingany of the criteria of andSection; 50.46(b) mean that the plant is not operatingwithin the requirements of the regulations and require immediate reportingas required by andSection; 50.55(e), andSection; 50.72 and andSection; 50.73and immediate steps to bring the plant into compliance with andSection; 50.46.Appendix K ECCS Evaluation Models Amendments have been made to Appendix K, Section I.C.5.b, to modify thepost-CHF heat transfer correlations listed as acceptable. The ``McDonough''reference has been replaced with a more recent paper by the same authorsentitled ``An Experimental Study of Partial Film Boiling Region With Waterat Elevated Pressures in a Round Vertical Tube'' which is more generallyavailable and which includes additional data. The heat transfer correlation of Dougall and Rohsenow, listed as an acceptableheat transfer correlation in Appendix K, paragraph I.C.5.b, has been removed,because research performed since Appendix K was written has shown thatthis correlation overpredicts heat transfer coefficients under certainconditions and therefore can produce nonconservative results. A numberof applicants and licensees currently use the Dougall-Rohsenow correlationin approved evaluation models. The NRC has concluded that the continueduse of this correlation can be allowed. This is appropriate (even thoughparts of the approved evaluation model, Dougall-Rohsenow, are known tobe nonconservative) because the existing evaluation models are known tocontain a large degree of overall conservatism even while using the Dougall-Rohsenowcorrelation. This large overall conservatism has been demonstrated throughcomparisons between evaluation model calculations and calculations usingNRC's best-estimate computer codes. Thus, requiring that the applicantsand licensees remove the Dougall-Rohsenow correlation from their currentevaluation models cannot be justified as necessary to maintain safety.The stipulation that the Dougall-Rohsenow correlation will cease to beacceptable for previously approved evaluation models applies only whenchanges to the model are made which reduce the calculated peak clad temperatureby 50 anddegrees;F or more. However, the requirement to report any changesor culmination of changes, such that the sum of the absolute magnitudesof the respective temperature changes is greater than 50 anddegrees;F, stillapplies.A new Section I.C.5.c has been added to Appendix K to state the Commission'srequirements regarding continued use of the Dougall-Rohsenow correlationin existing evaluation models. Evaluation models which make use of theDougall-Rohsenow correlation and have been approved prior to the effectivedate of this rule may continue to use this correlation as long as no changesare made to the evaluation model which significantly reduce the currentoverall conservatism of the evaluation model. If the applicant or licenseesubmits proposed changes to an approved evaluation model, or submits correctionsto errors in the evaluation model which significantly reduce the existingoverall conservatism of the model, continued use of the Dougall-Rohsenowcorrelation under conditions where nonconservative heat transfer coefficientsresult would no longer be acceptable. For this purpose, significant reductionin overall conservatism has been defined as a ``net'' reduction in calculatedpeak clad temperature of at least 50anddegrees;F from that which would havebeen calculated using existing evaluation models. A reduction in calculatedpeak clad temperature could potentially result in an increase in the actualallowed peak power in the plant. An increase in allowed plant peak powerwith a known nonconservatism in the analysis would be unacceptable. Thisdefinition of a significant reduction in overall conservatism is basedon a judgment regarding the size of the existing overall conservatism inevaluation model calculations relative to the conservatism required toaccount for overall uncertainties in the calculations.Appendix K, Section II.1.b, has been removed since this requirement hasbeen clarified in the amended andSection; 50.46(a)(3). Likewise, AppendixK, Section II.5, has been amended to account for the fact that not allevaluation models will be required to use the features of Appendix K, SectionI. These minor changes to Appendix K do not affect any existing approvedevaluation models since the changes are either ``housekeeping'' in natureor are changes to ``acceptable features,'' not ``required features.''<ITAG tagnum="84">Availability of Documents</ITAG>1. Copies of NUREGs 1230 and 1285 may be purchased from the Superintendentof Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, P.O. Box 37082, Washington,DC 20013-7082. Copies are also available from the National Technical InformationService, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161. A copy is also availablefor public inspection and/or copying at the NRC Public Document Room, 2120L Street NW., Washington, DC 20555.2. Copies of SECY-83-472, an information report entitled ``Emergency CoreCooling Systems Analysis Methods,'' dated November 17, 1983, is availablefor inspection and copying at the NRC Public Documents Room, 2120 L StreetNW., Washington, DC 20555. Single copies of this report may be obtainedby writing L. M. Shotkin, Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research, U.S. NuclearRegulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555.3. Regulatory Guide, ``Best Estimate Calculations of Emergency Core CoolingSystems Performance,'' Task RS 701-4, may be obtained by writing to theDivision of Information Support Services, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555.4. The Paraphrased Summary of Public Comments on the ECCS Rule is availablefor public inspection at the NRC Public Documents Room, 2120 L Street NW.,Washington, DC 20555.<ITAG tagnum="84">Finding of No Significant Environmental Impact: Availability</ITAG>The Commission has determined under the National Environmental Policy Actof 1969, as amended, and the Commission's regulations in Subpart A of 10CFR Part 51, that this rule is not a major Federal action significantlyaffecting the quality of the human environment and therefore an environmentalimpact statement is not required. The primary effect of the rule is toallow an increase in the peak local power in the reactor. This could beused either to tailor the power shape within the reactor or to increasethe total power. Changing the power shape without changing the total powerhas a negligible effect on the environmental impact. The total power couldalso be increased, but is expected to be increased by no more than about5% due to hardware limitations in existing plants. This 5% power increaseis not expected to cause difficulty in meeting the existing environmentallimits. The only change in non-radiological waste will be an increase inwaste heat rejection commensurate with any increase in power. For stationsoperating with an open (once through) cooling system, this additional heatwill be directed to a surface water body. Discharge of this heat is regulatedunder the Clean Water Act administered by the U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency (EPA) or designated state agencies. It is not intended that NRCapproval of increased power level affects in any way the responsibilityof the licensee to comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act.The environmental assessment and finding of no significant impact on whichthis determination is based are available for inspection at the NRC PublicDocument Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC. Single copies of theenvironmental assessment and the finding of no significant impact are availablefrom L. M. Shotkin, Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research, U.S. NuclearRegulatory Commission, Washington DC 20555, telephone (301) 492-3530.<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act Statement</ITAG>This final rule amends information collection requirements that are subjectto the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>). These reporting requirements were approved by the Officeof Management and Budget (Approval Number 3150-0011).<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Analysis</ITAG>The Commission has prepared a regulatory analysis for this final regulation.The analysis examines the costs and benefits of the alternatives consideredby the Commission. The regulatory analysis is available for inspectionand copying for a fee at the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW.,Washington, DC. Single copies of the analysis may be obtained from L. M.Shotkin, Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research, Washington, DC 20555, telephone(301) 492-3530.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Certification</ITAG>As required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, 5 U.S.C. 605(b),the Commission certifies that this rule will not have a significant economicimpact upon a substantial number of small entities. This rule affects onlythe licensing and operation of nuclear power plants. The companies thatown these plants do not fall within the scope of the definition of ``smallentities'' set forth in the Regulatory Flexibility Act or the Small BusinessSize Standards set out in regulations issued by the Small Business Administrationin 13 CFR Part 121. Since these companies are dominant in their serviceareas, this rule does not fall within the purview of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">Backfit Analysis</ITAG>A backfit analysis is not required by 10 CFR 50.109 because the rule doesnot require applicants or licensees to make a change but only offers additionaloptions and provides a clarification and relaxation of existing reportingrequirements. Nonetheless, the factors in 10 CFR 50.109(c) have been analyzedfor the entire rule.1. <T3>Statement of the specific objectives that the backfit is designed toachieve.</T3>The objective of the rule is to modify 10 CFR 50.46 and Appendix K to permitthe use of realistic ECCS evaluation models. More realistic estimates ofECCS performance, based on the improved knowledge gained from recent researchon ECCS performance, may remove unnecessary operating restrictions. Alsoexperience with the previous version of andSection; 50.46 has demonstratedthat a clearer definition of reporting requirements for changes and errorsis very desirable.2. <T3>General description of the activity that would be required by the licenseeor applicant in order to complete the backfit.</T3>The amendment allows alternative methods to be used to demonstrate thatthe ECCS would protect the nuclear reactor core during a postulated designbasis loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA). While continuing to allow the useof current Appendix K methods and requirements, the rule also allows theuse of more recent information and knowledge currently available to demonstratethat the ECCS would perform its safety function during a LOCA. If an applicantor licensee elects to use a new realistic model they will be required toprovide sufficient supporting justification to validate the model and includecomparisons to experimental data and estimates of uncertainty. In accountingfor the uncertainty, the analysis would have to show, with a high levelof probability, that the ECCS performance criteria are not exceeded. Whetheror not a licensee or applicant chooses to use realistic analysis, completewith an uncertainty analysis, each licensee must comply with the requirementto report changes to their evaluation models (i.e., less than 50anddegrees;Fchange in calculated peak cladding temperature) annually to the NRC. Inaddition, significant changes (those which have a greater than 50anddegrees;Fchange in calculated peak cladding temperature) have to be reported within30 days.3. <T3>Potential change in risk to the public from the accidental offsiterelease of radioactive materials.</T3>The rule could result in increased local power within the reactor coreand possible increases in total power. Power increases on the order of5 will have an insignificant effect on risk. One effect of increased powercould be to increase the fission product inventory. A five percent powerincrease would result in a less than five percent increase in fission products.Thus, less than five percent more fission products might be released duringcore melt scenarios and potentially released to the environment duringsevere accidents.The rule still requires the fuel rod peak cladding temperature (PCT) remainbelow 2200anddegrees;F. Reactors choosing to increase power by about fivepercent will be operating with less margin between the PCT and the 2200anddegrees;Flimit than previously. The increased risk represented by this decreasein margin and increase in fission product inventory is negligible and fallswithin the uncertainties of PRA risk estimates. In addition, other safetylimits, such as departure from nucleate boiling (DNB), and operationallimits, such as turbine design, will limit the amount of margin reductionpermitted under the rule. The rule could also potentially reduce the riskfrom pressurized thermal shock by allowing the reactor to be operated ina manner which reduces the neutron fluence to the vessel.4. <T3>Potential impact on radiological exposure to facility employees.</T3>Since the primary effect of the rule involves the calculational methodsto be used in determining the ECCS cooling performance, it is expectedthat there will be an insignificant impact on the radiological exposureto facility employees. Because of the reduced LOCA restrictions resultingfrom the new calculations it is possible for the plant to achieve moreefficient operation and improved fuel utilization with improved maneuveringcapabilities. As a result, it is conceivable that there could be a reductionin radiological exposure if the fuel reloads can be reduced. This effectis not expected to be very significant.5. <T3>Installation and continuing costs associated with the backfit, includingthe cost of facility down times or the cost of construction delay.</T3>LOCA considerations resulting from the present rule are restricting theoptimum production of nuclear electric power in some plants. These restrictionscan be placed into the following three categories:(1) Maximum plant operating power,(2) Operational flexibility and operational efficiency of the plant, and(3) Availability of manpower to work on other activities.The effect of the rule will vary from plant to plant. Some plants may realizesavings of several million dollars per year in fuel and operating costs.Significantly greater economic benefit would be realized by plants ableto increase total power as a result of this final rule. The regulatoryanalysis cited above indicates that the total present value of the energyreplacement cost savings for a five percent power upgrade would vary between18 and 127 million dollars depending on the plant. Additional informationconcerning these potential cost savings are included in the regulatoryanalysis.The costs associated with the new reporting requirements are deemed tobe minimal. Although the existing Appendix K has no official reportingrequirements, paragraph II.1.b was interpreted by the staff to requirea reanalysis and report to NRC when significant changes are made whichchange the peak cladding temperature by more than 20 anddegrees;F. Therefore,this rule change, by changing the definition of significant changes to50 anddegrees;F, is actually a relaxation of current practices. The annualreporting of changes that are not significant is not viewed by the NRCas a major burden since no other action is required.6. <T3>The potential safety impact of changes in plant or operational complexityincluding the effect on other proposed and existing regulatory requirements.</T3>There are safety benefits derivable from alternative fuel management schemesthat could be utilized. The higher power peaking factors that would beallowed with the final rule provide greater flexibility for fuel designerswhen attempting to reduce neutron flux at the vessel wall. This can resultin a corresponding reduction in risk from pressurized thermal shock.The reduced cladding temperatures that would be calculated under the revisedrule offers the possibility of other design and operational changes thatcould result from the lower calculated temperatures. ECCS equipment numbers,sizes or surveillance requirements might be reduced and still meet theECCS design criteria (if not required to meet other licensing requirements).Another option may be to increase the diesel/generator start time duration.In summary, the effect of this rule on safety would have both potentialpositive and negative aspects. The potential for reduction of ECCS systemcapability in existing or new plants is present. However, several positiveaspects may also be realized under the final rule. The net effect on safetywould be plant specific. However, the probability of a large break LOCAis so low that the choice of best estimate versus Appendix K would havelittle effect on public risk.7. <T3>The estimated resource burden on the NRC associated with the proposedbackfit; and the availability of such resources.</T3>The major staff resources required under the final rule are to review therealistic models and uncertainty analysis required by the revised ECCSRule. Based on previous experience with the General Electric Company'sSAFER model and the learning that has resulted from these efforts, it isestimated that approximately one staff year would be required to revieweach generic model submitted. There are four major reactor vendors (GEalready has a revised evaluation model approved under the existing AppendixK for both jet pump and non-jet pump plants and may update their methodologyunder this new rule) and several fuel suppliers and utilities which performtheir own analyses and potentially might submit generic models for review.However, it is expected that only 3 or 4 generic models would be submittedsince not all plants would benefit from this rule. Thus, about 3-4 staffyears would be required to review the expected generic models. Once a genericmodel is approved, the plant specific review is very short. In addition,several vendors are currently planning to submit realistic models in conjunctionwith the use of SECY-83-472. Therefore, staff resources would be expendedto review these models in any event. Since these models would not changeas a result of the revised ECCS rule, there should be no net increase inresources required over that already planned to be expended. In summary,while it is difficult to estimate accurately, it is expected that the rulechange will have a small overall impact on NRC resources.8. <T3>The potential impact of differences in facility type, design or ageon the relevancy and practicality of the backfit.</T3>The degree to which the rule would affect a particular plant depends onhow limited the plant is by the LOCA restrictions. General Electric Company(GE) plants do tend to be limited in operation by LOCA restrictions andwould benefit from relief from LOCA restrictions. However, this reliefis already available for most GE plants through the recently approved SAFERevaluation model. Any additional relief due to a rule change would be oflittle further benefit. Westinghouse (<T3>W</T3>) plants would appear to directly benefit from relaxation ofLOCA limits. <T3>W</T3> plants represent the largest number of plants, with 47 plantsoperating and 10 additional plants being constructed. <T3>W</T3> indicates that most of these plants are limited by LOCA considerations.The potential benefit for plants of Bandamp;W and CE design is uncertainat this time.9. <T3>Whether the proposed backfit is interim or final and if interim, thejustification for imposing the proposed backfit on an interim basis.</T3>The rule, when made effective, will be in final form and not interim form.It will continue to permit the performance of ECCS cooling calculationsusing either realistic models or models in accord with Appendix K.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 10 CFR Part 50</ITAG>Antitrust, Classified information, Fire prevention, Incorporation by reference,Intergovernmental relations, Nuclear power plants and reactors, Penalty,Radiation protection, Reactor siting criteria, Reporting and Recordkeepingrequirements.For the reasons set out in the preamble and under the authority of theAtomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, the Energy Reorganization Act of1974, as amended, and 5 U.S.C. 552 and 553, the NRC is adopting the followingamendments to 10 CFR Part 50.<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 50_DOMESTIC LICENSING OF PRODUCTION AND UTILIZATION FACILITIES</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 50 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 102, 103, 104, 105, 161, 182, 183, 186, 189,68 Stat. 936, 937, 938, 948, 953, 954, 955, 956, as amended, sec. 234,83 Stat. 1244, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2132, 2133, 2134, 2135, 2201, 2232,2233, 2236, 2239, 2282); secs. 201, as amended, 202, 206, 88 Stat. 1242,as amended, 1244, 1246, (42 U.S.C. 5841, 5842, 5846).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Section 50.7 also issued under Pub. L. 95-601, sec. 10, 92 Stat. 2951(42 U.S.C. 5851). Section 50.10 also issued under secs. 101, 185, 68 Stat.936, 955, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2131, 2235); sec. 102, Pub. L. 91-190,83 Stat. 853 (42 U.S.C. 4332). Sections 50.23, 50.35, 50.55, 50.56 alsoissued under sec. 185, 68 Stat. 955 (42 U.S.C. 2235). Sections 50.33a,50.55a, and Appendix Q also issued under sec. 102, Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat.853 (42 U.S.C. 4332). Sections 50.34 and 50.54 also issued under sec. 204,88 Stat. 1245 (42 U.S.C. 5844). Sections 50.58, 50.91, and 50.92 also issuedunder Pub. L. 97-415, 96 Stat. 2073 (42 U.S.C. 2239). Section 50.78 alsoissued under sec. 122, 68 Stat. 939 (42 U.S.C. 2152). Sections 50.80-50.81also issued under sec. 184, 68 Stat. 954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2234).Section 50.103 also issued under sec. 108, 68 Stat. 939, as amended (42U.S.C. 2138). Appendix F also issued under sec. 187, 68 Stat. 955 (42 U.S.C.2237).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the purposes of sec. 223, 68 Stat. 958, as amended (42 U.S.C.2273), andSection;andSection; 50.10 (a), (b), and (c), 50.44, 50.46, 50,48,50.54, and 50.80(a) are issued under sec. 161b, 68 Stat. 948, as amended(42 U.S.C. 2201(b)); andSection;andSection; 50.10 (b) and (c) and 50.54 areissued under sec. 161i, 68 Stat. 949, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2201(i)); andandSection;andSection; 50.9, 50.55(e), 50.59(b), 50.70, 50.71, 50.72, 50,73,and 50.78 are issued under sec. 161o, 68 Stat. 950, as amended (42 U.S.C.2201(o)).</ITAG>2. In andSection; 50.46, paragraph (a) is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 50.46</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Acceptance criteria for emergency core cooling systems for light-waternuclear power reactors.</ITAG>(a)(1)(i) Each boiling and pressurized light-water nuclear power reactorfueled with uranium oxide pellets within cylindrical Zircaloy claddingmust be provided with an emergency core cooling system (ECCS) that mustbe designed such that its calculated cooling performance following postulatedloss-of-coolant accidents conforms to the criteria set forth in paragraph(b) of this section. ECCS cooling performance must be calculated in accordancewith an acceptable evaluation model and must be calculated for a numberof postulated loss-of-coolant accidents of different sizes, locations,and other properties sufficient to provide assurance that the most severepostulated loss-of-coolant accidents are calculated. Except as providedin paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, the evaluation model must includesufficient supporting justification to show that the analytical techniquerealistically describes the behavior of the reactor system during a loss-of-coolantaccident. Comparisons to applicable experimental data must be made anduncertainties in the analysis method and inputs must be identified andassessed so that the uncertainty in the calculated results can be estimated.This uncertainty must be accounted for, so that, when the calculated ECCScooling performance is compared to the criteria set forth in paragraph(b) of this section, there is a high level of probability that the criteriawould not be exceeded. Appendix K, Part II, Required Documentation, setsforth the documentation requirements for each evaluation model. (ii) Alternatively, an ECCS evaluation model may be developed in conformancewith the required and acceptable features of Appendix K ECCS EvaluationModels. (2) The Director of Nuclear Reactor Regulations may impose restrictionson reactor operation if it is found that the evaluations of ECCS coolingperformance submitted are not consistent with paragraphs (a)(1) (i) and(ii) of this section.(3)(i) Each applicant for or holder of an operating license or constructionpermit shall estimate the effect of any change to or error in an acceptableevaluation model or in the application of such a model to determine ifthe change or error is significant. For this purpose, a significant changeor error is one which results in a calculated peak fuel cladding temperaturedifferent by more than 50anddegrees;F from the temperature calculated forthe limiting transient using the last acceptable model, or is a cumulationof changes and errors such that the sum of the absolute magnitudes of therespective temperature changes is greater than 50anddegrees;F.(ii) For each change to or error discovered in an acceptable evaluationmodel or in the application of such a model that affects the temperaturecalculation, the applicant or licensee shall report the nature of the changeor error and its estimated effect on the limiting ECCS analysis to theCommission at least annually as specified in andSection; 50.4. If the changeor error is signficant, the applicant or licensee shall provide this reportwithin 30 days and include with the report a proposed schedule for providinga reanalysis or taking other action as may be needed to show compliancewith andSection; 50.46 requirements. This schedule may be developed usingan integrated scheduling system previously approved for the facility bythe NRC. For those facilities not using an NRC approved integrated schedulingsystem, a schedule will be established by the NRC staff within 60 daysof receipt of the proposed schedule. Any change or error correction thatresults in a calculated ECCS performance that does not conform to the criteriaset forth in paragraph (b) of this section is a reportable event as describedin andSection;andSection; 50.55(e), 50.72 and 50.73. The affected applicantor licensee shall propose immediate steps to demonstrate compliance orbring plant design or operation into compliance with andSection; 50.46 requirements.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. In 10 CFR Part 50, Appendix K, paragraph II.1.b is deleted, paragraphII.1.c is redesignated II.1.b, the introductory text to paragraph I.C.5.band paragraphs II.1.b and II.5 are revised, and a new section I.C.5.c isadded to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="84">APPENDIX K_ECCS EVALUATION MODELS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">I. Required and Acceptable Features of the Evaluation Models * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">C. Blowdown Phenomena * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">5. <T3>Post-CHF Heat Transfer Correlations. * * *</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">b. The Groeneveld flow film boiling correlation (equation 5.7 of D.C.Groeneveld, ``An Investigation of Heat Transfer in the Liquid DeficientRegime,'' AECL-3281, revised December 1969) and the Westinghouse correlationof steady-state transition boiling (``Proprietary Redirect/Rebuttal Testimonyof Westinghouse Electric Corporation,'' USNRC Docket RM-50-1, page 25-1,October 26, 1972) are acceptable for use in the post-CHF boiling regimes.In addition, the transition boiling correlation of McDonough, Milich, andKing (J.B. McDonough, W. Milich, E.C. King, ``An Experimental Study ofPartial Film Boiling Region with Water at Elevated Pressures in a RoundVertical Tube,'' Chemical Engineering Progress Symposium Series, Vol. 57,No. 32, pages 197-208, (1961) is suitable for use between nucleate andfilm boiling. Use of all these correlations is restricted as follows: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">c. Evaluation models approved after October 17, 1988, which make useof the Dougall-Rohsenow flow film boiling correlation (R.S. Dougall andW.M. Rohsenow, ``Film Boiling on the Inside of Vertical Tubes with UpwardFlow of Fluid at Low Qualities,'' MIT Report Number 9079 26, Cambridge,Massachusetts, September 1963) may not use this correlation under conditionswhere nonconservative predictions of heat transfer result. Evaluation modelsthat make use of the Dougall-Rohsenow correlation and were approved priorto October 17, 1988, continue to be acceptable until a change is made to,or an error is corrected in, the evaluation model that results in a significantreduction in the overall conservatism in the evaluation model. At thattime continued use of the Dougall-Rohsenow correlation under conditionswhere nonconservative predictions of heat transfer result will no longerbe acceptable. For this purpose, a significant reduction in the overallconservatism in the evaluation model would be a reduction in the calculatedpeak fuel cladding temperature of at least 50 anddegrees;F from that whichwould have been calculated on October 17, 1988, due either to individualchanges or error corrections or the net effect of an accumulation of changesor error corrections. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">II. Required Documentation </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">1.a. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">b. A complete listing of each computer program, in the same form asused in the evaluation model, must be furnished to the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission upon request. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">5. General Standards for Acceptability_Elements of evaluation modelsreviewed will include technical adequacy of the calculational methods,including: For models covered by andSection;50.46(a)(1)(ii), compliance withrequired features of section I of this Appendix K; and, for models coveredby andSection;50.46(a)(1)(i), assurance of a high level of probability thatthe performance criteria of andSection;50.46(b) would not be exceeded. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, MD, this 13 day of September 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Samuel J. Chilk, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-21179 Filed 9-15-88; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>