<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88119-0122 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-19-88.f2.A1121</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Railroad Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRA Docket No. 87-2, Notice No. 4]    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Automatic Train Control; Northeast Corridor Railroads; Supplementto Final Orders    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), Department of Transportation(DOT).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Supplement to Final Orders of Particular Applicability.     </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document provides notice to the affected partiesand the general public of FRA's supplement to final orders requiring thatall trains operating on the Northeast Corridor (NEC) be controlled by locomotivesequipped with Automatic Train Control (ATC). This supplement contains adiscussion and specifications for freight train locomotive ATC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>February 18, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>S.H. Stotts, Jr., Chief, StandardsDivision, Office of Safety, FRA, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC20590 (telephone (202) 366-0495), or Mark Tessler, Office of Chief Counsel,FRA, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590 (telephone (202) 366-0628).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background    </ITAG>On November 16, 1987, FRA issued a Notice of Final Orders (52 FR 44510,November 19, 1987) requiring that all trains operating on the NEC spinebe controlled by locomotives equipped with ATC. At the time of issuanceof those orders, FRA was conducting analyses to determine the optimallysafe braking specifications for ATC devices on freight trains on the NEC.FRA has concluded its study and determined that ATC does not present anyundue safety risk for freight service on the NEC.    1. FRA's Study    Conventional ATC systems are composed of electromagnetic, electropneumatic,and pneumatic equipment that establishes an operational relationship betweenthe signal system and the train air brakes. Conventional ATC functionsso that when a more restrictive cab signal is established, a brake applicationat the service rate is imposed that continues until the train is broughtto a stop or, under control of the locomotive engineer, its speed is reducedto a predetermined rate. When a more restrictive cab signal is established,the locomotive engineer must apply the brakes within eight seconds in orderto prevent an automatic brake application. In addition, when operatingunder a speed restriction, an automatic brake application will result ifthe train speed exceeds the predetermined rate and will continue untilthe train is brought to a stop or, under control of the locomotive engineer,the speed is reduced to that rate.    Results of computer simulations over three selected segments in the NECrepresenting the worst case terrain for developing undesirably severe in-trainforce levels strongly indicate that ATC-initiated brake applications onfreight trains pose little hazard to safety of operations. The simulationsdealt with severity of brake applications, hazards of severe buff and draftforces, and depletion of air reservoirs. The information developed fromthese simulations indicates that ATC devices meeting the requirements containedin Subpart E of 49 CFR Part 236 (Rules, Standards, and Instructions governingthe installation, inspection, maintenance, and repair of automatic trainstop, train control and cab signal devices), and presently available fromat least two manufacturers, are adequate and safe to be applied to freightlocomotives operating on the NEC.    The primary simulations were performed by the Illinois Institute of TechnologyResearch Institute (IITRI) using state-of-the-art computer programs developedfor their Research and Locomotive Evaluator Simulator (RALES) system. TheConsolidated Rail Corporation (Conrail) and FRA used the Train OperationsSimulator (TOS) program, developed by the Association of American Railroads,to define input parameters and to compare results obtained by IITRI.   The computer simulation model used by IITRI in conjunction with the operationof the RALES facility represents all aspects of the operation of the locomotivecontrols and the resulting consequences on the operation of the train asa whole and on each car in the train. Each car is considered individually,taking into account all pertinent factors, such as weight, dimensions,braking ratio, and type of air brake control valve. Braking, gravitational,inertial, and transient in-train forces are calculated for each car.   The RALES and TOS models are similar in both their structures and the resultsfrom their use. The RALES model, however, incorporates additional refinementsnot yet available in TOS, and permits more flexibility in the format ofits output data presentation.    Both RALES and TOS simulation models accept as input data all pertinentoperations of locomotive controls, including throttle positions, dynamicbraking, automatic brake pipe pressure reductions and releases, and independentbrake applications.  The output of each simulation model includes the instantaneous force ateither end of any car or locomotive in the train, the train speed and locationon the simulated railroad, locomotive traction or braking current in amperes,and the air pressure in brake pipes and brake cylinders throughout thetrain. The primary information considered in the study were the peak in-trainforces and the train speed. The inter-vehicular forces are the best indicatorof the probability of a train accident from train buckling or separation.The train speed is an indicator of the ability of a train operated in aparticular manner to comply with the speed restrictions imposed on it bythe signal system or other limiting factors.The simulations incorporated four train consists: PYSE1, a combinationof 115 intermodal and conventional freight cars with three locomotives;CRMIX, a train of four locomotives and 135 conventional freight cars; TV24,a train of three locomotives and 60 loaded intermodal flat cars; and CRCoal,a train of four locomotives and 110 loaded hopper cars. The train on whichmost of the comparative simulations were based was PYSE1. The PYSE1 representedan actual Conrail train that had presented particular train-handling problems.Thus, this train was selected to represent a ``worst case'' train for thisstudy.The various terrain features on which the simulations were run representedlevel, tangent track, and three locations on the NEC between Washington,D.C. and Baltimore. The hill-and-valley profile on that segment is recognizedby Conrail, Amtrak, and FRA as the area in which a long freight train ismore likely to develop higher inter-vehicular forces than anywhere elseon the NEC.The three locations were selected by using TOS to simulate the operationof the PYSE1 train twice in each direction over the entire Washington toBaltimore segment with two differing but realistic methods of normal trainhandling. The locations at which the highest inter-vehicular forces occurredwere then analyzed to determine the cause of those forces. When the primarycause was determined to be the track profile, that location was selectedas a critical point at which to simulate differing train handling sequences.IITRI then conducted simulations with braking initiated at these criticallocations and at points two-tenths of a mile in either direction from twoof the critical locations to determine the sensitivity of inter-vehicularforces to the precise location at which braking was initiated. Since noneof the critical locations chosen for simulation were near signals or otherlocations at which cab signal indications would normally change, simulationswere also run with braking initiated at the next signal beyond the criticallocation.The study indicates that freight trains can be safely operated on the NECwhile complying with the requirements imposed by conventional ATC systems.At some locations, however, if the locomotive engineer of a long traindoes not have the slack properly adjusted at the time the ATC mandatesa brake application, the application could result in unacceptably highinter-vehicular forces. A critical factor is the exact location at whichbraking is begun; for instance, if the braking is initiated 500 feet beforeor after passing a critical point, the peak inter-vehicular forces couldbe greatly reduced. The levels of those forces are also greatly influencedby the manner in which the throttle is handled during the early stagesof an air brake application. Because the exact location of a train at thepoint of initiation of a brake application has been found to be critical,it follows that a system that can permit an engineer more flexibility inthe method of accomplishing a required speed reduction can thereby producelower inter-vehicular forces. Conrail believes it has developed such asystem, which is discussed below.Conrail is opposed to conventional ATC in freight operations because conventionalATC requires a brake application whenever the cab signal changes to a morerestrictive aspect requiring a speed reduction. FRA recognizes that thereis some merit to these objections.High inter-vehicular forces may possibly be developed under certain trainmakeup and terrain conditions. Nevertheless, conventional ATC serves toimprove safety of train operations by requiring speed reductions undercontrol of the locomotive engineer or stopping of the train if the locomotiveengineer does not operate the train in compliance with signal indications.2. Conrail's BPS SystemConrail is nearing completion of development of a microprocessor-basedspeed control system, which Conrail refers to as a braking profile system,or BPS. This system is intended to be used in conjunction with Conrail'sexisting 4-aspect cab signal system that is supplemented with an automatictrain stop device. Conrail's objective is to use the speed control systemin lieu of conventional off-the-shelf ATC devices on its locomotives operatingon the NEC.Conrail's proposed system, as described by the railroad itself.<ITAG tagnum="21">Would require the engineer to keep his train speed within the <T3>braking profile</T3> after a more restrictive signal indication, butit would not dictate how he should do so. It may not be necessary to applythe train air brakes at all to reduce train speed in compliance with signalindications. Depending on conditions, the engineer may choose only to reducethrottle, or to use the dynamic brake, either of which alternatives issafer and more efficient than the air brake in some situations * * *. Conrail's[system] would activate a full service penalty air brake application ifthe engineer fails to acknowledge a more restrictive cab signal indicationwithin 8 seconds after it is displayed. Also, failure to comply with thedeceleration profile will result in a full service penalty air brake application.</ITAG>At the present time Conrail's NEC cab signal aspects are: Clear (Proceedat maximum authorized speed of 50 mph.); Approach Medium (Proceed approachingnext signal at medium speed of 30 mph.); Approach (Proceed prepared tostop at next signal. Train exceeding medium speed (30 mph) must at oncereduce to that speed.); and Restricting (Proceed prepared to stop shortof train, obstruction, or switch not properly lined, looking out for brokenrail, but not exceeding 20 mph outside interlocking limits, 15 mph withininterlocking limits.) Conrail's BPS will change train speeds to 50 mphunder a Clear cab signal aspect; 40 mph under Approach Medium; and 20 mphunder both Approach and Restricting aspects.BPS will be installed in conjunction with Conrail's cab signal and automatictrain stop (ATS) systems. The ATS requires that each cab signal aspectchange to a more restrictive aspect be acknowledged by the locomotive engineerwithin eight seconds or an automatic brake application will be applieduntil the train is brought to a stop.Like conventional ATC, Conrail's BPS will enforce speed reductions andcompliance with signal indications by the locomotive engineer and stopthe train if the locomotive engineer does not properly control the train.BPS imposes a braking profile curve and audibly warns the locomotive engineerif an overspeed condition exists. It automatically applies irrevocablebraking if the locomotive engineer fails to correct the overspeed withinthe parameters of the predetermined braking profile curve. The brakingprofile curve is based on the worst combination of block length, trackgrade, and train make-up. Whenever the cab signal changes to a more restrictiveaspect the locomotive speed is automatically compared to the speed permittedby that restrictive aspect and a braking profile is generated. In addition,a visual display shows the actual speed and the time in seconds remainingbefore an irrevocable automatic brake application would occur absent anappropriate speed reduction.The braking profile curves are based on the stopping distances from variousspeeds (with a full-service air brake application) to a signal that requiresa train to stop. To that distance is added a 15 percent safety factor.These braking profile curves are designed to be effective within the ``criticalblock'' on the NEC.The ``critical block'' is that block with the shortest distance from theentrance to the block to the point where the brakes must be applied (usinga full service brake application) to stop the train within the block. Theselection of the critical block is based on the length of the block, thetrack grades within the block, the maximum authorized speeds for freighttrains within the block, and the braking properties of the heaviest trainsoperating at those speeds.BPS differs from conventional ATC in that BPS does not mandate an applicationof the air brake when a speed reduction is required. Instead, BPS imposesthe parameters of a braking profile curve within which a train may be operatedwithout the imposition of an automatic brake application. The parametersare calculated by BPS from the previous cab signal indication, the presentcab signal indication, the train speed, and the distance run since thelast change of cab signal indications. The parameters displayed to theengine crew are the actual train speed and the time in seconds during whichthe train may operate at that speed before an automatic brake applicationwill be initiated by the BPS. This display supplements and modifies theaspects displayed by the cab signal system, which will remain visible tothe crew.In operation, BPS will electronically monitor the cab signal indicationsand train speed in a fail-safe manner. When the locomotive speed exceedsthat permitted by the cab signal indication, (<T3>i.e.</T3>, an overspeed condition), the BPS will automatically selecta braking profile curve based on the previous and present cab signal indications.It will begin to measure the distance travelled by the locomotive sincethe overspeed condition began, and will calculate and display to the enginecrew the time in which the train can continue at its present speed untilBPS initiates an automatic brake application (``seconds to penalty'').When the cab signal mandates a reduction in train speed, the locomotiveengineer will use an appropriate train handling method to reduce speedto that permitted by the signal indication. Depending on conditions, theengineer can adjust the throttle, use dynamic braking, or use air brakesto reduce the train speed. Until the train speed has been reduced to thatpermitted by the signal indication, the BPS display will indicate the timein seconds during which the train can travel at its current speed withouthaving an automatic brake application, initiated by the BPS. During thattime, the engineer retains full control of the train.An audible alarm and flashing time display indicate that the combinationof train speed and distance travelled within the block is reaching thelimit for the braking profile in effect. If the train reaches this limit,the BPS will initiate an irrevocable automatic brake application.However, if the speed of the train is reduced (within the parameters ofthe braking profile) to the speed required by the signal indication, theoverspeed condition will no longer exist. The train can thus continue atthe authorized speed. Exceeding that speed by one mile-per-hour will thenactivate the overspeed alarm; a three mile-per-hour overspeed will causethe BPS to initiate an automatic brake application to stop the train. TheBPS will likewise enforce the maximum authorized speed for trains operatingwith a cab signal aspect indicating ``proceed''.Conrail claims that BPS provides the locomotive engineer the ability tocontrol the train speed by means other than an air brake application, <T3>i.e., </T3>by reducing throttle position or using dynamic braking,depending on train speed, track gradient, and time to penalty brake application.The system does not require a brake application within eight seconds asdoes conventional ATC, and, it is claimed, is therefore safer. Additionally,the train is permitted to travel farther into the block at maximum safespeed, thereby reducing delay costs, keeping use of the train air brakesto minimum, and reducing maintenance and fuel costs.<ITAG tagnum="84">Technical Issues</ITAG>FRA has examined Conrail's prototype speed control system, performed extensivetesting, and reviewed manufacturers' data on this system. At FRA's suggestion,Conrail and the manufacturers have adopted certain changes to increaseits safety and integrity and to make it more compatible with the requirementsof 49 CFR Part 236. Still, there are inherent features in Conrail's systemthat will not meet certain requirements of Part 236. A discussion of thosefeatures follows:<T3>Section 236.502. </T3>This section requires that ATC operate to initiatean automatic brake application at least stopping distance from the entranceto a block under certain specified conditions. It further requires thatATC operate to initiate an automatic brake application at each main tracksignal requiring a reduction in speed.Although by its nature, BPS will not impose an automatic brake applicationat a signal requiring a reduction in speed, BPS will not compromise safetysince the braking profile curve requires that either the speed be reducedto the predetermined rate under control of the locomotive engineer or thetrain will be stopped by an irrevocable automatic brake application.<T3>Section 236.503. </T3>This section requires that ATC operate to initiatean automatic brake application where the speed of a train exceeds the predeterminedrate as required by the setting of the speed control mechanism.Conventional ATC is designed to initiate an automatic brake applicationwhenever the speed of the train exceeds the predetermined rate as requiredby the speed control mechanism.In its testing of the BPS, FRA found that under certain conditions, a traincould be accelerated above the speed permitted by an ``approach'' signal.This occurred when the speed of a train was 15 mph with a ``clear'' cabsignal indication (which authorizes 50 mph speed). If the signal changedto ``approach'' (requiring a speed reduction to 20 mph), the train couldbe accelerated to a speed greater than 20 mph while still within the parametersof the braking profile.In order to make BPS compatible with section 263.503, Conrail has agreedto impose a speed limiting curve three mph above the existing train speedwhen a more restrictive cab signal aspect is established. Thus, if thespeed of a train were 25 mph with an ``approach medium'' cab signal indication(limiting speed to 40 mph) and the cab signal aspect changed to ``approach,''(limiting speed to 20 mph) the train could not be accelerated above 28mph within the parameters of the profile braking curve without initiatingan automatic brake application. As train speed is reduced, the speed limitingcurve will likewise reduce until the predetermined speed is reached. Thischange resolved this technical issue without adversely affecting safety.<T3>Section 236.515.</T3> This section requires that the cab signals beplainly visible to the members of the locomotive crew from their stationsin the cab. The cab signal to which the BPS is interconnected is clearlyvisible to all crew members in the cab. However, the display of the prototypeBPS is directly visible only to the locomotive engineer_other crew memberscannot see the display unless they stand behind the engineer. The BPS display contains pertinent information about the movement of thetrain of which all members of the locomotive crew should be aware. Thedisplay shows the train speed and time remaining before a penalty brakeapplication (penetration of the parameters of the braking profile curve)when a more restrictive cab signal indication occurs. The locomotive engineermust then exercise his judgment regarding the method by which the trainspeed should be reduced, <T3>i.e.,</T3> throttle reduction, dynamic brake, or air brake. The BPS display will modify the indications of the cab signal. It will,for instance, permit a train to pass a wayside signal displaying an aspectindicating that the train must stop at the next signal. The train willbe permitted to continue at maximum authorized speed until the BPS mandatesa speed reduction some distance into the block. The present rule requiresthat the train ``proceed prepared to stop at next signal. Train exceedingMedium speed must at once reduce to that speed.'' BPS will not enforcethe requirement to ``at once reduce to that speed''. However, any trainnot equipped with BPS must continue to comply with that portion of therule. The ``time to penalty'' display of BPS will therefore serve to modifythe indication of that signal by quantifying and extending the requirementto ``at once reduce to medium speed.'' Unless the display is visible to the other crew members from their stationsin the cab, they will not be able to determine whether the locomotive engineeris properly controlling the train. Conrail does not agree with FRA's reasoning on this issue and prefers thatthe BPS display not be considered part of the cab signal system. However,the BPS visual display modifies the indications of the cab signal aspectsand thus should also be visible to other crew members. <T3>Section 236.553.</T3> This section requires that a seal be maintainedon any device (other than brake-pipe cut-out cock), by means of which theoperation of the pneumatic portion of the ATC can be cut out. The BPS'``mode'' switch, used to cut the system in and out for cab signal and non-cabsignal territory obviously should not be sealed, yet a method is necessaryto ensure that the system is operating when in cab signal territory. Afurther problem is that when a train is operating under a ``restricting''signal aspect (maximum speed of 20 mph) and is traveling at 19 mph or less,the mode switch can be placed in non-cab signal position and the traincan be accelerated above 20 mph. Positioning the mode switch in this mannereffectively cuts out the BPS. Conrail's BPS specifications require that the mode switch position be continuouslyrecorded on an event recorder. Also, to further compensate for the modeswitch not being sealed, Conrail will install outside lights on both sidesof the locomotive that will be illuminated whenever the mode switch isin the cab signal territory position. If the BPS is cut out by unauthorizeduse of the mode switch, it will be apparent to crews of other trains andemployees along the right-of-way. The information stored on the event recordercan then confirm the unauthorized cut-out. We believe this arrangementwill adequately discourage unauthorized acts of cutting out the BPS.<T3>Section 236.563. </T3>This section requires that the delay time ofATC not exceed 8 seconds. Delay time is the time which elapses after theonboard apparatus detects a more restrictive signal indication until thebrakes start to apply. It is the time the locomotive engineer has to applythe brakes before control of the train is taken from him.Conrail's braking profile was developed on the basis of the shortest blocklength and worst case train and track grade. The penalty brake applicationimposed when exceeding the braking profile curve provides sufficient brakingdistances at various speeds to stop within that block with a 15 percentsafety factor. Thus, with BPS, a train is permitted to proceed into a blockas far as safety permits before the speed control system automaticallyapplies an irrevocable full service brake application. BPS' basic provisionallowing a train to proceed the safe distance into a block exceeds eightseconds in all circumstances. Therefore, in Conrail's speed control systemthe requirement of an eight-second delay time is unduly restrictive, becausethe imposed braking profile curve provides a safe stopping distance witha 15 percent safety margin.<ITAG tagnum="84">Supplement to Final Orders</ITAG>In consideration of the foregoing the Final Orders of Particular Applicabilityissued November 16, 1987 are supplemented as follows:1. Use of conventional ATC on freight train locomotives on the NEC is safe.Conventional ATC, which makes use of temporary suppression, results atmost, in only moderate increases in buff forces. By careful use of thethrottle during a temporary suppression application, the buff forces canbe reduced. Therefore, no modifications or specification changes are necessaryfor conventional ATC installation on freight train locomotives on the NEC.2. Conrail's proposed automatic train control system utilizing a brakingprofile system, when used in conjunction with automatic cab signals supplementedwith ATS, provides a safe alternative to conventional automatic train controlsystems. It is an acceptable ATC system for use on controlling locomotivesof NEC freight trains <T3>provided that:</T3>A. the BPS system complies with all provisions of 49 CFR Part 236 thatapply to automatic train control systems, except as modified herein;B. the BPS system shall operate to initiate an automatic brake applicationat least stopping distance from the entrance to a block in which any conditiondescribed in section 236.205 exists;C. the BPS system shall operate to require a reduction in speed to thatprescribed by a main track signal requiring a reduction in speed;D. the BPS system shall operate to initiate an automatic brake applicationwithin 27 seconds after the locomotive, at speeds exceeding 20 mph, entersor is within a block in which any condition described in section 236.205occurs;E. the BPS system shall operate to initiate an automatic brake applicationwhen the speed of the train exceeds the rate permitted by the braking profilecurve;F. the BPS system shall operate to initiate an automatic brake applicationif the system is deactivated while the speed of the locomotive exceeds20 mph;G. the visual display of the status of BPS is plainly visible to membersof the locomotive crew from their stations in the cab;H. indicators clearly visible from trackside on both sides of each equippedlocomotive are illuminated when BPS is activated and operating properly,and extinguished at all other times;I. the BPS system shall be connected to an operating event recorder whichrecords each instance of activation and deactivation of the BPS so thatthe time and location of each activation and deactivation can be determinedfor at least 48 hours following the event;J. each profile braking curve program shall be identified by a unique identifyingnumber that can be displayed on the BPS visual display for identificationpurposes;K. all components in the control circuits, including, but not limited toprogrammable chips, are permanently installed by soldering;L. installation is permanent on each controlling locomotive designatedfor operation on the NEC;M. Conrail and Amtrak issue operating rules governing operation of locomotivesequipped with the BPS system that area in compliance with Part 236 andspecifically address the situation in which the speed control system failsor is cut out en route; andN. no train having a controlling locomotive with a failed or cut-out BPSsystem is permitted to depart its last terminal before entering the NEC.3. Nothing contained herein, or in the Final Orders issued November 16,1987, permits operation of non-ATC equipped controlling locomotives afterthe dates specified in the Final Orders. Carriers desiring to operate non-ATC-equippedlocomotives in switching, transfer, or work train service must petitionFRA for relief on a case-by-case basis through the waiver process as providedin 49 CFR Part 235.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>The Signal Inspection Act (49 U.S.C. andSection; 26)and the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 U.S.C. andSection; 431 <T3>et seq.</T3>), delegated to the Federal Railroad Administrator by theSecretary of Transportation (49 C.F.R. 1.49(f), (g), and (m)).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on January 14, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John H. Riley,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-995 Filed 1-15-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-06-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>