<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88516-0018 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-16-88.f2.A1017</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 53, No. 94 / Monday, May 16, 1988 / Rulesand Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Bureau of Land Management</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">43 CFR Parts 3000, 3040, 3100, 3130, 3150, 3160, 3180, 3200, 3210,3220, 3240, 3250, and 3260</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[AA-620-88-4111-01; Circular No. 2606]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Oil and Gas Leasing, Geothermal Resources Leasing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Bureau of Land Management, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This final rulemaking makes changes to existing regulationsthat will clarify procedures in the administration of the oil and gas leasingprogram on which there have been questions since the publication of therevised regulations for 43 CFR Groups 3000 and 3100 in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of July 22, 1983. This final rulemaking alsomakes changes in the regulations in 43 CFR Group 3200.Proposed changes concerning the noncompetitive and competitive leasingprovisions in Subparts 3110, 3111, 3112, and 3120 that were published inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4> as proposed rulemaking on June 12, 1987 (52 FR22592) have been removed in their entirety in this final rulemaking. Thoseproposed changes were made obsolete by the enactment on December 22, 1987,of the Federal Onshore Oil and Gas Leasing Reform Act of 1987, hereinafterreferred to as the Reform Act. A proposed rulemaking published on March21, 1988, in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (53 FR 9214) to implement the provisions of theReform Act contains the revisions proposed to these subparts and changesto other subparts, including Subparts 3102, 3103, 3104, 3106, and 3108.Numerous provisions and references in the June 12, 1987, proposed rulemakingconcerning Subpart 3112, or sections therein, have been deleted in thisfinal rulemaking because the specific provisions are no longer pertinent.Changes that are made in this final rulemaking include clarification ofthe definitions of lessee, operating rights owner (sublessee), and operatorand the responsibilities of each concerning lease rights, obligations,and operations on leased lands, including bonding obligations and responsibilities.This final rulemaking also clarifies procedures for approval of lease transfersof record title and operating rights (subleases). It specifies that approvalby the Bureau of Land Management is for administrative purposes only anddoes not warrant that either party to the transfer holds legal or equitabletitle to the lease. This rulemaking has provisions relating to mass transfers,that is, numerous lease transfers from a single entity to another. In addition,the final rulemaking provides that a request for approval of a voluntarytermination of a communitization or unit agreement or the expiration ofan agreement without satisfaction of a public interest requirement shallcause the agreement to be invalid from the beginning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>June 15, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Inquiries or suggestions should be sent to: Director(500), Bureau of Land Management, Room 5647, Main Interior Bldg., 1800C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Lois Mason, (202) 653-2190, orRobert C. Bruce, (202) 343-8735.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>A proposed rulemaking amending theregulations in 43 CFR Groups 3000, 3100, and 3200 was published in the<T4>Federal Register</T4> on June 12, 1987 (52 FR 22592), with a 60-daycomment period. During the comment period, comments were received from35 sources: 14 from business interests, primarily related to the oil industry;4 from attorneys; 3 from associations; and 14 from Federal agencies. Generally,the comments expressed the view that the changes made by the proposed rulemakingclarify the existing regulations and will be helpful. In addition, therewere comments on many of the sections of the proposed rulemaking, someopposing certain provisions and recommending changes. The comments andthe action taken on them are discussed in this preamble.One comment questioned the need for two different authority provisionsin each part of the proposed rulemaking. The regulations of the Officeof the Federal Register require that an ``authority citation'' be includedat the beginning of each part. The authority section is included in certainparts because it makes the part complete, and in other parts there arespecial statutory provisions that need to be fully explained in the authoritysection. Finally, the comment questioned the need to repeat the full textof the authority citation when there is no change in its language. Again,the regulations of the Office of the Federal Register require that thefull text of the authority citation be repeated in both the proposed andfinal rulemaking, even if there is no change in the text of the citation.<ITAG tagnum="84">43 CFR Part 3000</ITAG>Section 3000.0-5 Definitions.Several comments were submitted on the changes made by the proposed rulemakingin the definitions of the terms ``party in interest'' and ``interest.''Two of the comments expressed the view that the proposed changes in thedefinition of these terms caused confusion. The cross-reference to Subpart3112 in the definition of ``party in interest'' has been removed and thelanguage in the definition of ``interest'' in the proposed rulemaking relatingto former Subpart 3112 has been removed because that subpart has been removed,the Reform Act having made obsolete the need to delineate differences inthe oil and gas leasing methods used by the Department of the Interior.The amended definition of the term ``interest'' in the final rulemakingaddresses only those aspects that do not relate to former Subpart 3112.In response to several comments on the proposed rulemaking that expressedconcern about the expansion of the definition of the term ``interest,''the final rulemaking has deleted the phrase ``fiduciary obligations, securityinterests.'' A review of the definition of this term as it appeared inthe proposed rulemaking showed that the language of the proposed rulemakingcould be interpreted more broadly than was intended. The objective is toidentify those holding and controlling interests in oil and gas leasesin order to determine whether the acreage limitations and other requirementsof the Mineral Leasing Act are being met. It is not the intent to includein the definition of the term ``interest'' any debt of an entity that maybe satisfied by income received from a lease, if that debt does not involvethe potential acquisition of the lease by the lender.One of the comments raised the issue of publicly traded limited partnerships,suggesting that the final rulemaking revise the definition of the term``interest'' specifically to exclude unit holders of such partnerships.The final rulemaking has not adopted this suggested change in andSection;3000.0-5(l), as discussed under section 3102 below.One of the comments on andSection; 3000.0-5 expressed concern that the changesmade by the proposed rulemaking would return the Bureau of Land Managementto the earlier requirement that all ``parties in interest'' be identifiedin an over-the-counter offer to lease, as well as in all assignments, transfers,and competitive bids. The comment apparently misunderstood the intent onthis issue. There is no intention to expand the information relating to``interest'' presently required in a lease offer or an assignment, transfer,or competitive bid. The information is not needed by the Bureau of LandManagement unless its examination of the lease instrument or other lease-relateddocument indicates that there may be a problem. At that point, the Bureaucan request any information it needs to ascertain the propriety of thelease action. Where necessary for consistency, the final rulemaking hasadopted changes in andSection; 3200.0-5, which are discussed above in thecomments on ``interest.''Section 3000.8 Management of Federal minerals from reserved mineral estates.Several comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking.Generally, those comments questioned why this section was not limited inits application to oil and gas. The reference to groups 3000 and 3100,groups covering oil and gas activities, limits the application of thissection to those minerals. Therefore, the final rulemaking has not adopteda specific reference to oil and gas because it is unnecessary, nor hasit adopted a specific reference to geothermal resources in andSection; 3200.2.Section 3100.0-3 Authority.Several comments on this section of the proposed rulemaking objected tothe prohibition of leasing of National Park System lands on the basis thatleases on such lands could contain stipulations that would protect thelands and resources. These comments have not been accepted because it isa policy of the Department of the Interior, and in many cases a matterof law, that mineral leasing will not be allowed on National Park Systemlands unless there is specific statutory authority for such leasing.Section 3100.0-5 Definitions.Several comments were received on the definition of the term ``operator''as it appeared in the proposed rulemaking. The comments suggested thatthe definition needed to be clarified to set forth what constitutes anoperator. Some of the comments raised questions about the use of the phrase``designated operator'' in the definition in the proposed rulemaking andwhat appears to be an attempt to distinguish between an operator, a designatedoperator, or an official Designation of Operator filed with the Bureauof Land Management, and their respective responsibilities if they do nothold operating rights or an interest in a lease. The final rulemaking hasrevised the definition of the term ``operator'' to mean any person or entitywho states in writing to the Bureau of Land Management that it is responsibleunder the terms and conditions of the lease for conducting operations ona lease or a portion thereof. It eliminates the definition of and all referenceto ``designated operator.'' In addition, the final rulemaking adds a definitionof the term ``operating rights owner'' to clarify the use of this termwhen such rights are transferred by sublease. For consistency, the finalrulemaking has included this change in andSection;andSection; 3160.0-5, 3200.0-5,and 3260.0-5, as well as in numerous sections throughout Parts 3160 and3260.Section 3100.4-3 Option statements.Two comments were received on the changes made to this section by the proposedrulemaking. One comment objected to the removal of paragraphs (a) through(e) because the information specified in those paragraphs is required bythe Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 (30 U.S.C. 184(d)(2)). After reviewingthe comments, it was agreed that the final rulemaking needed to be changedto retain language clarifying the information that shall be included inan option statement. The final rulemaking has moved one of the requirementsof an option statement to andSection; 3100.4-1 and revised andSection; 3100.4-3by dividing the opening paragraph into 2 parts and adding a new paragraph(b) requiring that the semiannual statement contain the number of acrescovered by each option and the total acreage of all options held in eachState, in addition to any changes to the option statements submitted inaccordance with andSection; 3100.4-1(b).Section 3101.1-2 Surface use rights.Numerous comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking,which was intended to clarify the authority of the Bureau of Land Managementto use the terms and conditions of the standard lease form to control site-specificenvironmental impacts on leaseholds, as opposed to lease-specific protectivemeasures addressed in lease stipulations to mitigate impacts to specificresource values identified on the leased lands. The standard lease formauthorizes the Bureau to require ``reasonable measures'' to the extentsuch measures would be consistent with the lease rights granted a lessee.However, certain measures considered reasonable and consistent with leaserights by the Bureau may not be viewed the same way by a lessee. To resolvethe uncertainty which has existed concerning the Bureau's authority withinthe terms and conditions of the standard lease form to control site-specificenvironmental impacts, the proposed rulemaking was intended to establishthe measures over which the Bureau has clear authority.Many of the comments on this section of the proposed rulemaking expressedconcern over the implications of defining the term ``reasonable,'' indicatingthat lessees would be deprived of the opportunity to challenge the Bureauof Land Management's requirements. Some of the comments expressed the viewthat the measures being established by the proposed rulemaking were eithergreater or less than those provided in existing land management plans andcurrently used to develop lease stipulations. A few comments were of theview that the way the word ``reasonable'' was used in the proposed rulemakingwould limit the Bureau's ability to prescribe adequate mitigation measuresat the time lease operations are proposed because, without lease stipulations,it could be inferred that the Bureau's authority under the standard leaseform is limited. Other comments expressed the opinion that it would expandthe Bureau's authority to control environmental impacts and allow measuresto be imposed on leases without adequate justification. One of the commentson this section strongly supported the change made by the proposed rulemaking.After careful review of the comments, the provision in the final rulemakinghas been revised. The regulation does not seek to limit the lessee's opportunityto challenge environmental requirements imposed after lease issuance. However,it is appropriate to establish minimum parameters within which the Bureaucan specify site-specific mitigating measures which, by regulation, areconsistent with the lease rights granted a lessee. The final rulemakingprovides that the Bureau, at a minimum, can require relocation of proposedoperations by 200 meters and can prohibit new surface disturbance for aperiod of 60 days, and that such requirements are consistent with the leaserights granted. The authorized officer may grant a lease suspension inappropriate cases if new surface disturbance is prohibited under this section.Similarly, the authority of the Bureau to prescribe ``reasonable,'' butmore stringent, protection measures is not affected by the final rulemaking.Finally, 2 comments on this section of the proposed rulemaking relatedto measures imposed by the Bureau of Land Management at the time of operationsthat might be used to expand the protection already specified for a resourcevalue in a lease stipulation. For example, such measures might result inan unstipulated additional buffer around an area already stipulated tohave a buffer or cause a 180-day delay when a delay of only 120 days isspecified by a stipulation. This was not the intent of the proposed rulemaking.Measures imposed by this provision of the rulemaking will not be used toincrease the level of protection of resource values that are addressedin lease stipulations.Section 3101.1-3 Stipulations and information notices.Section 3101.1-3 of the proposed rulemaking was the focus of numerous comments,most of which were directed to the public review requirement for certainlease stipulations. Because new provisions in the Federal Onshore Oil andGas Leasing Reform Act of 1987 require public notification of lease offeringsand substantial modifications of lease terms, that portion of this sectionof the proposed rulemaking dealing with public review and waiver of stipulationshas been removed from this final rulemaking. This matter is addressed inthe separate rulemaking that will implement the new law.Several of the comments on andSection; 3101.1-3 raised questions about theinformation notices proposed in this section. The comments urged that alessee be given pertinent information notices prior to the issuance ofa lease. The Bureau of Land Management will inform lessees of all requirementsrelated to a lease. The information notice is a method of informing lesseesof requirements that may be imposed by an existing law or regulation, notof imposing new requirements. After careful consideration of the concernsexpressed in these comments, the final rulemaking has adopted a changethat makes it clear that an information notice has no legal consequencesexcept to give notice of existing requirements.Several of the comments on this section requested clarification of theprovision that a lessee be made aware of or required to indicate acceptanceof stipulations. As a result of the comments, the final rulemaking hasbeen amended to state that the filing of a bid constitutes acceptance ofthe stipulations that are set out at the time the lands are made availablefor lease under Subpart 3120.Section 3101.2-3 Excepted acreage.All comments on this section of the proposed rulemaking supported the changemade by the proposed rulemaking clarifying the exclusion from chargeableacreage of offers to lease, overriding royalties, and payments out of production.The final rulemaking has adopted the language of the proposed rulemakingswithout change.Section 3102.2 Aliens.Several comments were offered on this section of the proposed rulemaking.Two comments supported the clarification made by the proposed rulemaking.A third comment strongly opposed the clarification made by the proposedrulemaking of the provision that, in accordance with the Mineral LeasingAct (30 U.S.C. 181), would prohibit aliens from holding, owning, or controllinginterests in Federal oil and gas leases through units in a publicly tradedlimited partnership. The comment expressed the view that the Mineral LeasingAct of 1920 did not prohibit such ownership as long as citizens of countriesor foreign entities recognized by the United States are granted reciprocalrights. The comment includes a detailed explanation of its position onthis issue. After reviewing the arguments presented in the comment, thefinal rulemaking has not adopted the suggested change. Section 1 of theMineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 181) authorizes issuance of leases to ``citizensof the United States, associations of such citizens, or to any corporationorganized under the laws of the United States.'' A master limited partnershipis an association, and therefore, all of the members in such a publiclytraded entity must be citizens of the United States to hold an interestin a Federal oil and gas lease. When the Congress enacted the Act in 1920,the States had laws recognizing corporations and limited partnerships.The Congress, while clearly providing for foreign ownership of stock indomestic corporations, did not provide similar authority for foreign participationin limited partnerships. Limited partnerships and corporate entities areorganized under completely different laws and principles. The fact thatthe Act does not reflect recent investment practices does not provide abasis for an interpretation of the Act that would accord a master limitedpartnership the same status as a corporation. Therefore, the final rulemakinghas adopted this section of the proposed rulemaking without change.Section 3102.4 Signature.A number of comments were offered on this section of the proposed rulemaking.Several of them recommended that the final rulemaking simplify the languagein paragraph (c) of the section to indicate clearly that a request forapproval of a transfer be signed by the transferee and that only one originalof such request be required, even though the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920(30 U.S.C. 187a), requires that 3 copies of the transfer be originallysigned and dated by the transferor. One of the comments on this sectionof the proposed rulemaking pointed out that the request for approval ofan assignment does not inure to the benefit of the transferor; rather itis merely the transferee's representation to the Bureau of Land Managementthat he/she is qualified to hold the interest in the lease that is beingtransferred. After a thorough review of the comments, the final rulemakinghas adopted a change that combines paragraphs (b) and (c) into a singleparagraph and revises the provision for clarity.A final comment on this section of the proposed rulemaking supported thechange made by paragraph (e), redesignated paragraph (d) by the final rulemaking,that would not allow reference to a qualification file number. This wouldeliminate the possibility of referring to a noncurrent qualification statementwhen the Bureau of Land Management requests information concerning a lessee'squalifications.Section 3102.5-1 Compliance.Several comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking,with most of those comments pointing out typographical errors, the needto clarify cross-references to other sections of the rulemaking, and othertechnical problems. The final rulemaking has made these changes. One ofthe comments suggested that excluding lease assignments or tranfers fromcompliance with the provisions of section 2(a)(2)(A) of the Mineral LeasingAct of 1920, as amended (30 U.S.C. 201(a)(2)(A)) is illogical and the positionof the Department of the Interior should be reassessed. The Department'sSolicitor has considered this question and concluded that section 2(a)(2)(A)prohibits the Secretary of the Interior from issuing leases covered bythe requirements of the section, but does not prohibit the approval ofan assignment or transfer of a lease to any entity that the section disqualifiesfrom receiving a newly issued lease. (Solicitor's Opinion M-36951, 92 I.D.537, 556 (1985).) This interpretation allows an entity that is disqualifiedfrom receiving a newly issued lease to acquire leases through approvalof an assignment or transfer. The final rulemaking, therefore, has notchanged this provision.Section 3102.5-2 Certification of compliance.Several comments on this section indicated that there was a need to clarifythat a separate statement of certifications of compliance is not requiredwhen forms approved by the Bureau of Land Management are submitted forleasing actions because the certification is a part of the approved form.After careful review of this issue, the final rulemaking has adopted clarifyinglanguage by moving the first sentence of andSection; 3102.5-3 of the proposedrulemaking to the end of this section. In response to a comment, the finalrulemaking has adopted an amendment to this sentence to include a referenceto the execution of a document as a necessary requirement for certificationof compliance.One of the comments on this section of the proposed rulemaking raised questionsconcerning the requirement for certification for entities which have constituentmembers holding, owning, or controlling more than 10 percent of the entity.The final rulemaking has adopted the language of the proposed rulemakingwithout change. It is the policy of the Department of the Interior to allowcorporate entities, as well as publicly traded associations, includingpublicly traded partnerships, to qualify for Federal oil and gas leasesby certifying only as to the citizenship of persons holding or controllingmore than 10 percent of the outstanding shares of the entity holding orcontrolling a Federal oil and gas lease. Such certification is made throughexecution and submission of Bureau-approved forms. Separate certificationof citizenship of such entities and associations is not required by theBureau.Section 3102.5-3 Evidence of compliance.Several comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking.Some of the comments concerned the provision requiring the authorized officerto cancel or reject a potential lease action, such as issuance of a leaseor approval of a lease transfer, if the information requested is not provided.The comments argued that this penalty was excessive. In recognition ofthe points raised in the comments, in the final rulemaking the last sentenceof this section has been revised to specify that failure to submit therequested information shall result in adjudication of the action basedon the incomplete submission. A request by the Bureau of Land Managementfor additional information will be made to clarify questions concerninga potential lease action. The failure to comply with such a request forinformation could result in the denial of lease approval or disapprovalof the lease action.One comment expressed the view that the title of this section of the proposedrulemaking needed to be clarified. The final rulemaking has adopted a changeto the title of the section, so that it now more accurately describes thepurpose of the section.Section 3103.1-2 Where submitted.Two comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking whichsets out the address where annual rental payments are to be sent. One ofthe comments expressed the view that the final rulemaking needed to clarifyparagraph (a)(2) of the section to exclude from its applicability thoseleases covered by paragraph (b). The final rulemaking adopts the changessuggested by this comment. One comment expressed the view that providingthe address of the Minerals Management Service was helpful. Sections 3103.2-1 and 3103.2-2 Rental requirements and annual rental payments.One comment was submitted on these two sections of the proposed rulemaking.It expressed the view that the titles improperly differentiated betweenthe advance and annual rental requirements. The comment pointed out thatit is common industry understanding that ``advance rental'' means a year'srental that is paid in advance, i.e., at the beginning of each lease year.In recognition of the use of this term by the industry, the final rulemakinghas adopted a change that eliminates the word ``advance'' from the titleof andSection; 3103.2-1. The final rulemaking has not adopted the recommendedchange in the title of andSection; 3103.2-2 because the title as writtenproperly identifies the content of the section. Several comments were received on the introductory paragraph of andSection;3103.2-2 concerning the acceptability of an annual rental payment, requiredto be made on a day when the Minerals Management Service is closed, thatis postmarked on the next day that the designated Minerals Management Serviceoffice is open. One of the comments indicated that this change would preventthe inadvertent cancellation of some leases due to confusion between theanniversary date and the date when the rental was actually received, withthe date of receipt being controlling when the Service office is closed.Another comment on this specific issue agreed with the interpretation givenin the preamble to the proposed rulemaking. Most of the comments on thissection strongly opposed the provision contending that it was contraryto the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 (30 U.S.C. 188(b)) which requires thatthe rental payment must be made on the anniversary date or, if the officeis closed on the anniversary date, the rental must be received on the nextday the office is open, but must be made on or before the anniversary dateor the lease terminates by operation of law. The final ruelmaking adoptsthe comments opposed to using the postmark as receipt of payment. The referenceto the ``postmark'' in the proposed rulemaking, as well as the postmarkprovision that is included in the existing regulations is removed. Accordingly,if the annual rental payment is not received on time in the proper officeof the Minerals Management Service, the lease shall terminate automaticallyby operation of law. However, the final rulemaking includes in andSection;3108.2-1(a) an additional provision explaining what constitutes reasonablediligence, allowing a lessee to obtain a Class I reinstatement, when therental is not received on time, under the following circumstances: (1)The rental payment is postmarked on or before the anniversary date; or(2) if the Service office is closed on the anniversary date, the rentalpayment is postmarked on or before the next day the Service is open tothe public. All other requirements of a Class I reinstatement, includingreceipt of the payment within 20 days of the due date must be met. Thischange also affects andSection;andSection; 3108.2-1 and 3108.2-2, and changesto those sections are addressed at the proper point in this preamble. The preamble to the proposed rulemaking requested the public to commenton a possible change in the rental schedule. Twelve comments were submittedon this subject, with the majority of them being opposed to any rentalincrease. However, the Reform Act changed the rental rates required forcompetitive and noncompetitive oil and gas leases. Accordingly, provisionsin andSection; 3103.2-2 concerning rental rates are not included in thisfinal rulemaking, but instead are addressed in the separate rulemakingimplementing the new law.Section 3103.3 Royalties.The proposed rulemaking requested the public to comment on the currentcompetitive lease variable royalty rate schedules, as well as the variableroyalty rate schedule attached to 20-year leases at the time they are renewedor exchanged, in terms of efficient production practice, maximizing resourcerecovery, collection of maximum royalties, and the administrative burdenassociated with the schedules contained in the existing regulations. Thirteencomments were submitted in response to the questions raised in the proposedrulemaking. The majority of the comments indicated that a variable royalty rate maynot directly affect the ultimate production from the lease but may influencethe decision to drill a well on a lease. From a reservoir management standpoint,factors such as reservoir characteristics and marketing conditions mayhave a greater influence. Some of the comments, however, were of the viewthat the current royalty schedules result in incremental distortions ofproduction from some wells. The comments, did not agree on what a new variablerate schedule should be and indicated that a flat rate would be preferableand might increase ultimate production. On the issue of the administrativeburden of the current variable royalty rate schedules and whether theycould be audited, the comments expressed the view that variable royaltyrates complicate the auditing of lease production and add to the administrativeburden. Finally, the majority of the comments suggested that successiveincremental rates, if continued, be applicable to successive productionincrements. Because of the enactment of the Reform Act, the provisions for royaltyrates are not addressed further in this final rulemaking. A separate rulemakingto implement the new law addresses the royalty rates provided in andSection;andSection;3103.3-1 and 3103.3-2 for the competitive and noncompetitive leasing programin accordance with the new law. Section 3103.3-3 Limitation of overriding royalties, payments out of productionand similar interests and arrangements. This section of the proposed rulemaking generated a number of comments,with several expressing considerable concern over the inclusion of carriedinterests and net profit interests because of the difficulty of calculatingsuch interests on a percentage basis. The other comments on this sectionrecommended that the final rulemaking delete the entire section becausesuch overriding royalty interests and other similar agreements are voluntarilyentered into by the lessee with other parties. The United States is notrequired to approve these agreements and, thus, should not become involved,except when a reduction in the Federal rental or royalty rate is requestedby the lessee, in which case the effect of outstanding private paymentswill be considered. Accordingly, at the time of such a request, the authorizedofficer could require that any excess overriding royalty or similar interestbe reduced before consideration will be given to the requested reductionin Federal rental or royalty. Two other comments on this section of theproposed rulemaking pointed out a discrepancy in the next-to-last sentenceof the section and the language of andSection; 3103.4-1(c) of the proposedrulemaking. The discrepancy is caused by a difference in the extent ofpossible reduction of the other interests and the comments recommendedthat the language of andSection; 3103.4-1 be adopted by the final rulemaking.In response to the comments, andSection; 3103.3-3 has been deleted in itsentirety from the final rulemaking.Section 3103.4-1 Waiver, suspension or reduction of rental, royalty orminimum royalty.This section of the proposed rulemaking attracted several comments, withone of the comments commending elimination of the requirement that requestsbe filed in triplicate. All of the comments noted the addition of carriedinterests and net profit interests or similar arrangements and recommendedthat these interests be removed by the final rulemaking. The final rulemakinghas adopted the recommendations of the comments and removed all referenceto these types of interests.Section 3103.4-2 Suspension of operations and/or production.Several comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking.One of the comments commended the elimination of the requirement to filerequests in triplicate. One comment requested that the final rulemakingclarify paragraph (f) concerning the applicability of a suspension of obligationson a Federal lease subject to a unit or cooperative plan with no applicationof such a suspension to non-Federal leases within a unit. The final rulemakinghas adopted this suggestion because the regulations in 43 CFR Group 3100are applicable only to Federal interests. The non-Federal lands withina unit are governed by the terms of the lease or contract between the non-Federallessor and its lessee, as well as any requirements of the State where theunit is located. Most of the comments supported the addition of the<T3> force majeure</T3> provision, with one of the comments recommendingthat the final rulemaking expand the provision to include lack of marketfor new production to handle the recent market volatility, while anothercomment suggested that the language describing this provision is the preambleof the proposed rulemaking be added to this section.<T3> Force majeure</T3> generally includes such events as strikes, actsof God, and unforeseeable administrative delay, but not lack of a marketby itself. No changes have been made in the final rulemaking, in orderto avoid limiting the discretion of the authorized officer to address uniquesituations that may occur in lease operations. A comment on paragraph (d) of this section suggested that the languagebe clarified to ensure that the requirement for resumption of rental paymentson the first day of the month in which a suspension is lifted will notexpose a lessee to termination of the lease. The final rulemaking has notadopted a change in this section of the proposed rulemaking. At the timea suspension of operations and production is approved, the advance rentalwill have already been paid for the full lease year and will continue tobe credited for the remainder of a lease year when the suspension is lifted,normally allowing sufficient time for the rental to be paid in advanceof the next lease year. Two comments suggested that the final rulemaking clarify the differencebetween the three types of suspension that can be approved and suggestedthat there should be a cross-reference to andSection; 3165.1. In responseto these comments, the final rulemaking has adopted a change to clarifythe different types of suspension, as well as to include in paragraph (c)a cross-reference to andSection; 3165.1. In addition, the final rulemakinghas adopted a clarification as part of paragraph (d) which specifies thata suspension of operations only or suspension of production only does notsuspend requirements for payment of rentals and royalties, including minimumroyalties. Section 3104.1 Bond obligations. As part of the change in the definition of the term ``operator'' in andSection;3100.0-5 of the proposed rulemaking to remove all reference to designatedoperator, the final rulemaking also amends this section of the proposedrulemaking to remove all reference to designated operator, making thissection consistent with andSection; 3100.0-5. This change also is being madein the final rulemaking to andSection;andSection; 3206.1-1, 3206.3-1, 3206.5,and 3206.6 for consistency. Section 3104.6 Where filed and number of copies. One comment on this section of the proposed rulemaking suggested that thereference to andSection; 3104.3 should be changed to andSection; 3104.3(a)to clarify that only statewide bonds or riders, rather than nationwidebonds, are required to be filed in the State office having jurisdictionof the lease, because the next sentence also provides that nationwide bondscan be filed in any State office. The final rulemaking has adopted thissuggestion. The comments suggested the removal of the requirement in the proposed rulemakingthat a replacement bond or rider to a nationwide bond be filed in the sameState office where the original bond was filed. After reviewing the comments,the final rulemaking, in response to the comments, has removed this requirement.Section 3104.7 Default. This section of the proposed rulemaking received two comments. One recommendedthat paragraph (b) be amended by the final rulemaking to set a time limitfor the posting of a new bond or restoration of an existing bond, or theposting of a separate or substitute bond for each lease covered by thedeficient bond. In response to this comment, the final rulemaking has combinedparagraphs (b) and (c) of the proposed rulemaking and made it clear thatthe time limit for restoring a bond to its full value or for posting anew bond shall be within 6 months of notice from the authorized officer.The comments on this section of the proposed rulemaking raised a concernthat an operator who is in default could expose the record title holderof the lease to liability even though the lessee is not in default. Aftercareful review of this issue, the final rulemaking has adopted a changeto this section that gives the authorized officer the discretionary authorityto cancel a lease, rather than continuing the more restrictive languageof the proposed rulemaking. An operator on the ground is in the best positionto carry out the terms and conditions of a lease and should be responsiblefor handling the default. However, if all efforts to resolve the defaultfail, including attaching the bond, the authorized officer may then takethe appropriate steps to cancel the lease. In response to these comments,and for consistency, the final rulemaking has clarified the responsibilitiesof the lessee, operator, and operating rights owner (sublessee) throughoutParts 3160, 3180, 3260, and 3280. Section 3105.2-3 Requirements. Numerous comments discussed this section of the proposed rulemaking. Oneof those comments suggested that the communitization agreement applicationbe considered only after a well has been completed because the effectivedate of any agreement is the date of the first sale, and the operator wouldhave no incentive to file the agreement application until a well is completedon the lease because the public interest requirement must be met or approvalof the agreement becomes invalid. The final rulemaking has not adoptedthis suggestion because, under the provisions of the proposed rulemaking,the agreement approval would be valid if the public interest requirementis met, and the lease could receive a drilling extension even though noproduction was established. Two comments questioned allowing the filing and approval of a communitizationagreement after the lease expires. One suggested that if all the landsin the proposed communitized area are Federal lands and the leases haveexpired, no purpose would be served by approving an agreement since thereis no well and drilling could not occur until the lands are again underlease. One comment expressed the view that approval of an agreement afterthe lease expires has the effect of breathing life back into a lease solong as the lands have not been posted on a list of lands available forleasing. The comment further suggested that this form of a lease extensionis not authorized by the Mineral Leasing Act, and that in most instancesan action to communitize lands is required prior to the expiration dateof any involved lease. One comment requested that paragraphs (c) and (d)be reorganized. The final rulemaking removes paragraphs (b) and (c) ofthe proposed rulemaking relating to informal agreements and filing of agreementsfor consideration after the lease expiration date. The final rulemakingreorganizes the section into three paragraphs and requires filing of anagreement for approval prior to lease expiration, thus eliminating theuncertainty as to whether a lease has expired.The comments on the public interest requirement of this section recognizedthe abuses of operators who terminated unit or communitization agreementssolely to gain automatic extension of a lease when no attempt had beenmade to drill under the terms of the agreement. A few of the comments suggestedthat the public interest requirement be limited to those instances wherethere has been no drilling under the agreement or that the requirementbe satisfied by any reasonably prudent activity conducted in a good faitheffort to explore for oil or gas. Two comments expressed the view thatthe public interest requirement was never intended to apply to existingproduction of commencement/continuance of diligent operations to unitizedor communitized zones. Other comments questioned the use of the publicinterest requirement to limit lease extensions, with one of the commentscontending that the Bureau of Land Management does not have the authorityto alter the language of the law addressing drilling and elimination/termination.Two of the comments pointed out the proposed rulemaking removes the discretionof the authorized officer to terminate an agreement under appropriate circumstancesand recommended that this authority be restored by the final rulemaking.The standards for the public interest requirement are similar to thoseestablished for actual drilling operations, which require industry to operatein a responsible manner if it is to receive the benefits of the law. Theprovision of the proposed rulemaking is consistent with the law, whichrequires approval of the agreement to be in the public interest. The provisionwould render the approval invalid if the public interest requirement isnot satisfied. The model unit agreement provided for in section 3186 ofthe existing regulations contains a provision in section 9 that allowsthe flexibility to terminate a unit for good cause and requires establishingto the satisfaction of the authorized officer that further drilling wouldbe unwarranted or impracticable. The final rulemaking adopts the languageof the model agreement in redesignated andSection; 3105.2-3(c) as an exceptionto the requirement to drill the well pursuant to communitization agreements.Five comments on andSection; 3105.2-3(e) of the proposed rulemaking alsoaddressed the same provisions contained in andSection; 3183.4 of the proposedrulemaking. The comments all expressed concern regarding the effect thatinvalidation of approval of a unit agreement would have on lease segregationsand extensions of the segregated leases. One of the comments suggestedthat this provision of the proposed rulemaking be amended by the finalrulemaking so that it affects only the extension of leases occurring whena unit agreement terminates and the segregation process, together withextensions of the segregated leases, would be unaffected. Another commentsuggested that lease segregations and resulting extensions would have tobe ``undone'' if the unit approval is declared invalid. One of the commentsquestioned the effect of this section of the proposed rulemaking on thesegregated lease where drilling may have taken place and production establishedduring the two-year extension period following segregation. Finally, twoof the comments questioned whether, under the rulemaking, when multi-wellobligations are included in the agreement, all wells under a unit agreementmust be drilled to meet the public interest requirement. The Bureau of Land Management's administrative action in processing leasesegregations and extensions of segregated leases may be deferred untilthe authorized officer has determined that the public interest requirementhas been satisfied and that the unit agreement is valid. Until a determinationis made that a unit agreement is valid as approved, thereby allowing thesegregation and extension of leases beyond their primary term, developmentactivity (approval of an Application for Permit to Drill) on such landsoutside of the unit agreement area also may be deferred. Development activitieswould be allowed to continue on the portion of a lease outside the unitarea during the primary term of the lease and, if production is establishedprior to the end of its primary term and the unit approval is determinedto be invalid, such production holds the entire lease because no segregationhas taken place. In the case of multi-well obligations under a unit agreement,completion of one well to the unitized formation may, as determined bythe authorized officer at the time of approval, satisfy the public interestrequirement. The final rulemaking has adopted the language of andSection;3105.2-3(e) of the proposed rulemaking redesignated as andSection; 3105.2-3(c),with the addition of language providing for a determination by the authorizedofficer that further drilling would be unwarranted or impracticable. Thesecomments also were directed to andSection; 3183.4 of the proposed rulemakingand the final rulemaking has adopted the language of that section withoutchange.<ITAG tagnum="81">Subpart 3106_Transfers by Assignment, Sublease or Otherwise </ITAG>Subpart 3106 of the proposed rulemaking received several comments. Oneof the comments recommended that what it called ``artifical'' distinctionbetween the holder of the record title and holder of the operating rightsbe eliminated and that a transfer of operating rights be recognized asa transfer of the working interest or the execlusive right to explore forminerals in the lands acquired by the lessee with all of the lessee's rightsto and obligations for development of the minerals. This comment also recommendedthat the Bureau of Land Management reinstitute the policy of adjudicatingtransfers of operating rights and verify that an applicant for an Applicationfor Permit to Drill is either the holder of the operating rights or his/herdesignee. The comment expressed the view that this change would ensurethat the prospective permittee has a right to operate on the lease. Another comment suggested that the Department of the Interior's decisionto discontinue the close examination of subleases will result in increasedpotential for surface operations to be carried on by one who is not thelessee and it could foster increased litigation over responsibility forviolations of the conditions of permits issued to different parties. Thecomments contended that holding the record title holder liable is insufficientto prevent environmental degradation by a surface operator. The final rulemaking has not adopted these general suggestions for changesto Subpart 3106 of the proposed rulemaking. The Bureau of Land Managementcannot, and should not, undertake the role of attempting to validate privatelyarranged agreements between any lessee and its sublessee, or of protectinga lessee's rights under a private arrangement to which the Federal Governmentis not a party. The Bureau does not have the power or authority to warranttitle is such circumstances regardless of whatever administrative examinationsmay be conducted. The Bureau's policy for over two years has been not toadjudicate transfers of operating rights because it is time-consuming andunnecessary unless there is an independent concern about a transferee'squalifications. The Bureau's experience is that this process is workingwell. The comment regarding eliminating the distinction between the holderof a record title and the holder of operating rights in an oil and gaslease has not been adopted in the final rulemaking because the transferof operating rights is a sublease or a private subsidiary arrangement betweenthe lessee of record and the operator. As recognized in the statutory language,such an arrangement is in addition to, rather than in place of, the contractualagreement between the lessee of record and the United States. One comment received on andSection; 3106.1(a) of the proposed rulemakingconcerned the requirement that transfers filed more than 90 days followingsignature by the transferor must provide a statement that the transferis still in force.The comment suggested that, in many cases, this is a paper exercise thatserves neither the public nor the Bureau of Land Management, because smalldelays of a few days beyond this time period result in extensions of compliancetime to ascertain whether the transfer remains in force or causes disapprovalof the transfer followed by a new transfer. In response to this comment,the final rulemaking includes language to change this provision to allowthe authorized officer to verify that the transfer is still in force. Whenfactors such as the receipt of any intervening transfer cause the Bureauto question whether the transfer is still valid, at the discretion of theauthorized officer, an inquiry would be made to the parties involved priorto approval or disapproval of the transfer.  Section 3106.1(b) of the proposed rulemaking would be revised in the finalrulemaking to remove provisions applicable only to leases under Subpart3112, now made obsolete by enactment of the Federal Onshore Oil and GasLeasing Reform Act of 1987.  Several comments were received on andSection;3106.4-1 of the proposed rulemaking.One of the comments questioned why a $25 filing fee was required to besubmitted with each transfer of operating rights when the Bureau of LandManagement no longer adjudicates such transfers. The Bureau is authorizedby the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 to recover costsin connection with its administrative activities and to assess chargesfor benefits granted. The Bureau has determined that the $25 fee is neededto recover its costs for handling transfers to determine compliance withthe Mineral Leasing Act. The final rulemaking continues without changingthis provision of the proposed rulemaking.  A few comments on this section recommended that the final rulemaking bereworded for clarity. This recommendation has been adopted in the finalrulemaking.  Section 3106.4-1 of the proposed rulemaking generated several comments,two of which suggested that documentation of operating rights, in additionto the required transfer from, should be maintained in the case file forthe benefit of present or potential lessees or operators who may wish toknow more details of the lease interests that have been created in orderto make informed decisions on whether or not to acquire a lease interestor to drill on a particular lease. It is not necessary for the Bureau tomaintain copies of private agreements between a sublessor and sublesseeto approve a transfer of operating rights because most of the informationin such documents involves specific terms and agreements between thoseparties and does not affect the approval process by the Federal Government.Therefore, the final rulemaking has not adopted this suggested change. One comment on this section of the proposed rulemaking noted that the rulemakingeliminates the provision in the existing regulations which allows a transfereeto make a single request for approval of several transfers filed at thesame time. The final rulemaking has adopted the suggested change and restoredappropriate language concerning the provision in this section.  Several comments were received on andSection;3106.4-2 of the proposed rulemaking.Two of the comments suggested that it be made clear that in certain instancesa transfer need not be on an officially approved form. This section ofthe proposed rulemaking included 2 separate paragraphs to distinguish betweena transfer in conjunction with a transfer or record title or of operatingrights (sublease) and a transfer of interests that is made independentof a transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease). In thesecond of these sections are stated the requirements for filing such transfersif the current Bureau form is not used. The final rulemaking adopts thisprovision of the proposed rulemaking without change. For consistency withthe removal in the final rulemaking of andSection;3103.3-3, the final rulemakingremoves from this section the requirement that transfers of overridingroyalties and other similar interests contain a statement providing forsuspension. The third comment on this section focused on paragraph (b)and suggested eliminating the requirement for an originally executed copyof a transfer in the types of transfers described in this paragraph becausethe Bureau of Land Management does not approve these kinds of transfers.The final rulemaking has adopted this suggestion and removed the requirementin paragraph (b) for an originally executed copy for this type of transferwhen created or reserved in a lease independent of a transfer of recordtitle or of operating rights (sublease).  Section 3106.4-3 of the proposed rulemaking received several comments.Three of the comments expressed strong support for the procedure allowingmass transfers. One comment recommended removal from paragraph (b)(3) ofthe phrase ``and the depths or formations'', contending that such informationis not needed because the Bureau of Land Management is not adjudicatingor abstracting operating rights transfers (subleases). This recommendationhas been adopted in the final rulemaking.One comment was received on andSection; 3106.6-1 of the proposed rulemakingwhich suggested that the section be amended to provide for those instanceswhen a bond is no longer required. The final rulemaking has adopted thesuggested change and also has been revised to adopt the current bond terminologyreferring to lease bonds, rather than to lessee's general lease or drillingbond and operator's bond. A lease bond may be provided either by a lessee,operating rights owner (sublessee), or operator. For consistency, the finalrulemaking has made similar revisions for this terminology in Subparts3134 and 3206. The comments on andSection;andSection; 3106.6-2 and 3106.6-3 of the proposedrulemaking questioned restricting the bond coverage solely to the holderof operating rights and suggested that the sections be amended by the finalrulemaking to clarify that the bond may be furnished by any operator. Thissuggestion has been adopted by the final rulemaking along with a provisionthat the operator must furnish evidence of the surety's consent under anexisting bond to become co-principal. This final rulemaking also redesignatesandSection; 3106.6-3 of the proposed rulemaking as andSection; 3106.6-2, andandSection; 3106.6-2 of the proposed rulemaking has been made a part of andSection;3106.6-1, Lease Bond, in the final rulemaking. Several comments were directed to andSection; 3106.7-2 of the proposed rulemaking.The comments expressed concern about both the sublessee and the lesseeof record having responsibility for all lease obligations. The commentswere of the view that the lessee of record should not be fully responsiblewhen it is not the operator on the lease. The final rulemaking has adopteda change which makes the sublessee responsible for all obligations underthe rights transferred to the sublessee. This change is consistent withthe change made by the final rulemaking in andSection; 3104.7 as discussedearlier in this preamble. This change also is applicable to the bondingand lease transfer provisions in Subpart 3134 and 3135 and the final rulemakinghas made the appropriate changes in these subparts. For consistency, thefinal rulemaking also has made appropriate changes to andSection; 3241.5and has clarified the responsibilities of the lessee, sublessee, and operatorthroughout Parts 3160, 3180, 3260 and 3280. <T3>Sections 3106.8-1, 3106.8-2, and 3106.8-3 of the proposed rulemakinggenerated one comment which raised questions about the requirement forbond coverage under the situation described in these sections because theprovisions are not uniform. The final rulemaking makes it clear when achange in bonding coverage may be required.</T3>Section 3107.1 Extension by drilling. Several comments were made on this section of the proposed rulemaking.All but one of the comments objected to the provision that set forth whatconstitutes actual drilling operations. One comment suggested that theprovision was too narrow, and suggested that the final rulemaking providethat the use of a spudder rig, timely followed by the placement of a rotaryrig, which continuously drills to a valid objective would constitute actualdrilling operations. Two other comments expressed the view that no purposeis served by the new language in the proposed rulemaking on actual drillingoperations, because the current provisions represent a well-establishedterminology, having been interpreted numerous times by the Department ofthe Interior Board of Land Appeals, and urged that it be removed in thefinal rulemaking. Another comment on this point suggested that there isno precedent for the language in the proposed rulemaking requiring penetrationof certain horizons and suggested that the model unit agreement allowsan operator to cease drilling ``at a lesser depth'' than that providedin the agreement if unitized substances can be produced in paying quantities.This comment also made the point that there is no requirement that a lesseedrill a well on a lease to any particular depth or formation. Another commentobjected to any attempt by the proposed rulemaking to impose additionalconditions for obtaining an extension of a lease. The comment also statedthat the application of unit well standards as a condition for the extensionof a lease would result in imposing a burden on an operator who makes agood faith effort to drill, but is unable to drill a well which meets theunit drilling requirements. The proposed rulemaking did not add any new requirements but incorporatedstandards established by the Interior Board of Land Appeals as necessaryfor the Bureau to determine whether a lease is extended. The model unitagreement provides for establishing, to the authorized officer's satisfaction,that further drilling would be unwarranted or impracticable. The same languagehas been adopted by the final rulemaking for this section as for communitizationagreements as discussed under andSection;3105.2-3(e) earlier in this preamble.Section 3107.3-2 Segregation of leases committed in part. The final rulemaking makes technical changes in andSection; 3107.3-2 to clarifythe period of lease extension for leases segregated in conjunction witha cooperative or unit plan and to specify that no lease operations on thesegregated lease will be approved after the primary term of the lease andthat no lease extension will be recognized until the public interest requirementfor the unit agreement has been satisfied. These changes are added by thefinal rulemaking to be consistent with the language contained in andSection;3107.4. Section 9, 18, and 20 of the model unit agreement also have beenrevised to be consistent with the amendments of andSection;andSection; 3107.3-2and 3107.4. These provisions are the correct and consistent interpretationof the Mineral Leasing Act. Section 3107.4 Extension by elimination. Several of the comments on the public interest requirement contained inthe proposed rulemaking also included a discussion of this section. Thepublic interest requirements are discussed in full under andSection; 3105.2-3(e)earlier in this preamble.Section 3108.1 Relinquishments. The only comment on this section expressed the view that the provisionallowing relinquishment by the record title holder's attorney-in-fact confusestwo issues, i.e., who actually relinquishes a lease, and who may executethe relinquishment. The comment stated that the proposed rulemaking couldgenerate unforeseen consequences because the power of attorney may notpermit the attorney-in-fact to execute a relinquishment. After carefulreview of the comment, the final rulemaking has adopted the provision ofthe proposed rulemaking but has revised the language to refer to a dulyauthorized agent, the acceptable terminology under general agency law.It is incumbent upon the parties to an attorney-in-fact or agency agreementto ensure its adequacy in actions taken on behalf of the principal.Sections 3108.2-1 and 3108.2-2 Automatic termination and Reinstatementat existing rental and royalty rates_Class I reinstatements.These sections of the proposed rulemaking dealt with allowing a rentalpayment to be considered filed in a timely manner when it is due on a daythe Minerals Management Service office is closed, but which is postmarkedon the next day the designated Minerals Management Service office is open.This issue, and the comments received, were extensively discussed underandSection; 3103.2-2 earlier in this preamble. This discussion is not repeatedhere. The final rulemaking has adopted changes to these sections to makethem consistent with andSection; 3103.2-2 of the final rulemaking. The finalrulemaking also adopts this change in andSection;andSection; 3205.3-2, 3244.2-1,and 3244.2-2 for consistency.One of the comments received on andSection; 3108.2-2(a)(3) of the proposedrulemaking questioned the provision concerning payment of accrued royaltyif a terminated lease becomes productive prior to its reinstatement. Thecomment requested that this provision be clarified as to when such paymentis due. Three comments recommended that the final rulemaking amend thissection to remove the requirement for providing proof to the Bureau ofLand Management of payment of royalty to the Minerals Management Service(MMS) as a condition of a Class I reinstatement. The final rulemaking hasadopted a change removing all words after the word ``Service'' in the proposedrulemaking. Payment of accrued royalty is required prior to reinstatement,but would not be required to be paid within the 60-day period requiredfor submission of the petition for reinstatement. The Bureau would verifythat such payment had been made to the MMS office.<ITAG tagnum="84">Part 3130_Authority Citation</ITAG>One comment recommended that the final rulemaking add the Naval PetroleumReserves Production Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6504 <T3>et seq.</T3>) to the authority citation section. The final rulemakinghas not adopted this recommendation because that Act does not provide specificauthority for leasing in the National Petroleum Reserve_Alaska, which isthe subject of this part.Section 3135.1-1 Transfers and extensions, general.One comment on paragraph (d) of this section of the proposed rulemakingrecommended that the word ``assignment'' be changed to the word ``transfer''.The final rulemaking has adopted this recommended change.Section 3150.0-1 Purpose.A number of the comments on the geophysical exploration provisions containedin Part 3150 of the proposed rulemaking indicated some confusion regardingto whom, and in what situation, the provisions of this portion of the rulemakingwould apply. The confusion seemed to result from the abbreviated languagecontained in andSection; 3150.0-1 of the proposed rulemaking. To resolvethis uncertainty, the final rulemaking revises the language of this sectionto clearly state which parties must comply, and under what circumstancesthe regulations apply with respect to authorization from the Bureau ofLand Management to conduct geophysical exploration operations. The finalrulemaking also clarifies a similar provision in andSection; 3209.0-1 concerninggeophysical exploration for geothermal resources for consistency.Section 3150.0-3 Authority.One comment noted that 2 citations had been omitted from the authoritysection of the proposed rulemaking and recommended that the final rulemakinginclude them. The final rulemaking has adopted the recommendation for inclusionof the citation of the Independent Offices Appropriations Act of 1952 (31U.S.C. 483a), but has not included the citation of the Act of May 21, 1930(30 U.S.C. 301-306), because it has no application to geophysical exploration.The final rulemaking also adds the citation for the Naval Petroleum ReserveProduction Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6504) to address exploration activitiesfor the National Petroleum Reserve_Alaska. These new citations also areadded to the authority citation provision of the final rulemaking.Section 3150.0-5 Definitions.One comment on andSection; 3150.0-5(a) of the proposed rulemaking recommendedthat the final rulemaking remove the last sentence of the definition becauseit repeats language contained in andSection; 3150.0-1. The final rulemakinghas adopted this suggestion.Several comments on the definition of the term ``public lands,'' appearingin this section of the proposed rulemaking, indicated some confusion withthe definition of the term and the applicability of the rulemaking to varioustypes of lands. After careful review, the final rulemaking has removedthe term from andSection;andSection; 3150.0-5 and 3209.0-5 because it is adequatelydefined in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act.Section 3150.1 Suspension, revocation, or cancellation.One comment on this section questioned why the language in the existingregulations was being changed, and suggested that language dealing withcompliance with State standards was needed. After careful review, the finalrulemaking has restored the language of the existing regulations becausethis section is sufficient, with a change in the beginning to clarify thatthe right to conduct exploration may be suspended, revoked, or canceled.Section 3151.1 Notice of intent to conduct oil and gas geophysical explorationoperations.Eight comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking.Most of them were supportive of the change made by the proposed rulemaking.However, some of the comments expressed concern that the 5 days allowedfor processing a Notice of Intent may not be adequate in all cases. Thefinal rulemaking has revised this section of the proposed rulemaking toreflect the changes made in andSection; 3150.0-1 of the final rulemakingto allow for situations in which additional time is needed to completethe review of the Notice of Intent. The change requires that in those instanceswhen the Notice of Intent cannot be processed in 5 working days of beingfiled, the authorized officer shall promptly notify the operator of whenprocessing will be completed and state the reason for the delay.Section 3152.1 Application for oil and gas geophysical exploration permit.Although no comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking,the final rulemaking has adopted a change to make its provisions consistentwith changes made by the final rulemaking in andSection; 3150.0-1.Section 3154.1 Types of bonds.The only comment on this section questioned the effect of lease terms ona lessee who wishes to conduct geophysical exploration operations on his/herlease. This comment resulted in the word ``lease'' being removed from boththis section of the final rulemaking and andSection;3154.3 to provide consistency.The word ``lease'' is not needed because a bond providing exclusive coveragefor geophysical exploration operations must fulfill only the requirementscontained in the regulations and the Notice of Intent or permit to conductgeophysical exploration operations. If stipulations or other requirementsspecified at the time of lease issuance are relevant to geophysical explorationoperations, such stipulations or requirements also would be included inthe Notice of Intent or permit. Further review of this section of the proposedrulemaking revealed that there were two technical flaws. The proposed rulemakingwould have required that lessees obtain riders to their lease bonds inorder to do geophysical exploration on their own leases. Such a requirementis not necessary because lease bonds already cover all operations by alessee on his/her leasehold. The final rulemaking has adopted languageto resolve this technical problem. The proposed rulemaking also inadvertentlyremoved the provision in the existing regulations that allows the holderof a statewide or nationwide bond to obtain a rider that would allow geophysicalexploration to be conducted on lands that the holder did not have underlease. The final rulemaking has retained this provision of the existingregulations.Section 3154.3 Bond cancellation or termination of liability.Several comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking.All comments were concerned that the 30-day period for inspection of landssubject to geophysical exploration under a Notice of Intent was not adequate.In response to these comments, the final rulemaking retains the 90-dayperiod of the existing regulations.Section 3160.0-5 Definitions.Several comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking.The final rulemaking, in response to concerns raised in these commentsamends the definition of the term ``operator'' to clarify that there isno distinction between an operator, designated operator, and an officialDesignation of Operator. The amendment also makes the definition identicalto that contained in andSection;3100.0-5(a) of the final rulemaking. As discussedearlier in the preamble in conjunction with that section, the definitionhas been revised to mean any person or entity that notifies the Bureauof Land Management that he/she is accepting the responsibilities for conductingoperations on a lease or a portion thereof. Under the new definition, anyindividual or entity that accepts the responsibility for conducting operationson a lease, whether it be the lessee, owner of operating rights (sublessee),or a contractor on behalf of an operator, is responsible for the defaultthat may occur in the conduct of activities in exploration, development,and production under the terms and conditions of the lease. Further, therevisions made by the final rulemaking to the various terms in andSection;3160.0-5provide that the individual holding the operating rights to a lease isresponsible for all obligations relating to the responsibilities transferredby the lessee of record, including drainage. Accordingly, the final rulemakingalso revises the term ``lessee'' to mean a person or entity holding recordtitle to a lease and adds a definition of ``operating rights owner'' whichconforms to the revised definition of the term ``operator.'' To bring theprovisions of Part 3160 into conformance with these definition changes,the final rulemaking has substituted the word ``operator'' or the term``operating rights owner'' for the word ``lessee'' in numerous sectionsof the final rulemaking. Finally, this final rulemaking adds definitionsof several terms from the final rulemaking to implement the Federal Oiland Gas Royalty Management Act which was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on February 20, 1987 (52 FR 5384).Section 3162.3-1 Drilling applications and plans.Three comments received on this section of the proposed rulemaking werea followup to comments made on Subpart 3106 of the proposed rulemakingthat objected to the policy of the Bureau of Land Management not to adjudicatetransfers of operating rights (subleases). One of the comments suggestedthat this change was designed to insulate the Bureau from disputes on publiclands when an application for development is approved by the authorizedofficer. The response to these comments has previously been discussed inthis preamble under subpart 3106. The final rulemaking has not adoptedthis suggested change.Section 3165.1 Relief from operating and producing requirements.Two comments submitted on the provisions of the proposed rulemaking concerningandSection;3103.4-2 also recommended that the final rulemaking make revisionsin this section of the existing regulations in order to address the provisionfor a suspension of operations and/or production consistently. The finalrulemaking adopts this recommendation and amends andSection;3165.1 of theexisting regulations to be consistent with andSection;3103.4-2 of the finalrulemaking.Section 3165.4 Appeals.The final rulemaking clarifies the language in andSection;3165.4(c) concerningthe effect of an appeal on compliance requirements. This change is madeto ensure that the provision in this regulation, which made the decisionof the authorized officer effective pending an appeal, has the same effectand meaning as it did prior to its amendment on February 20, 1987 (52 FR5384). The Department of the Interior Board of Land Appeals has suggestedthat the meaning and effect of this regulation may have been changed bythe 1987 amendment (see <T3>Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance,</T3> 100 IBLA 63 (1987)). No changewas ever intended by the amendment and this final rulemaking makes a technicalcorrection to clarify this matter.Section 3186.1 Model onshore unit agreement for unproven areas.Changes have been made in sections 9, 13-15, 18, and 20 of the model unitagreement to conform these provisions to the final rulemaking, which defines``operator'' and establishes the public interest requirement for unit approval.<ITAG tagnum="81">Subpart 3200_Geothermal Resources Leasing; General</ITAG>One general comment on this subpart of the proposed rulemaking recommendedthat the final rulemaking include language to reflect the statutory mandatein section 115 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies AppropriationsAct of 1987 (Pub. L. 99-591) for protecting selected thermal features inspecific National Park System units. After careful consideration of thiscomment, the final rulemaking has not adopted the suggestion because theprovisions of this Act are very specific. These protective requirementsare directly applied to areas affected by the law and are being implementedthrough interagency agreements and memoranda of agreement.Section 3200.0-5 Definitions.Changes made in this section by the final rulemaking have been discussedpreviously in this preamble under andSection;andSection;3100.0-5 and 3160.0-5.Section 3200.1 Competitive and noncompetitive leasing areas.Two comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking whichquestioned the use of the phrase ``competitive interest'' in connectionwith the classification of known geothermal resource areas. The commentson this issue appeared to misunderstand how ``competitive interest'' isused in determining whether lands should be classified as known geothermalresource areas. The existence of competitive interest in an area does notautomatically compel classification or require that the lands remain classifiedas a known geothermal resource area. The overriding interest of the Bureauof Land Management is to ensure that lands which have not been subjectto geothermal leasing, where there is little or no classification informationavailable, are reviewed for known geothermal resource area classificationbecause of competitive interest. The final rulemaking has adopted thisprovision of the proposed rulemaking without change.Section 3210.2-1 Application.Two comments were received on this section of the proposed rulemaking.One of the comments made the point that the change in the proposed rulemakingto require a different number of copies of an application to lease publicdomain lands versus the number of copies required for acquired lands wasincorrect. This comment has been adopted and the final rulemaking has correctedthis section.The second comment recommended the addition of language similar to thatfound in andSection;3111.2-1(d)(2) of the existing regulations with respectto conforming the legal description of an existing lease to a subsequentresurvey or amended protraction survey. For consistency with the existingoil and gas regulations, the final rulemaking has adopted this suggestedchange.Section 3220.3 Publication of the notice.One comment was received on this section of the proposed rulemaking. Thecomment recommended the deletion of the language requiring the successfulbidder to pay a proportionate share of the total cost of the publicationof the notice. The final rulemaking has not adopted this recommended change.The policy of the Bureau of Land Management is to defray the costs associatedwith the programs under its jurisdiction, in accordance with the provisionsin the Federal Land Policy and Management Act.Section 3220.4 Bidding requirements.Several comments on this section of the proposed rulemaking expressed concernabout the deletion from paragraph (a) of the provision allowing the optionto pay the balance of the bonus bid, either by a single bid or in two equalannual installments. Three of the comments indicated a preference thatthe provision of the existing regulations be retained. Two comments recommendedthat the final rulemaking change the section to allow installment paymentsbased on a high bid threshold. The change made by the proposed rulemakingwas designed to reduce lease administration and processing costs, and alsoto minimize the loss of revenues and interest moneys to the United Statesby requiring all bonus moneys to be paid prior to lease issuance. The finalrulemaking adopts the language of paragraph (a) of the proposed rulemakingwithout change.Section 3220.5 Award of lease.Two comments on paragraph (c) of this section of the proposed rulemakingraised concerns about removal of the 30-day period during which the authorizedofficer is to accept or reject the highest bid. After careful review ofthis recommendation, the final rulemaking has adopted language to indicatethat if the authorized officer is unable to make a decision within 30 days,the apparent high bidder will be notified and informed of the reason forthe delay, and provided an anticipated date when the decision will be made.Several comments were offered on paragraph (d) of this section of the proposedrulemaking. All objected to the reduction of the period for the successfulbidder to execute the lease forms from 30 to 15 days. This change, however,is in response to a report by the General Accounting Office that the UnitedStates would benefit from having use of the lease rentals and bonus 15days earlier. The final rulemaking has adopted the language of paragraph(d) of the proposed rulemaking without change.Editorial and technical changes, and grammatical corrections, have beenmade as needed.The principal authors of this final rulemaking are Gloria Jean Austin,Rob Cervantes, Karl Duscher, Cynthia Embretson, Lois Mason, Judy Reed,and Mona Schermerhorn of the Division of Fluid Mineral Leasing and SieLing Chiang of the Division of Fluid Mineral Operations, all of the Bureauof Land Management, assisted by the staff of the Division of Legislationand Regulatory Management, Bureau of Land Management.The Department of the Interior has determined that this document is nota major rule under Executive Order 12291 and that it will not have a significanteconomic effect on a substantial number of small entities under the RegulatoryFlexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq.</T3>).The final rulemaking will not have an adverse effect on investment, competition,employment, productivity or the ability of U.S. firms to compete with foreignenterprises. These amendments will affect all businesses, large and small,equally. In addition, the changes will simplify and clarify the existingregulations, reducing the regulatory burden on the public.The information collection requirements contained in this final rulemakinghave been cleared by the Office of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C.3507 and assigned clearance numbers 1004-0034, 1004-0067, 1004-0074, 1004-0132,1004-0134, 1004-0135, 1004-0136, 1004-0137, 1004-0138, and 1004-0145.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>43 CFR Part 3000Public lands_classification, Public lands_mineral resources.43 CFR Part 3040Oil and gas exploration, Public Lands_mineral resources.43 CFR Part 3100Administrative practice and procedure, Environmental protection, Mineralroyalties, Oil and gas reserves, Public lands_classification, Public lands_mineralresources, Surety bonds.43 CFR Part 3130Alaska, Government contracts, Mineral royalties, Oil and gas exploration,Oil and gas reserves, Public lands_mineral resources, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Surety bonds.43 CFR Part 3150Oil and gas exploration, Public lands_mineral resources.43 CFR Part 3160Environmental protection, Government contracts, Mineral royalties, Oiland gas exploration, Public lands_mineral resources, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements.43 CFR Part 3180Government contracts, Oil and gas reserves, Public lands_mineral resources.43 CFR Part 3200Environmental protection, Geothermal energy, Mineral royalties, Publiclands_classification, Public lands_mineral resources, Surety bonds.43 CFR Part 3210Geothermal energy, Public lands_mineral resources.43 CFR Part 3220Geothermal energy, Public lands_mineral resources.43 CFR Part 3240Geothermal energy, Mineral royalties, Public lands_mineral resources, Waterresources.43 CFR Part 3250Electric power, Geothermal energy, Public lands_mineral resources.43 CFR Part 3260Environmental protection, Geothermal energy, Government contracts, Publiclands_mineral resources, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.Under the authorities cited below, Parts 3000 and 3040, Group 3000, Parts3100, 3130, 3150, 3160, and 3180, Group 3100, and Parts 3200, 3210, 3220,3240, 3250, and 3260, Group 3200, Subchapter C, Chapter II of Title 43of the Code of Federal Regulations, are amended as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="6">James E. Cason,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary of the Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="34">April 20, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3000_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 3000 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, as amended and supplemented(30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.), the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands of1947, as amended (30 U.S.C. 351-359), the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act (16 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.), the Federal Land Policy andManagement Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the Federal Property andAdministrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 471 et seq.), the Act ofMay 21, 1930 (30 U.S.C. 301-306), the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Actof 1981 (Pub. L. 97-35), the Independent Offices Appropriations Act of1952 (31 U.S.C. 483a), the Department of the Interior Appropriations Act,Fiscal Year 1981 (42 U.S.C. 6508), and the Attorney General's Opinion ofApril 2, 1941 (40 Op. Atty. Gen. 41).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3000.0-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>2. Section 3000.0-5 is amended by:A. Revising paragraph (g) to read:(g) ``Public domain lands'' means lands, including mineral estates, whichnever left the ownership of the United States, lands which were obtainedby the United States in exchange for public domain lands, lands which havereverted to the ownership of the United States through the operation ofthe public land laws and other lands specifically identified by the Congressas part of the public domain.B. Revising paragraph (k) to read:(k) ``Party in interest'' means a party who is or will be vested with anyinterest under the lease as defined in paragraph (l) of this section. Noone is a sole party in interest with respect to an application, offer,competitive bid or lease in which any other party has an interest;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">andC. Revising paragraph (l) to read:(l) ``Interest'' means ownership in a lease or prospective lease of allor a portion of the record title, working interest, operating rights, overridingroyalty, payments out of production, carried interests, net profit shareor similar instrument for participation in the benefit derived from a lease.An ``interest'' may be created by direct or indirect ownership, includingoptions. ``Interest'' does not mean stock ownership, stockholding or stockcontrol in an application, offer, competitive bid or lease, except forpurposes of acreage limitations in andSection; 3101.2 of this title and qualificationsof lessees in Subpart 3102 of this title.3. A new andSection; 3000.8 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3000.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Management of Federal minerals from reserved mineral estates.</ITAG>Where nonmineral public land disposal statutes provide that in conveyancesof title all or certain minerals shall be reserved to the United Statestogether with the right to prospect for, mine and remove the minerals underapplicable law and regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the leaseor sale, and administration and management of the use of such mineralsshall be accomplished under the regulations of groups 3000 and 3100 ofthis title. Such mineral estates include, but are not limited to, thosethat have been or will be reserved under the authorities of the Small TractAct of June 1, 1938, as amended (43 U.S.C. 682(b)) and the Federal LandPolicy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3040_[REMOVED]</ITAG>4. Part 3040 is removed in its entirety.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3100_[AMENDED]</ITAG>5. The authority citation for Part 3100 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, as amended and supplemented(30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.), the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands of1947, as amended (30 U.S.C. 351-359), the Federal Land Policy and ManagementAct of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act (16 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.), the Act of May 21, 1930 (30U.S.C. 301-306), the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of1949 (40 U.S.C. 471 et seq.), the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of1981 (Pub. L. 97-35), the National Wildlife Refuge Administration Act of1966 (16 U.S.C. 668dd-ee), the Attorney General's Opinion of April 2, 1941(40 Op. Atty. Gen. 41) and the Independent Offices Appropriations Act of1952 (31 U.S.C. 483a).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3100.0-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>6. Section 3100.0-3 is amended by:A. Revising paragraph (a)(2)(i) to read:(i) Units of the National Park System, including lands withdrawn by section206 of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, except as providedin paragraph (g)(4) of this section;B. Revising paragraph (b)(2)(i) to read:(i) Units of the National Park System, except as provided in paragraph(g)(4) of this section;andC. Amending paragraph (e) by inserting after the phrase ``excess to'' thephrase ``or surplus by''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3100.0-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>7. Section 3100.0-5 is amended by:A. Revising paragraph (a) to read:(a) ``Operator'' means any person or entity, including, but not limitedto, the lessee or operating rights owner, who has stated in writing tothe authorized officer that it is responsible under the terms and conditionsof the lease for the operations conducted on the leased lands or a portionthereof.B. Amending paragraph (d) by removing the last sentence thereof in itsentirety;C. Revising paragraph (e) to read:(e) ``Transfer'' means any conveyance of an interest in a lease by assignment,sublease or otherwise. This definition includes the terms: ``Assignment''which means a transfer of all or a portion of the lessee's record titleinterest in a lease; and ``sublease'' which means a transfer of a non-recordtitle interest in a lease, i.e., a transfer of operating rights is normallya sublease and a sublease also is a subsidiary arrangement between thelessee (sublessor) and the sublessee, but a sublease does not include atransfer of a purely financial interest, such as overriding royalty interestor payment out of production, nor does it affect the relationship imposedby a lease between the lessee(s) and the United States.D. Removing paragraph (f) in its entirety;E. Redesignating paragraph (g) as paragraph (f);F. Removing paragraph (h) in its entirety;G. Redesignating paragraphs (i) and (j) as paragraphs (g) and (h), respectively;H. Amending newly designated paragraph (h), formerly paragraph (j), byremoving from paragraph (h)(1) the phrase ``drilling or'' and by removingfrom paragraph (h)(2) the last sentence thereof; andI. Redesignating paragraphs (k) and (l) as paragraphs (i) and (j), respectively,and revising them to read as follows:(i) ``Lessee'' means a person or entity holding record title in a leaseissued by the United States.(j) ``Operating rights owner'' means a person or entity holding operatingrights in a lease issued by the United States. A lessee also may be anoperating rights owner if the operating rights in a lease or portion thereofhave not been severed from record title.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3100.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>8. Section 3100.2-2 is amended by removing from the last sentence thereofthe citation ``30 CFR 221.21'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection;3162.2(a) of this title.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3100.4-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>9. Section 3100.4-1(b) is amended by removing from where it appears inthe opening paragraph the phrase ``notice or option'' and replacing itwith the phrase ``notice of option'', by removing from paragraph (b)(3)the phrase ``to the option; and'' and replacing it with the phrase ``tothe option, including the date and expiration date of the option; and'',and by removing from paragraph (b)(4) the phrase ``signed copy of notice''and replacing it with the phrase ``signed copy or notice''.10. Section 3100.4-3 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3100.4-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Option statements.</ITAG>Each option holder shall file in the proper BLM office within 90 days afterJune 30 and December 31 of each year a statement showing as of the priorJune 30 and December 31, respectively:(a) Any changes to the statements submitted under andSection; 3100.4-1(b)of this title, and(b) The number of acres covered by each option and the total acreage ofall options held in each State.11. Sections 3101.1-1 and 3101.1-2 are revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.1-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Lease form.</ITAG>A lease shall be issued only on the standard form approved by the Director.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Surface use rights.</ITAG>A lessee shall have the right to use so much of the leased lands as isnecessary to explore for, drill for, mine, extract, remove and disposeof all the leased resource in a leasehold subject to: Stipulations attachedto the lease; restrictions deriving from specific, nondiscretionary statutes;and such reasonable measures as may be required by the authorized officerto minimize adverse impacts to other resource values, land uses or usersnot addressed in the lease stipulations at the time operations are proposed.To the extent consistent with lease rights granted, such reasonable measuresmay include, but are not limited to, modification to siting or design offacilities, timing of operations, and specification of interim and finalreclamation measures. At a minimum, measures shall be deemed consistentwith lease rights granted provided that they do not: require relocationof proposed operations by more than 200 meters; require that operationsbe sited off the leasehold; or prohibit new surface disturbing operationsfor a period in excess of 60 days in any lease year.12. A new andSection; 3101.1-3 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.1-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Stipulations and information notices.</ITAG>The authorized officer may require stipulations as conditions of leaseissuance. Stipulations shall become part of the lease and shall supersedeinconsistent provisions of the standard lease form. A lessee shall be requiredto indicate acceptance of stipulations prior to the issuance of a lease.Any party submitting a bid under Subpart 3120 of this title shall be deemedto have agreed to stipulations applicable to the specific parcel as indicatedin a list or notice of parcels available from the proper BLM office. Aninformation notice has no legal consequences, except to give notice ofexisting requirements, and may be attached to a lease by the authorizedofficer at the time of lease issuance to convey certain operational, proceduralor administrative requirements relative to lease management within theterms and conditions of the standard lease form. Information notices shallnot be a basis for denial of lease operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.2-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>13. Section 3101.2-1(b) is amended by removing from the second sentencethereof all after the word ``Alaska'' and replacing it with the phrase``begins at the northeast corner of the Tetlin National Wildlife Refugeas established on December 2, 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3101), at a point on theboundary between the United States and Canada, then northwesterly alongthe northern boundary of the refuge to the left limit of the Tanana River(63anddegrees;9andmin16;38andmin16;andmin16; north latitude, 142anddegrees;20andmin16;52andmin16;andmin16;west longitude), then westerly along the left limit to the confluence ofthe Tanana and Yukon Rivers, and then along the left limit of the YukonRiver from said confluence to its principal southern mouth.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.2-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>14. Section 3101.2-3 is amended by adding at the end thereof a new sentenceto read:* * * Acreage subject to offers to lease, overriding royalties and paymentsout of production shall not be included in computing accountable acreage.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.2-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>15. Section 3101.2-4(b) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``bring the lessee within'' and replacing it with the phrase ``complywith''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.2-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>16. Section 3101.2-5 is amended by removing from where it appears the phrase``and co-leassees'' and replacing it with the phrase ``and co-parties'',and by removing from the last sentence thereof the word ``lessee'' andreplacing it with the word ``party''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.3-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>17. Section 3101.3-1 is amended by removing from where it appears in thesecond sentence the word ``lessee'' and replacing it with the word ``operator''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3101.3-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>18. Section 3101.3-2 is amended by removing from where it appears the word``noncompetitive'' and by removing from where it appears the word ``without''and replacing it with the word ``outside''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>19. Section 3102.1 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the section the word ``Leases'' and replacing it with thephrase ``Leases or interests therein''.20. Section 3102.2 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Aliens.</ITAG>Leases or interests therein may be acquired and held by aliens only throughstock ownership, holding or control in a present or potential lessee thatis incorporated under the laws of the United States or of any State orterritory thereof, and only if the laws, customs or regulations of theircountry do not deny similar or like privileges to citizens or corporationsof the United States. If it is determined that a country has denied similaror like privileges to citizens or corporations of the United States, itwould be placed on a list available from any Bureau of Land ManagementState office.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>21. Section 3102.3 is amended by adding a new sentence at the end thereofto read: ``Such legal guardians or trustees shall be citizens of the UnitedStates or otherwise meet the provisions of andSection; 3102.1 of this title.''22. Section 3102.4 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Signature.</ITAG>(a) The original of an offer or bid shall be signed in ink and dated bythe present or potential lessee or by anyone authorized to sign on behalfof the present or potential lessee.(b) Three copies of a transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease),as required by section 30a of the act, shall be originally signed and datedby the transferor or anyone authorized to sign on behalf of the transferor.However, a transferee, or anyone authorized to sign on his or her behalf,shall be required to sign and date only 1 original request for approvalof a transfer.(c) Documents signed by any party other than the present or potential lesseeshall be rendered in a manner to reveal the name of the present or potentiallessee, the name of the signatory and their relationship. A signatory whois a member of the organization that constitutes the present or potentiallessee (e.g., officer of a corporation, partner of a partnership, etc.)may be requested by the authorized officer to clarify his/her relationship,when the relationship is not shown on the documents filed.(d) Submission of a qualification number does not meet the requirementsof paragraph (c) of this section.23. Section 3102.5 is revised and andSection;andSection; 3102.5-1, 3102.5-2and 3102.5-3 are added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.5 Compliance, certification of compliance and evidence.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.5-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Compliance.</ITAG>In order to own, hold, or control an actual or potential interest in alease or prospective lease, all parties, including corporations, and allmembers of associations, including partnerships of all types, shall, withoutexception, be qualified and in compliance with the act. Compliance meansthat the lessee, potential lessee and all such parties (as defined in andSection;3000.0-5(k)) are:(a) Citizens of the United States (See andSection; 3102.1) or alien stockholdersin a corporation organized under State or Federal law (See andSection; 3102.2);(b) In compliance with the Federal acreage limitations (See andSection; 3101.2);(c) Not minors (See andSection; 3102.3);(d) Not participants in any agreement, scheme, plan or arrangement prohibitedin relation to oil and gas leasing; and(e) Except for an assignment or transfer under Part 3106 of this title,in compliance with section 2(a)(2)(A) of the act, in which case the signatureon an offer or lease constitutes evidence of compliance. A lease issuedto any entity in violation of this paragraph (e) shall be subject to thecancellation provisions of andSection; 3108.3 of this title. The term `entity'is defined at andSection; 3400.0-5(rr) of this title.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.5-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Certification of compliance.</ITAG>Any party(s) seeking to obtain an interest in a lease shall certify itis in compliance with the act as set forth in andSection; 3102.5-1 of thistitle. A party(s) that is a corporation or publicly traded association,including a publicly traded partnership, shall certify that constituentmembers of the corporation, association or partnership holding or controllingmore than 10 percent of the instruments of ownership fo the corporation,association or partnership are in compliance with the act. Execution andsubmission of an offer, competitive bid form, or request for approval ofa transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease), constitutescertification of compliance.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3102.5-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Evidence of compliance.</ITAG>The authorized officer may request at any time further evidence of complianceand qualification from any party holding or seeking to hold an interestin a lease. Failure to comply with the request of the authorized officershall result in adjudication of the action based on the incomplete submission.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3103.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>24. Section 3103.1-2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a)(1) by removing from where it appears the phrase``applications for approval of an instrument of'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``requests for approval of a''; andB. Revising paragraph (a)(2) to read:(a) * * *(2) All second-year and subsequent rentals, except for leases specifiedin paragraph (b) of this section, shall be paid to the Service at the followingaddress: Minerals Management Service, Royalty Management Program/BRASS,Box 5640 T.A., Denver, Colorado 80217.25. Section 3103.2-2 introductory text is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3103.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Annual rental payments.</ITAG>Rentals shall be paid on or before the anniversary date. A full year'srental shall be submitted even when less than a full year remains in thelease term, except as provided in andSection; 3103.4-2(d) of this title.Failure to make timely payment shall cause a lease to terminate automaticallyby operation of law. If the designated Service office is not open on theanniversary date, payment received on the next day the designated Serviceoffice is open to the public shall be deemed to be timely made. Paymentsmade to an improper BLM or Service office shall be returned and shall notbe forwarded to the designated Service office. Rental shall be payableat the following rates:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3103.3-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>26. Section 3103.3-1 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears the citation``30 CFR Part 221, `Oil and Gas Operating Regulations.' '' and replacingit with the citation ``andSection; 3162.7-4 of this title.''B. Removing paragraphs (c) and (d) in their entirety;C. Redesignating paragraph (e) as paragraph (c); andD. Adding a new paragraph (d) to read:(d) Leases that qualify under specific provisions of the Act of August8, 1946 (30 U.S.C. 226c) may apply for a limitation of a 12\1/2\ percentroyalty rate.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3103.3-3 [Removed]</ITAG>27. Section 3103.3-3 is removed in its entirety.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3103.4-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>28. Section 3103.4-1 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (b)(1) by removing from where it appears the phrase``in triplicate'' and by removing from where it appears in the second sentencethereof the phrase ``the proper BLM office name, the name of the recordtitle holder and operator or sub-lessee,'' and replacing it with the phrase``the names of the record title holders, operating rights owners (sublessees),and operators for each lease,''; andB. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears in the secondsentence the phrase ``royalties or payments out of production'' and replacingit with the phrase ``overriding royalties, payments out of production,or similar interests'' and by removing from where it appears the firsttime in the third sentence the word ``royalties'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``royalties or similar payments''.29. Section 3103.4-2 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3103.4-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Suspension of operations and/or production.</ITAG>(a) A suspension of all operations and production may be directed or consentedto by the authorized officer only in the interest of conservation of naturalresources. A suspension of operations only or a suspension of productiononly may be directed or consented to by the authorized officer in caseswhere the lessee is prevented from operating on the lease or producingfrom the lease, despite the exercise of due care and diligence, by reasonof <T3>force majeure</T3>, that is, by matters beyond the reasonable controlof the lessee. Applications for any suspension shall be filed in the properBLM office. Complete information showing the necessity of such relief shallbe furnished.(b) The term of any lease shall be extended by adding thereto the periodof the suspension, and no lease shall be deemed to expire during any suspension.(c) A suspension shall take effect as of the time specified in the directionor assent of the authorized officer, in accordance with the provisionsof andSection; 3165.1 of this title.(d) Rental and minimum royalty payments shall be suspended during any periodof suspension of all operations and production directed or assented toby the authorized officer beginning with the first day of the lease monthin which the suspension of all operations and production becomes effective,or if the suspension of all operations and production becomes effectiveon any date other than the first day of a lease month, beginning with thefirst day of the lease month following such effective date. Rental andminimum royalty payments shall resume on the first day of the lease monthin which the suspension of all operations and production is terminated.Where rentals are creditable against royalties and have been paid in advance,proper credit shall be allowed on the next rental or royalty due underthe terms of the lease. Rental and minimum royalty payments shall not besuspended during any period of suspension of operations only or suspensionof production only.(e) Where all operations and production are suspended on a lease on whichthere is a well capable of producing in paying quantities and the authorizedofficer approves resumption of operations and production, such resumptionshall be regarded as terminating the suspension, including the suspensionof rental and minimum royalty payments, as provided in paragraph (d) ofthis section.(f) The relief authorized under this section also may be obtained for anyFederal lease included within an approved unit or cooperative plan of developmentand operation. Unit or cooperative plan obligations shall not be suspendedby relief obtained under this section but shall be suspended only in accordancewith the terms and conditions of the specific unit or cooperative plan.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3104.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>30. Section 3104.1(a) is revised to read:(a) Prior to the commencement of surface disturbing activities relatedto drilling operations, the lessee, operating rights owner (sublessee),or operator shall submit a surety or personal bond, conditioned upon compliancewith all of the terms and conditions of the entire leasehold(s) coveredby the bond, as described in this subpart.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3104.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>31. Section 3104.3(b) is amended by removing from the end thereof the phrase``or operations nationwide.'' and replacing it with the phrase ``and operationsnationwide.''32. Section 3104.6 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3104.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Where filed and number of copies.</ITAG>All bonds shall be filed in the proper BLM office on a current form approvedby the Director. A single copy executed by the principal or, in the caseof surety bonds, by both the principal and an acceptable surety is sufficient.A bond filed on a form not currently in use shall be acceptable, unlesssuch form has been declared obsolete by the Director prior to the filingof such bond. For purposes of andSection;andSection; 3104.2 and 3104.3(a) ofthis title, bonds or bond riders shall be filed in the Bureau State officehaving jurisdiction of the lease or operations covered by the bond or rider.Nationwide bonds may be filed in any Bureau State office (See andSection;1821.2-1).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3104.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>33. Section 3104.7 is amended by revising paragraph (b) to read:(b) After default, where the obligation in default equals or is less thanthe face amount of the bond(s), the principal shall either post a new bondor restore the existing bond(s) to the amount previously held or a largeramount as determined by the authorized officer. In lieu thereof, the principalmay file separate or substitute bonds for each lease covered by the deficientbond(s). Where the obligation incurred exceeds the face amount of the bond(s),the principal shall make full payment to the United States for all obligationsincurred that are in excess of the face amount of the bond(s) and shallpost a new bond in the amount previously held or such larger amount asdetermined by the authorized officer. The restoration of a bond or postingof a new bond shall be made within 6 months or less after receipt of noticefrom the authorized officer. Failure to comply with these requirementsmay subject all leases covered by such bond(s) to cancellation under theprovisions of andSection; 3108.3 of this title.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3104.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>34. Section 3104.8 is amended by removing from where it appears the phrase``alternative bond'' and replacing it with the phrase ``replacement bond''.35. Section 3105.2-3 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3105.2-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Requirements.</ITAG>(a) The communitization or drilling agreement shall describe the separatetracts comprising the drilling or spacing unit, shall show the apportionmentof the production or royalties to the several parties and the name of theoperator, and shall contain adequate provisions for the protection of theinterests of the United States. The agreement shall be signed by or onbehalf of all necessary parties and shall be filed prior to the expirationof the Federal lease(s) involved in order to confer the benefits of theagreement upon such lease(s).(b) The agreement shall be effective as to the Federal lease(s) involvedonly if approved by the authorized officer. Approved communitization agreementsare considered effective from the date of the agreement or from the dateof the onset of production from the communitized formation, whichever isearlier, except when the spacing unit is subject to a State pooling orderafter the date of first sale, then the effective date of the agreementmay be the effective date of the order.(c) The public interest requirement for an approved communitization agreementshall be satisfied only if the well dedicated thereto has been completedfor production in the communitized formation at the time the agreementis approved or, if not, that the operator thereafter commences and/or diligentlycontinues drilling operations to a depth sufficient to test the communitizedformation or establish to the satisfaction of the authorized officer thatfurther drilling of the well would be unwarranted or impracticable. Ifan application is received for voluntary termination of a communitizationagreement during its fixed term or such an agreement automatically expiresat the end of its fixed term without the public interest requirement havingbeen satisfied, the approval of that agreement by the authorized officershall be invalid and no Federal lease shall be eligible for extension underandSection; 3107.4 of this title.36. A new andSection; 3105.6 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3105.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Consolidation of leases.</ITAG>Consolidation of leases may be approved by the authorized officer if itis determined that there is sufficient justification and it is in the publicinterest. Each application for consolidation of leases shall be consideredon its own merits. Leases to different lessees for different terms, rentaland royalty rates, and those containing provisions required by law thatcannot be reconciled, shall not be consolidated. The effective date ofa consolidated lease shall be that of the oldest lease involved in theconsolidation.37. Subpart 3106 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3106_Transfers by Assignment, Sublease or Otherwise</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.1 Transfers, general.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.2 Qualifications of transferees.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.3 Filing fees.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.4 Forms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.4-1 Transfers of record title and of operating rights (subleases).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.4-2 Transfers of other interests, including royalty interestsand production payments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.4-3 Mass transfers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.5 Description of lands.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.6 Bonds.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.6-1 Lease bond.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.6-2 Statewide/nationwide bond.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.7 Approval of transfer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.7-1 Failure to qualify.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.7-2 Continuing responsibility.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.7-3 Lease account status.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.7-4 Effective date of transfer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.7-5 Effect of transfer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.8 Other types of transfers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.8-1 Heirs and devisees.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.8-2 Change of name.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3106.8-3 Corporate merger.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 3106_Transfers by Assignment, Sublease or Otherwise</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers, general.</ITAG>(a) Leases may be transferred by assignment or sublease as to all or partof the acreage in the lease or as to either a divided or undivided interesttherein. An assignment of a separate zone or deposit or of part of a legalsubdivision shall be disapproved unless the necessity of the assignmentis established and it is determined that such assignment is in the bestinterest of the United States. The rights of the transferee to a leaseor an interest therein shall not be recognized by the Department untilthe transfer has been approved by the authorized officer. A transfer maybe withdrawn in writing, signed by the transferor and the transferee, ifthe transfer has not been approved by the authorized officer. A requestfor approval of a transfer of a lease or interest in a lease shall be filedwithin 90 days from the date of its execution. The 90-day filing periodshall begin on the date the transferor signs and dates the transfer. Ifthe transfer is filed after the 90th day, the authorized officer may requireverification that the transfer is still in force. A transfer of productionpayments or overriding royalty or other similar payments, arrangementsor interests shall be filed in the proper BLM office but shall not requireapproval.(b) No transfer of an offer to lease or interest in a lease shall be approvedprior to the issuance of the lease.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Qualifications of transferees.</ITAG>Transferees shall comply with the provisions of Subpart 3102 of this titleand post any bond that may be required.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Filing fees.</ITAG>Each transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease) or eachtransfer of royalty interest, payment out of production or similar interestfor each lease, when filed, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filingfee of $25. A transfer not accompanied by the required filing fee shallnot be accepted and shall be returned.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Forms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.4-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers of record title and of operating rights (subleases).</ITAG>Each transfer of record title or of an operating right (sublease) shallbe filed with the proper BLM office on a current form approved by the Directoror exact reproductions of the front and back of such form. A transfer filedon a form not currently in use shall be acceptable, unless such form hasbeen declared obsolete by the Director prior to the filing of the transfer.A separate form for each transfer, in triplicate, originally executed shallbe filed for each lease out of which a transfer is made. Only 1 originallyexecuted copy of a transferee's request for approval for each transfershall be required, including in those instances where several transfersto a transferee have been submitted at the same time (See also andSection;3106.4-3). Copies of documents other than the current form approved bythe Director shall not be submitted. However, reference(s) to other documentscontaining information affecting the terms of the transfer may be madeon the submitted form.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.4-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers of other interests, including royalty interests and productionpayments.</ITAG>(a) Each transfer of overriding royalty interest, payment out of productionor similar interests created or reserved in a lease in conjunction witha transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease) shall be describedfor each lease on the current form when filed.(b) Each transfer of overriding royalty interest, payment out of productionor similar interests created or reserved in a lease independently of atransfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease), if not filedon the current form, shall be described and shall include the transferee'sexecuted statement as to his/her qualifications under Subpart 3102 of thistitle. A single executed copy of each such transfer of other interestsfor each lease shall be filed with the proper BLM office.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.4-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Mass transfers.</ITAG>(a) A mass transfer may be utilized in lieu of the provisions of andSection;andSection;3106.4-1 and 3106.4-2 of this title when a transferor transfers interestsof any type in a large number of Federal leases to the same transferee.(b) Three originally executed copies of the mass transfer shall be filedwith each proper BLM office administering any lease affected by the masstransfer. The transfer shall be on a current form approved by the Directoror an exact reproduction of both sides thereof, with an exhibit attachedto each copy listing the following for each lease:(1) The serial number;(2) The type and percent of interest being conveyed; and(3) A description of the lands affected by the transfer in accordance withandSection; 3106.5 of this title.(c) One reproduced copy of the form required by paragraph (b) of this sectionshall be filed with the proper BLM office for each lease involved in themass transfer. A copy of the exhibit for each lease may be limited to lineitems pertaining to individual leases as long as that line item includesthe information required by paragraph (b) of this section.(d) A nonrefundable filing fee of $25 for each such interest transferredfor each lease, in accordance with the provisions of andSection; 3106.3 ofthis title, shall accompany a mass transfer.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Description of lands.</ITAG>Each transfer of record title shall describe the lands involved in thesame manner as the lands are described in the lease or in the manner requiredby andSection; 3111.2 of this title, except no land description is requiredwhen 100 percent of the entire area encompassed within a lease is conveyed.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Bonds.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.6-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Lease bond.</ITAG>Where a lease bond is maintained by the lessee or operating rights owner(sublessee) in connection with a particular lease, the transferee of recordtitle interest or operating rights in such lease shall furnish, if bondcoverage continues to be required, either a proper bond or consent of thesurety under the existing bond to become co-principal on such bond if thetransferor's bond does not expressly contain such consent. Where bond coverageis provided by an operator, the new operator shall furnish an appropriatereplacement bond or provide evidence of consent of the surety under theexisting bond to become co-principal on such bond.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.6-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Statewide/nationwide bond.</ITAG>If the transferee is maintaining a statewide or nationwide bond, a leasebond shall not be required, but the amount of the bond may be increasedto an amount determined by the authorized officer in accordance with theprovisions of andSection; 3104.5 of this title.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Approval of transfer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.7-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Failure to qualify.</ITAG>No transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease) shall beapproved if the transferee or any other parties in interest are not qualifiedto hold the transferred interest(s), or if the bond, should one be required,is insufficient. Transfers are approved for administrative purposes only.Approval does not warrant or certify that either party to a transfer holdslegal or equitable title to a lease.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.7-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Continuing responsibility.</ITAG>The transferor and its surety shall continue to be responsible for theperformance of all obligations under the lease until a transfer of recordtitle or of operating rights (sublease) is approved by the authorized officer.If a transfer of record title is not approved, the obligation of the transferorand its surety to the United States shall continue as though no such transferhad been filed for approval. After approval of the transfer of record title,the transferee and its surety shall be responsible for the performanceof all lease obligations, notwithstanding any terms in the transfer tothe contrary. When a transfer of operating rights (sublease) is approved,the sublessee is responsible for all obligations under the lease rightstransferred to the sublessee.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.7-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Lease account status.</ITAG>A transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease) in a producinglease shall not be approved unless the lease account is in good standing.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.7-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Effective date of transfer.</ITAG>The signature of the authorized officer on the official form shall constituteapproval of the transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease)which shall take effect as of the first day of the lease month followingthe date of filing in the proper BLM office of all documents and statementsrequired by this subpart and an appropriate bond, if one is required.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.7-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Effect of transfer.</ITAG>A transfer of record title to 100 percent of a portion of the lease segregatesthe transferred portion and the retained portion into separate leases.Each resulting lease retains the anniversary date and the terms and conditionsof the original lease. A transfer of an undivided record title interestor a transfer of operating rights (sublease) shall not segregate the transferredand retained portions into separate leases.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Other types of transfers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.8-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Heirs and devisees.</ITAG>(a) If an offeror, applicant, lessee or transferee dies, his/her rightsshall be transferred to the heirs, devisees, executor or administratorof the estate, as appropriate, upon the filing of a statement that allparties are qualified to hold a lease in accordance with subpart 3102 ofthis title. No filing fee is required. A bond rider or replacement bondmay be required for any bond(s) previously furnished by the decedent.(b) Any ownership or interest otherwise forbidden by the regulations inthis group which may be acquired by descent, will, judgement or decreemay be held for a period not to exceed 2 years after its acquisition. Anysuch forbidden ownership or interest held for a period of more than 2 yearsafter acquisition shall be subject to cancellation.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.8-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Change of name.</ITAG>A change of name of a lessee shall be reported to the proper BLM office.No filing fee is required. The notice of name change shall be submittedin writing and be accompanied by a list of the serial numbers of the leasesaffected by the name change. If a bond(s) has been furnished, change ofname may be made by surety consent or a rider to the original bond or bya replacement bond.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3106.8-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Corporate merger.</ITAG>Where a corporate merger affects leases situated in a State where the transferof property of the dissolving corporation to the surviving corporationis accomplished by operation of law, no transfer of any affected leaseinterest is required. A notification of the merger shall be furnished witha list, by serial number, of all lease interests affected. No filing feeis required. A bond rider or replacement bond conditioned to cover theobligations of all affected corporations may be required by the authorizedofficer as a prerequisite to recognition of the merger.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3107.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>38. Section 3107.1 is amended by removing from where it appears in thefirst sentence thereof the phrase ``of this title or 30 CFR 226.12,'' andreplacing it with the phrase ``and andSection; 3186.1 of this title,'' andby removing the last sentence thereof and replacing it with the sentences:``Actual drilling operations shall be conducted in a manner that anyoneseriously looking for oil or gas could be expected to make in that particulararea, given the existing knowledge of geologic and other pertinent facts.In drilling a new well on a lease or for the benefit of a lease under theterms of an approved agreement or plan, it shall be taken to a depth sufficientto penetrate at lease 1 formation recognized in the area as potentiallyproductive of oil or gas, or where an existing well is reentered, it shallbe taken to a depth sufficient to penetrate at least 1 new and deeper formationrecognized in the area as potentially productive of oil or gas. The authorizedofficer may determine that further drilling is unwarranted or impracticable.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3107.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>39. Section 3107.2-2 is amended by adding immediately after the phrase``because of production'' where it appears the phrase ``in paying quantities''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3107.2-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>40. Section 3107.2-3 is amended by revising the title to read: ``andSection;3107.2-3 Leases capable of production.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3107.3-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>41. Section 3107.3-2 is amended by removing the last sentence in its entiretyand replacing it with 3 new sentences to read as follows:* * * The segregated lease covering the nonunitized portion of the landsshall continue in force and effect for the term of the lease or for 2 yearsfrom the date of segregation, whichever is longer. However, for any leasesegregated from a unit, if the public interest requirement for the unitis not satisfied, such segregation shall be declared invalid by the authorizedofficer. Further, the segregation shall be conditioned to state that nooperations shall be approved on the segregated portion of the lease pastthe expiration date of the original lease until the public interest requirementof the unit has been satisfied.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3107.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>42. Section 3107.4 is amended by adding at the end thereof the sentence:* * * No lease shall be extended if the public interest requirement foran approved cooperative or unit plan or a communitization agreement hasnot been satisifed as determined by the authorized officer.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3107.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>43. Section 3107.6 is amended by removing from where it appears in theintroductory paragraph the citation ``andSection; 3108.2-1'' and replacingit with the citation ``andSection; 3108.2''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3107.8-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>44. Section 3107.8-3(b) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``out of production in excess of 5 percent'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``out of production or similar interests in excess of 5 percent''and by removing from where it appears the phrase ``out of production arereduced to not more than 5 percent'' and replacing it with the phrase ``outof production or similar interests are reduced to not more than 5 percent''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3108.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>45. Section 3108.1 is amended by adding in the first sentence immediatelyafter the phrase ``record title holder'' the phrase ``, or the holder'sduly authorized agent,''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3108.2-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>46. Section 3108.2-1 is amended by:A. Revising paragraph (a) to read:(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, any lease on whichthere is no well capable of producing oil or gas in paying quantities shallautomatically terminate by operation of law (30 U.S.C. 188) if the lesseefails to pay the rental at the designated Service office on or before theanniversary date of such lease. However, if the designated Service officeis closed on the anniversary date, a rental payment received on the nextday the Service office is open to the public shall be considered as timelymade.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">andB. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears in the firstsentence the phrase ``stated in a bill,'' and replacing it with the phrase``stated in a bill rendered by the designated Service office,'', by revisingthe third sentence thereof to read ``The designated Service office shallsend a Notice of Deficiency to the lessee.'' and by removing from whereit appears at the end of the fourth sentence the phrase ``the proper BLMoffice or the Service, as appropriate.'' and replacing it with the phrase``the designated Service office.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3108.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>47. Section 3108.2-2(a) is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a)(2) by removing from the end thereof the phrase``lessee; and'' and replacing it with the phrase ``lessee (reasonable diligenceshall include a rental payment which is postmarked by the U.S. Postal Service,common carrier, or their equivalent (not including private postal meters)on or before the lease anniversary date or, if the designated Service officeis closed on the anniversary date, postmarked on the next day the Serviceoffice is open to the public); and'' andB. Amending paragraph (a)(3) by adding at the end thereof the sentence``If a terminated lease becomes productive prior to the time the leaseis reinstated, all required royalty that has accrued shall be paid to theService.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3108.2-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>48. Section 3108.2-4(a) is amended by removing from where it appears inthe first sentence thereof the word ``validy'' and replacing it with theword ``validly''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3108.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>49. Section 3108.4 is amended by removing the last sentence thereof inits entirety.50. A new andSection; 3108.5 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3108.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Waiver of suspension of lease rights.</ITAG>If, during any proceeding with respect to a violation of any provisionsof the regulations in Groups 3000 and 3100 of this title or the act, aparty thereto files a waiver of his/her rights under the lease to drillor to assign his/her lease interests, or if such rights are suspended byorder of the Secretary pending a decision, payments of rentals and therunning of time against the term of the lease involved shall be suspendedas of the first day of the month following the filing of the waiver orthe Secretary's suspension until the first day of the month following thefinal decision in the proceeding or the revocation of the waiver or suspension.51. Section 3109.1-2 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3109.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application.</ITAG>No approved form is required for an application to lease lands in a right-of-way.Applications shall be filed in the proper BLM office. Such applicationsshall be filed by the owner of the right-of-way or by his/her transfereeand be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $75, and if filed bya transferee, by a duly executed transfer of the right to lease. The applicationshall detail the facts as to the ownership of the right-of-way, and ofthe transfer if the application is filed by a transferee; the developmentof oil or gas in adjacent or nearby lands, the location and depth of thewells, the production and the probability of drainage of the deposits inthe right-of-way. A description by metes and bounds of the right-of-wayis not required by each legal subdivision through which a portion of theright-of-way desired to be leased extends shall be described.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3109.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>52. Section 3109.2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (c)(1) by removing from where it appears the phrase``map, 8360-80013A, revised December 1979.'', and replacing it with thephrase ``map, 8360-80013B, revised February 1986.''; andB. Amending paragraph (d)(1)(ii) by removing from where it appears thephrase ``and all lands within any developed and/or concentrated publicuse area or other area of outstanding recreational significance as designatedby the Superintendent on the map (NRA-L.M. 2291A, dated July 1966)'' andreplacing it with the phrase ``and all lands outside of resource utilizationzones as designated by the Superintendent on the map (602-2291B, datedOctober 1987)''.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3130_[AMENDED]</ITAG>53. The authority citation for Part 3130 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority. </T4>The Department of the Interior Appropriations Act,Fiscal Year 1981 (42 U.S.C. 6504 <T3>et seq</T3>.), 43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3130.0-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>54. Section 3130.0-5 is amended by:A. Removing paragraph (e) in its entirety; andB. Redesignating paragraphs (f) and (g) as paragraphs (e) and (f), respectively.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3130.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>55. Section 3130.3 is amended by removing from where it appears the phrase``Director, U.S. Geological Survey,'' and replacing it with the phrase``authorized officer''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3130.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>56. Section 3130.5 is amended by removing from where it appears the citation``andSection; 3102.1-2'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection; 3108.4''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3131.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>57. Section 3131.2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears the phrase``Management, with a copy to the Regional Conservation Manager, U.S. GeologicalSurvey.'' and replacing it with the word ``Management.''; and B. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears the phrase``shall, in consultation with the Regional Conservation Manager,'' andreplacing it with the word ``shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3132.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>58. Section 3132.3 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears the phrase``filing charges and fees'' and replacing it with the phrase ``and filingfees'', and by removing from where it appears the phrase ``Bureau of LandManagement'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Department of the Interior,Bureau of Land Management''; andB. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (b) the phrase ``U.S. GeologicalSurvey'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Department of the Interior,Minerals Management Service''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3133.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>59. Section 3133.1(c) is amended by removing the phrase ``in any year''and relacing it with the phrase ``in any year prior to discovery of oilor gas on the lease''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3133.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>60. Section 3133.2 is amended by removing from where it appears near theend of the section the misspelled word ``royality'' and replacing it withthe correct word ``royalty.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3133.2-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>61. Section 3133.2-1 is amended by removing from where it appears nearthe beginning of the section the misspelled word ``leasee'' and replacingit with the correct word ``lessee.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3134.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>62. Section 3134.1 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears the phrase``corporate surety bond'' and replacing it with the phrase ``surety orpersonal bond in accordance with the provisions of andSection; 3104.1 ofthis title'', and by removing the period at the end of the paragraph andadding the phrase ``, or maintains or furnishes a nationwide bond as setforth in andSection; 3104.3(b) of this title and furnishes a rider theretosufficient to bring total coverage to $300,000 to cover all oil and gasleases held within NPR-A.'';B. Revising paragraph (b) to read:(b) A bond in the sum of $100,000 or $300,000, or a nationwide bond asprovided in andSection; 3104.3(b) of this title with a rider thereto sufficientto bring total coverage to $300,000 to cover all oil and gas leases withinNPR-A, may be provided by an operating rights owner (sublessee) or operatorin lieu of a bond furnished by the lessee, and shall assume the responsibilitiesand obligations of the lessee for the entire leasehold in the same mannerand to the extent as though he/she were the lessee.C. Amending paragraph (c) by removing the phrase ``$100,000 lease bondor a $300,000 NPR-A-wide'';D. Revising paragraph (d) to read:(d) A new bond in the amount previously held or a larger amount as determinedby the authorized officer shall be posted within 6 months or such shorterperiod as the authorized officer may direct after a default. In lieu thereof,separate or substitute bonds for each lease covered by the prior bond maybe filed.The authorized officer may cancel a lease(s) covered by a deficientbond(s), in accordance with andSection; 3136.3 of this title. Where a bondis furnished by an operator, suit may be brought thereon without joiningthe lessee when such lessee is not a party to the bond.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">andE. Revising paragraph (e) to read:(e) Except as provided in this subpart, the bonds required for NPR-A leasesare in addition to any other bonds the successful bidder may have filedor be required to file under andSection;andSection; 3104.2, 3104.3(a) and 3154.1and subparts 3206 and 3209 of this title.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3134.1-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>63. Section 3134.1-1 is amended by removing from where it appears the phrase``lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``lessee, operating rightsowner (sublessee), or operator shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3134.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>64. Section 3134.1-2 is amended by redesignating the existing text as paragraph(a), by removing from where it appears therein the phrase ``the lesseeto supply'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the bonded party to supply'',and by adding a new paragraph (b) to read:(b) The holders of any oil and gas lease bond for a lease on the NPR-Ashall be permitted to obtain a rider to include the coverage of oil andgas geophysical operations within the boundaries of NPR-A.65. The title of Subpart 3135 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3135_Transfers, Extensions and Consolidations</ITAG>66. Section 3135.1 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3135.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers and extensions, general.</ITAG>67. Section 3135.1-1 is amended by:A. Revising the title to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3135.1-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers.</ITAG>B. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears the word ``assign''and replacing it with the word ``transfer'';C. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears the word ``assignment''and replacing it with the word ``transfer'';D. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears the phrase``assignor shall be liable for'' and replacing it with the phrase ``transferorshall continue to be responsible for'' and by removing from where it appearsat the end of the paragraph the word ``assignment'' and replacing it withthe word ``transfer'';E. Amending paragraph (d) by removing from where it appears the phrase``assignor shall be liable for'' and replacing it with the phrase ``transfereeshall be responsible for'', and by removing from where it appears the phrase``of an assignment,'' and replacing it with the phrase ``a transfer,'';andF. Adding new paragraphs (e) and (f) to read:(e) When a transfer of operating rights (sublease) is approved, the sublesseeis responsible for all obligations under the rights transferred to thesublessee.(f) Transfers are approved for administrative purposes only. Approval doesnot warrant or certify that either party to a transfer holds legal or equitabletitle to a lease.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3135.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>68. Section 3135.1-2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears therein theword ``assignment'' and replacing it with the word ``transfer''; andB. Revising paragraph (c) to read:(c) Where a transfer of record title creates separate leases, a bond shallbe furnished covering the transferred lands in the amount prescribed inandSection; 3134.1 of this title. Where a transfer does not create separateleases, the transferee, if the transfer so provides and the surety consents,may become co-principal on the bond with the transferor.69. Section 3135.1-3 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3135.1-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Separating filing for transfers.</ITAG>A separate instrument of transfer shall be filed for each lease on a formapproved by the Director or an exact reproduction of the front and backof such form. Any earlier editions of the current form are deemed obsoleteand are unacceptable for filing. When transfers to the same person, associationor corporation, involving more than 1 lease are filed at the same timefor approval, 1 request for approval and 1 showing as to the qualificationsof the transferee shall be sufficient.70. Section 3135.1-4 is amended by:A. Revising the title to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3135.1-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Effect of transfer of a tract.</ITAG>B. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears in the firstsentence the phrase ``an assignment'' and replacing it with the phrase``a transfer'', by removing from where it appears in the first sentencethe word ``assigned'' and replacing it with the word ``transferred'' andby removing from where it appears at the beginning of the second sentencethe word ``Assignment'' and replacing it with the word ``Transfers''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3136.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>71. Section 3136.1 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the fourth sentence the phrase ``Are linquishment'', and replacingit with the correct phrase ``A relinquishment'', and by removing from whereit appears at the end of the section the phrase ``Director, U.S. GeologicalSurvey'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''.72. A new Part 3150 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3150_ONSHORE OIL AND GAS GEOPHYSICAL EXPLORATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 3150_Onshore Oil and Gas Geophysical Exploration; General</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3150.0-1 Purpose.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3150.0-3 Authority.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3150.0-5 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3150.1 Suspension, revocation or cancellation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 3151_Exploration Outside of Alaska</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3151.1 Notice of intent to conduct oil and gas geophysical explorationoperations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3151.2 Notice of completion of operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 3152_Exploration in Alaska</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3152.1 Application for oil and gas geophysical exploration permit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3152.2 Action on application.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3152.3 Renewal of exploration permit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3152.4 Relinquishment of exploration permit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3152.5 Modification of exploration permit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3152.6 Collection and submission of data.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3152.7 Completion of operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 3153_Exploration of Lands Under the Jurisdiction of the Departmentof Defense</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3153.1 Geophysical permit requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 3154_Bond Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3154.1 Types of bonds.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3154.2 Additional bonding.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3154.3 Bond cancellation or termination of liability.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, as amended and supplemented(30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.), the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands of1947, as amended (30 U.S.C. 351-359), the Federal Land Policy and ManagementAct of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act (16 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.), the Independent Offices AppropriationsAct of 1952 (31 U.S.C. 483a), the Naval Petroleum Reserves Production Actof 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6504), and the Department of the Interior AppropriationsAct. Fiscal Year 1981 (42 U.S.C. 6508).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3150_Onshore Oil and Gas Geophysical Exploration; General</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3150.0-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose.</ITAG>The purpose of this part is to establish procedures for conducting oiland gas geophysical exploration operations when authorization for suchoperations is required from the Bureau of Land Management. Geophysicalexploration on public lands, the surface of which is administered by theBureau, requires Bureau approval. The procedures in this part also applyto geophysical exploration conducted under the rights granted by any Federaloil and gas lease unless the surface is administered by the U.S. ForestService. However, a lessee may elect to conduct exploration operationsoutside of the rights granted by the lease, in which case authorizationfrom the surface managing agency or surface owner may be required. At therequest of any other surface managing agency, the procedures in this partmay be applied on a case-by-case basis to unleased public lands administeredby such agency. The procedures of this part do not apply to:(a) Casual use activities;(b) Operations conducted on private surface overlying public lands unlesssuch operations are conducted by a lessee under the rights granted by theFederal oil and gas lease; and(c) Exploration operations conducted in the Arctic National Wildlife Refugein accordance with section 1002 of the Alaska National Interest Lands ConservationAct (See 50 CFR Part 37).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3150.0-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Authority.</ITAG>The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, as amended and supplemented, (30 U.S.C.181 et seq.), the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands of 1947, as amended(30 U.S.C. 351-359), the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act(16 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.), the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the Independent Offices Appropriations Actof 1952 (31 U.S.C. 483a), the Naval Petroleum Reserves Production Act of1976 (42 U.S.C. 6504) and the Department of the Interior AppropriationsAct, Fiscal Year 1981 (42 U.S.C. 6508).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3150.0-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>As used in this part, the term:(a) ``Oil and gas geophysical exploration'' means activity relating tothe search for evidence of oil and gas which requires the physical presenceupon the lands and which may result in damage to the lands or the resourceslocated thereon. It includes, but is not limited to, geophysical operations,construction of roads and trails and cross-country transit of vehiclesover such lands. It does not include core drilling for subsurface geologicinformation or drilling for oil and gas; these activities shall be authorizedonly by the issuance of an oil and gas lease and the approval of an Applicationfor a Permit to Drill. The regulations in this part, however, are not intendedto prevent drilling operations necessary for placing explosive charges,where permissible, for seismic exploration.(b) ``Casual use'' means activities that involve practices which do notordinarily lead to any appreciable disturbance or damage to lands, resourcesand improvements. For example, activities which do not involve use of heavyequipment or explosives and which do not involve vehicular movement andexcept over established roads and trails are casual use.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3150.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Suspension, revocation or cancellation.</ITAG>The right to conduct exploration under notices of intent and oil and gasgeophysical exploration permits may be revoked or suspended, after notice,by the authorized officer and upon a final administrative finding of aviolation of any term or condition of the instrument, including, but notlimited to, terms and conditions requiring compliance with regulationsissued under Acts applicable to the public lands and applicable State airand water quality standards or implementation plans. The Secretary mayorder an immediate temporary suspension of activities authorized undera permit or other use authorization prior to a hearing or final administrativefinding if he/she determines that such a suspension is necessary to protecthealth or safety or the environment. Further, where other applicable lawcontains specific provisions for suspension, revocation, or cancellationof a permit or other authorization to use, occupy, or develop the publiclands, the specific provisions of such law shall prevail.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3151_Exploration Outside of Alaska</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3151.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Notice of intent to conduct oil and gas geophysical exploration operations.</ITAG>Parties wishing to conduct oil and gas geophysical exploration outsideof the State of Alaska shall file a Notice of Intent to Conduct Oil andGas Exploration Operations, referred to herein as a notice of intent. Thenotice of intent shall be filed with the District Manager of the properBLM office on the form approved by the Director. Within 5 working daysof the filing date, the authorized officer shall process the notice ofintent and notify the operator of practices and procedures to be followed.If the notice of intent cannot be processed within 5 working days of thefiling date, the authorized officer shall promptly notify the operatoras to when processing will be completed, giving the reason for the delay.The operator shall, within 5 working days of the filing date, or such othertime as may be convenient for the operator, participate in a field inspectionif requested by the authorized officer. Signing of the notice of intentby the operator shall signify agreement to comply with the terms and conditionscontained therein and in this part, and with all practices and proceduresspecified at any time by the authorized officer.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3151.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Notice of completion of operations.</ITAG>Upon completion of exploration, there shall be filed with the DistrictManager a Notice of Completion of Oil and Gas Exploration Operations. Within30 days after this filing, the authorized officer shall notify the partywhether rehabilitation of the lands is satisfactory or whether additionalrehabilitation is necessary, specifying the nature and extent of actionsto be taken by the operator.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3152_Exploration in Alaska</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3152.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for oil and gas geophysical exploration permit.</ITAG>Parties wishing to conduct oil and gas geophysical exploration operationsin Alaska shall complete an application for an oil and gas geophysicalexploration permit. The application shall contain the following information:(a) The applicant's name and address;(b) The operator's name and address;(c) The contractor's name and address;(d) A description of lands involved by township and range, including amap or overlays showing the lands to be entered and affected;(e) The period of time when operations will be conducted; and(f) A plan for conducting the exploration operations.The application shall be submitted, along with a nonrefundable filing feeof $25 (except where the exploration operations are to be conducted ona lease held by or on behalf of the lessee), to the District Manager ofthe proper BLM office.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3152.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Action on application.</ITAG>(a) The authorized officer shall review each application and approve ordisapprove it within 90 calendar days, unless compliance with statutoryrequirements such as the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42U.S.C. 4321 et seq.) delays this action. The applicant shall be notifiedpromptly in writing of any such delay.(b) The authorized officer shall include in each geophysical explorationpermit terms and conditions deemed necessary to protect values, mineralresources, and nonmineral resources. Geophysical permits within NationalPetroleum Reserve_Alaska shall contain such reasonable conditions, restrictionsand prohibitions as the authorized officer deems appropriate to mitigateadverse effects upon the surface resources of the Reserve and to satisfythe requirement of section 104(b) of the Naval Petroleum Reserves ProductionAct of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6504) (See part 3130 for stipulations relating tothe National Petroleum Reserve_Alaska).(c) An exploration permit shall become effective on the date specifiedby the authorized officer and shall expire 1 year thereafter.(d) For lands subject to section 1008 of the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act, exploration shall be authorized only upon a determinationthat such activities can be conducted in a manner which is consistent withthe purposes for which the affected area is managed under applicable law.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3152.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Renewal of exploration permit.</ITAG>Upon application by the permittee and payment of a nonrefundable filingfee of $25 (except where the exploration operations are to be conductedon a leasehold by or on behalf of the lessee), an exploration permit maybe renewed for a period not to exceed 1 year.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3152.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Relinquishment of exploration permit.</ITAG>Subject to the continued obligations of the permittee and the surety tocomply with the terms and conditions of the exploration permit and theregulations, the permittee may relinquish an exploration permit for allor any portion of the lands covered by it. Such relinquishment shall befiled with the District Manager of the proper BLM office.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3152.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Modification of exploration permit.</ITAG>(a) A permittee may request, and the authorized officer may approve a modificationof an exploration permit.(b) The authorized officer may, after consultation with the permittee,require modifications determined necessary.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3152.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Collection and submission of data.</ITAG>(a) The permittee shall submit to the authorized officer all data and informationobtained in carrying out the exploration plan.(b) The Bureau shall not release such data and information and any processed,analyzed and interpreted material until such time as disclosure would notadversely affect, in the opinion of the authorized officer, the competitiveposition of the permittee.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3152.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Completion of operations.</ITAG>(a) The permittee shall submit to the authorized officer a completion reportwithin 30 days of completion of all operations under the permit. The completionreport shall contain the following:(a) A description of all work performed;(2) Charts, maps or plats depicting the areas and blocks in which the explorationwas conducted and specifically identifying the lines of geophysical traversesand any roads constructed;(3) The dates on which the actual exploration was conducted;(4) Such other information about the exploration operations as may be specifiedby the authorized officer in the permit; and(5) A statement that all terms and conditions have been complied with orthat corrective measures shall be taken to rehabilitate the lands or otherresources.(b) Within 90 days after the authorized officer receives a completion reportfrom the permittee that exploration has been completed or after the expirationof the permit, whichever occurs first, the authorized officer shall notifythe permittee of the specific nature and extent of any additional measuresrequired to rectify any damage to the lands and resources.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3153_Exploration of Lands Under the Jurisdiction of the Departmentof Defense</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3153.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Geophysical permit requirements.</ITAG>Except in unusual circumstances, permits for geophysical exploration onunleased lands under the jurisdiction of the Department of Defense shallbe issued by the appropriate agency of that Department. In the event anagency of the Department of Defense refers an application for explorationto the Bureau for issuance, the provisions of Subpart 3152 of this titleshall apply. Geophysical exploration on lands under the jurisdiction ofthe Department of Defense shall be authorized only with the consent of,and subject to such terms and conditions as may be required by, the Departmentof Defense.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3154_Bond Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3154.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Types of bonds.</ITAG>Prior to each planned exploration, the party(s) filing the notice of intentor application for a permit shall file with the authorized officer a bondas described in andSection; 3104.1 of this title in the amount of at least$5,000, conditioned upon full and faithful compliance with the terms andconditions of this subpart and the notice of intent or permit. In lieuthereof, the party(s) may file a statewide bond in the amount of $25,000covering all oil and gas exploration operations in the same State or anationwide bond in the amount of $50,000 covering all oil and gas explorationoperations in the nation. Holders of individual, statewide or nationwideoil and gas lease bonds shall be allowed to conduct exploration on theirleaseholds without further bonding, and holders of statewide or nationwidelease bonds wishing to conduct exploration on lands they do not have underlease may obtain a rider to include oil and gas exploration operationsunder this part. Holders of nationwide or any National Petroleum Reserve-Alaskaoil and gas lease bonds shall be permitted to obtain a rider to includethe coverage of oil and gas exploration within the National Petroleum Reserve_Alaskaunder Subpart 3152 of this title.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3154.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Additional bonding.</ITAG>The authorized officer may increase the amount of any bond that is requiredunder this subpart after determining that additional coverage is neededto ensure protection of the lands or resources.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3154.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Bond cancellation or termination of liability.</ITAG>The authorized officer shall not consent to the cancellation of the bondor the termination of liability unless and until the terms and conditionsof the notice of intent or permit been met. Should the authorized officerfail to notify the party within 90 days of the filing of a notice of completionof the need for additional action by the operator to rehabilitate the lands,liability for that particular exploration operation shall automaticallyterminate.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3160_[AMENDED]</ITAG>73. Note 1 is amended by:A. Amending the paragraph immediately following the Operating Forms tableby removing from where it appears in the second sentence thereof the phrase``the lessee elects'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator elects'';andB. Amending the paragraph entitled Other Reporting Requirements by removingfrom where it appears in the first sentence thereof the citation ``3162.7-4''and replacing it with the citation ``3162.7-5''; and by removing from whereit appears in the second sentence thereof the phrase ``some lessees toeither'' and replacing it with the phrase ``some operators to either''.74. The authority citation for Part 3160 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, as amended and supplemented(30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.); the Act of May 21, 1930 (30 U.S.C. 301-306); theMineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands of 1947, as amended (30 U.S.C. 351-359);the Act of March 3, 1909, as amended (25 U.S.C. 369); the Act of May 11,1938, as amended (25 U.S.C. 396a-396q); the Act of February 28, 1891, asamended (25 U.S.C. 397); the Act of May 29, 1924 (25 U.S.C. 398); the Actof March 3, 1927 (25 U.S.C. 398a-398e); the Act of June 30, 1919, as amended(25 U.S.C. 399); R.S. andSection; 441 (43 U.S.C. 1457), the Attorney General'sOpinion of April 2, 1941 (40 Op. Atty. Gen. 41); the Federal Property andAdministrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 471 et seq.); the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.);the Department of the Interior Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 1981(42 U.S.C. 6508); the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act,as amended (16 U.S.C. 3101 <T3>et seq.)</T3>, the Combined Hydrocarbon Leasing Act of 1981 (Pub. L.97-78), the Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act of 1982 (30 U.S.C.1701); and the Indian Mineral Development Act of 1982 (25 U.S.C. 2102).</ITAG>75. Section 3160.0-5 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3160.0-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>As used in this part, the term:(a) ``Authorized representative'' means any entity or individual authorizedby the Secretary to perform duties by cooperative agreement, delegationor contract.(b) ``Avoidably lost'' means the venting or flaring of produced gas withoutthe prior authorization, approval, ratification or acceptance of the authorizedofficer and the loss of produced oil or gas when the authorized officerdetermines that such loss occurred as a result of:(1) Negligence on the part of the operator; or(2) The failure of the operator to take all reasonable measures to preventand/or control the loss; or(3) The failure of the operator to comply fully with the applicable leaseterms and regulations, applicable orders and notices, or the written ordersof the authorized officer; or(4) Any combination of the foregoing.(c) ``Federal lands'' means all lands and interests in lands owned by theUnited States which are subject to the mineral leasing laws, includingmineral resources or mineral estates reserved to the United States in theconveyance of a surface or nonmineral estate.(d) ``Fresh water'' means water containing not more than 1,000 ppm of totaldissolved solids, provided that such water does not contain objectionablelevels of any constituent that is toxic to animal, plant or acquatic life,unless otherwise specified in applicable notices or orders.(e) ``Knowingly or willfully'' means a violation that constitutes the voluntaryor conscious performance of an act that is prohibited or the voluntaryor conscious failure to perform an act or duty that is required. It doesnot include performances or failures to perform that are honest mistakesor merely inadvertent. It includes, but does not require, performancesor failures to perform that result from a criminal or evil intent or froma specific intent to violate the law. The knowing or willful nature ofconduct may be established by plain indifference to or reckless disregardof the requirements of the law, regulations, orders, or terms of the lease.A consistent pattern of performance or failure to perform also may be sufficientto establish the knowing or willful nature of the conduct, where such consistentpattern is neither the result of honest mistakes or mere inadvertency.Conduct that is otherwise regarded as being knowing or willful is renderedneither accidental nor mitigated in character by the belief that the conductis reasonable or legal.(f) ``Lease'' means any contract, profit-share arrangement, joint ventureor other agreement issued or approved by the United States under a mineralleasing law that authorizes exploration for, extraction of or removal ofoil or gas.(g) ``Lease site'' means any lands, including the surface of a severedmineral estate, on which exploration for, or extraction and removal of,oil or gas is authorized under a lease.(h) ``Lessee'' means a person or entity holding record title in a leaseissued by the United States.(i) ``Lessor'' means the party to a lease who holds legal or beneficialtitle to the mineral estate in the leased lands.(j) ``Major violation'' means noncompliance that causes or threatens immediate,substantial, and adverse impacts on public health and safety, the environment,production accountability, or royalty income.(k) ``Maximum ultimate economic recovery'' means the recovery of oil andgas from leased lands which a prudent operator could be expected to makefrom that field or reservoir given existing knowledge of reservoir andother pertinent facts and utilizing common industry practices for primary,secondary or tertiary recovery operations.(l) ``Minor violation'' means noncompliance that does not rise to the levelof a ``major violation''.(m) ``New or resumed production under section 102(b)(3) of the FederalOil and Gas Royalty Management Act'' means the date on which a well commencesproduction, or resumes production after having been off production formore than 90 days, and is to be construed as follows:(1) For an oil well, the date on which liquid hydrocarbons are first soldor shipped from a temporary storage facility, such as a test tank, or thedate on which liquid hydrocarbons are first produced into a permanent storagefacility, whichever first occurs; and(2) For a gas well, the date on which gas is first measured through salesmetering facilities or the date on which associated liquid hydrocarbonsare first sold or shipped from a temporary storage facility, whicheverfirst occurs. For purposes of this provision, a gas well shall not be consideredto have been off of production unless it is incapable of production.(n) ``Notice to lessees and operators (NTL)'' means a written notice issuedby the authorized officer. NTL's implement the regulations in this partand operating orders, and serve as instructions on specific item(s) ofimportance within a State, District, or Area.(o) ``Onshore oil and gas order'' means a formal numbered order issuedby the Director that implements and supplements the regulations in thispart.(p) ``Operating rights owner'' means a person or entity holding operatingrights in a lease issued by the United States. A lessee also may be anoperating rights owner if the operating rights in a lease or portion thereofhave not been severed from record title.(q) ``Operator'' means any person or entity including but not limited tothe lessee or operating rights owner, who has stated in writing to theauthorized officer that it is responsible under the terms and conditionsof the lease for the operations conducted on the leased lands or a portionthereof.(r) ``Paying well'' means a well that is capable of producing oil or gasof sufficient value to exceed direct operating costs and the costs of leaserentals or minimum royalty.(s) ``Person'' means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,consortium or joint venture.(t) ``Production in paying quantities'' means production from a lease ofoil and/or gas of sufficient value to exceed direct operating costs andthe cost of lease rentals or minimum royalties.(u) ``Superintendent'' means the superintendent of an Indian Agency, orother officer authorized to act in matters of record and law with respectto oil and gas leases on restricted Indian lands.(v) ``Waste of oil or gas'' means any act or failure to act by the operatorthat is not sanctioned by the authorized officer as necessary for properdevelopment and production and which results in: (1) A reduction in thequantity or quality of oil and gas ultimately producible from a reservoirunder prudent and proper operations; or (2) avoidable surface loss of oilor gas.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3161.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>76. Section 3161.1(a) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``by, or on behalf of the lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase``by the operator''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3161.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>77. Section 3161.2 is amended by removing from where it appears the phrase``that the operator is authorized to conduct such operations,''.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3162_[Amended]</ITAG>78. The title of Subpart 3162 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3162_Requirements for Operating Rights Owners and Operators</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3162.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>79. Section 3162.1 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate, shall'';B. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operator shall''; andC. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears the phrase``the lessee or operator'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3162.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>80. Section 3162.2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operating rights owner shall'', and by removing from whereit appears in the second sentence of the paragraph the phrase ``the lesseewill pay a sum determined as adequate to compensate the lessor for lessee'sfailure'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operating rights ownershall pay a sum determined by the authorized officer as adequate to compensatethe lessor for the operating rights owner's failure'';B. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the phrase ``The lessee, at its'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operator, at its''; andC. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears the phrase``the lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operating rightsowner shall''.81. Section 3162.3 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3162.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conduct of operations.</ITAG>(a) Whenever a change in operator occurs, the authorized officer shallbe notified promptly in writing, and the new operator shall furnish evidenceof sufficient bond coverage in accordance with andSection; 3106.6 and subpart3104 of this title.(b) A contractor on a leasehold shall be considered the agent of the operatorfor such operations with full responsibility for acting on behalf of theoperator for purposes of complying with applicable laws, regulations, thelease terms, NTL's Onshore Oil and Gas Orders, and other orders and instructionsof the authorized officer. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.3-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>82. Section 3162.3-1 is amended by: A. Removing from where it appears in at the beginning of paragraph (c)the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Theoperator shall''; B. Removing paragraph (d)(3) in its entirety and redesignating paragraph(d)(4) as paragraph (d)(3); and C. Adding a new paragraph (g) to read:(g) Approval of the Application for Permit to Drill does not warrant orcertify that the applicant holds legal or equitable title to the subjectlease(s) which would entitle the applicant to conduct drilling operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.3-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>83. Section 3162.3-2(a) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``the lessee on'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operatoron''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.3-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>84. Section 3162.3-3 is amended by removing the phrase ``the lessee shall''and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.3-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>85. Section 3162.3-4 is amended by: A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operator shall''; and B. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears the phrase``When justified by the lessee,'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Whenjustified by the operator,''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.4-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>86. Section 3162.4-1 is amended by: A. Removing from where it appears at the beginning of paragraph (a) thephrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operatorshall''; and B. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (b) the phrase ``Upon request,the lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Upon request, theoperator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.4-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>87. Section 3162.4-2 is amended by: A. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (a) the phrase ``the lesseeshall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator shall''; and B. Removing from the 2 places it appears in paragraph (b) the phrase ``thelessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.5-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>88. Section 3162.5-1 is amended by:A. Removing from the 2 places it appears in paragraph (a) the phrase ``lesseeshall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``operator shall'';B. Removing from the 2 places it appears in paragraph (b) the phrase ``lesseeshall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``operator shall'';C. Removing from the 2 places it appears in paragraph (c) the phrase ``thelessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator''; by removingfrom where it appears the phrase ``The lessee'' and replacing it with thephrase ``The operator''; and by removing from where it appears the phrase``A lessee's'' and replacing it with the phrase ``An operator's''; andD. Removing from where it appears at the beginning of paragraph (e) thephrase ``The lessee's liability'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Theoperator's liability'';<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.5-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>89. Section 3162.5-2 is amended by: A. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (a) the phrase ``The lesseeshall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operator shall''; B. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (b) the phrase ``The lesseeshall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operator shall''; C. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (c) the phrase ``The lesseeshall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operator shall''; andD. Removing from the 2 places it appears in paragraph (d) the word ``lessee''and replacing it with the word ``operator''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.5-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>90. Section 3162.5-3 is amended by removing from the 3 places it appearsthe word ``lessee'' and replacing it with the word ``operator''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>91. Section 3162.6(b) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``lessees shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operatorshall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3162.7-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>92. Section 3162.7-1 is amended by: A. Removing from where it appears at the beginning of paragraph (a) thephrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operatorshall'';B. Removing from the 4 places it appears in paragraph (d) the word ``lessee''and replacing it with the word ``operator''; andC. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (e) the phrase ``the lesseeshall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3162.7-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>93. Section 3162.7-4 is amended by:A. Removing from the 2 places it appears in the introductory paragraphthe phrase ``BLM'';B. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (b) the phrase ``BLM'';C. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (e) the phrase ``BLM'';andD. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (h) the phrase ``BLM''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3162.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>94-95. Section 3162.8 is amended by:A. Removing from where they appear in paragraph (a): the phrase ``obtainedfrom a lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``obtained from an operatingrights owner or operator''; the phrase ``consent of the lessee'' and replacingit with the phrase ``consent of the operating rights owner or operator,as appropriate,''; and the phrase ``the lessee may request'' and replacingit with the phrase ``the operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate,'';B. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (b) the word ``lessee''and replacing it with the phrase ``operating rights owner or operator'';C. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (c) the phrase ``a lesseeunder this part'' and replacing it with the phrase ``an operating rightsowner or operator under this part''; andD. Removing from where they appear in paragraph (d): the phrase ``the lesseesubmits'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operating rights owneror operator submits''; and the phrase ``the lessee's consent'' and replacingit with the phrase ``the consent of the operating rights owner or operator,as appropriate''.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3163_[Amended]</ITAG>96. Subpart 3163 is amended by removing the heading ``Noncompliance andAssessments'' and replacing it with the heading to read: ``Subpart 3163_Noncompliance,Assessments, and Penalties''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3163.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>97. Section 3163.1 is amended by:A. Removing from the beginning of paragaph (a): the phrase ``Whenever alessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Whenever an operating rightsowner or operator''; the phrase ``notify the lessee'' and replacing itwith the phrase ``notify the operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate,'';by removing from where it appears in paragraph (a)(1) the phrase ``subjectthe lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``subject the operating rightsowner or operator, as appropriate,'', by removing from where it appearsin paragraph (a)(2) the phrase ``subject the lessee'' and replacing itwith the phrase ``subject the operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate,'',by removing from where it appears in paragraph (a)(4) the phrase ``thelessee, operations that the lessee fails'' and replacing it with the phrase``the operator, operations that the operator fails'', by removing fromwhere it appears the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operator shall'', by removing from where it appears inparagraph (a)(5) the phrase ``subject the lessee to lease cancellationand forfeiture under the bond.'' and replacing it with the phrase ``subjectthe lease to cancellation and forfeiture under the bond.'', by removingfrom where it appears the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing itwith the phrase ``The operator shall'', by removing from where it appearsin paragraph (a)(6) the phrase ``the lessee's noncompliance'' and replacingit with the phrase ``the operator's noncompliance'', and by removing fromthe end of paragraph (a)(6) the word ``lessee'' and replacing it with theword ``operator'';B. Removing from the 2 places it appears in paragraph (c) the phrase ``peroperator,'' and replacing it with the phrase ``per operating rights owneror operator,''; andC. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (d) the phrase ``subjectthe lessee to'' and replacing it with the phrase ``subject the operatingrights owner or operator, as appropriate, to''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3163.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>98. Section 3163.2 is amended by:A. Removing from where it appears at the beginning of paragraph (a) thephrase ``Whenever a lessee fails'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Wheneveran operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate, fails'', by removingfrom where it appears in paragraph (a) the phrase ``notify the lessee inwriting'' and replacing it with the phrase ``notify the operating rightsowner or operator, as appropriate, in writing'', and by removing from whereit appears in paragraph (a) the phrase ``the lessee shall be liable'' andreplacing it with the phrase ``the operating rights owner or operator,as appropriate, shall be liable'';B. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (b) the phrase ``the lesseeshall be liable'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operating rightsowner or operator, as appropriate, shall be liable'';C. Removing from the 2 places where it appears in paragraph (g)(1) thephrase ``per operator'' and replacing it with the phrase ``per operatingrights owner or operator'', by removing from where it appears at the beginningof paragraph (g)(2)(i) the phrase ``The lessee has'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate, has'',by removing from where it appears at the beginning of paragraph (g)(2)(ii)the phrase ``The lessee has been'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Theoperating rights owner or operator, as appropriate, has been'' and by removingfrom the 2 places it appears in paragraph (g)(2)(iii) the phrase ``peroperator,'' and replacing it with the phrase ``per operating rights owneror operator,''; andD. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (j) the phrase ``maximumspecific'' and replacing it with the phrase ``maximum specified''.   <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3163.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]  </ITAG>99. Section 3163.5 is amended by:  A. Revising the title to read: ``andSection;3163.5 Assessments and civilpenalties.'';  B. Removing from where it appears at the beginning of paragraph (b) thephrase ``Administrative penalties'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Civilpenalties''; and  C. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (c) the phrase ``lesseefrom the responsibility'' and replacing it with the phrase ``responsibleparty''.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3164.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]  </ITAG>100. Section 3164.1(b) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``binding on lessees and operators'' and replacing it with the phrase``binding on operating rights owners and operators, as appropriate,''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3164.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]  </ITAG>101. Section 3164.3(a) is amended by removing from where it appears atthe beginning of the section the phrase ``Lessees shall'' and replacingit with the phrase ``Operators shall''.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3165.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]  </ITAG>102. Section 3165.1 is amended by:  A. Removing from where it appears in paragraph (a) the phrase ``in triplicatewith the authorized officer, and they shall'' and replacing it with thephrase ``with the authorized officer, and shall'';  B. Revising paragraph (b) to read: (b) The authorized officer shall act on applications submitted for a suspensionof operations or production, or both, filed pursuant to andSection;3103.4-2of this title. The application for suspension shall be filed with the authorizedofficer prior to the expiration date of the lease; shall be executed byall operating rights owners or, in the case of a Federal unit approvedunder Part 3180 of this title, by the unit operator on behalf of the committedtracts or by all operating rights owners of such tracts; and shall includea full statement of the circumstances that makes such relief necessary. and  C. Removing from where it appears in paragrph (c) the phrase ``was filedwith the authorized officer'' and replacing it with the phrase ``was filedor the date specified by the authorized officer''.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3165.1-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]  </ITAG>103. Section 3165.1-1 is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``shall be filed in triplicate in the office'' and replacing itwith the phrase ``shall be filed in the office''.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3165.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]  </ITAG>104. Section 3165.2 is amended by removing from where it appears the phrase``the lessee's obligations'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the obligations''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3165.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]  </ITAG>105. Section 3165.3(a) is amended by removing from where it appears atthe beginning of the paragraph the phrase ``Whenever a lessee fails'' andreplacing it with the phrase ``Whenever an operating rights owner or operator,as appropriate, fails'', by removing from where it appears the phrase ``giventhe lessee to remedy'' and replacing it with the phrase ``given the appropriateparty to remedy'', by removing from where it appears the phrase ``to anyperson authorized by the lessee to conduct or supervise'' and replacingit with the phrase ``to any person conducting or supervising'', and byremoving from where it appears the phrase ``or field employee shall bemailed to the lessee or the lessee's designated representative as describedabove'', and replacing it with the phrase ``or field employee or designatedrepresentative shall also be mailed to the operator'', and by removingfrom where it appears at the end of the last sentence the phrase ``mailedto the lessee of record'' and replacing it with the phrase ``mailed tothe operating rights owner''; and<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3165.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>106. Section 3165.4 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears the phrase``an appeal shall not result'' and replacing it with the phrase ``any appealfiled pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall not result'';andB. Amending paragraph (d) by removing from where it appears the phrase``in the event the lessee has failed'' and replacing it with the phrase``in the event the operator has failed''.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3180_[AMENDED]</ITAG>107. The authority citation for Part 3180 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, as amended and supplemented(30 U.S.C. 181, 189, 226(e), 226(m)).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;andSection; 3183.3-1, 3183.4, 3183.5 and 3183.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection;andSection; 3183.4, 3183.5, 3183.6 and 3183.7respectively]</ITAG>108. Sections 3183.3-1, 3183.4, 3183.5 and 3183.6 are redesignated as andSection;andSection;3183.4, 3183.5, 3183.6 and 3183.7, respectively.109. Section 3183.4, previously andSection; 3183.3-1, is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3183.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Approval of executed agreement.</ITAG>(a) A unit agreement shall be approved by the authorized officer upon adetermination that such agreement is necessary or advisable in the publicinterest and is for the purpose of more properly conserving natural resources.Such approval shall be incorporated in a Certification-Determination documentappended to the agreement (andSection; 3186.1 of this title for example).No such agreement shall be approved unless the parties signatory to theagreement hold sufficient interests in the unit area to provide reasonablyeffective control of operations.(b) The public interest requirement of an approved unit agreement for unprovenareas shall be satisfied only if the unit operator commences actual drillingoperations and thereafter diligently prosecutes such operations in accordancewith the terms of said agreement. If an application is received for voluntarytermination of a unit agreement for an unproven area during its fixed termor such an agreement automatically expires at the end of its fixed termwithout the public interest requirement having been satisfied, the approvalof that agreement by the authorized officer and lease segregations andextensions under andSection; 3107.3-2 of this title shall be invalid, andno Federal lease shall be eligible for extensions under andSection; 3107.4of this title.(c) Any modification of an approved agreement shall require the prior approvalof the authorized officer.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3186.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>110. Section 3186.1 is amended by:A. Amending Section 9 by revising the last paragraph thereof to read:Until the establishment of a participaint area, the failure to commencea well subsequent to the drilling of the initial obligation well, or inthe case of multiple well requirements, if specified, subsequent to thedrilling of those multiple wells, as provided for in this (these) section(s),within the time allowed including any extension of time granted by theAO, shall cause this agreement to terminate automatically. Upon failureto continue drilling diligently any well other than the obligation well(s)commenced hereunder, the AO may, after 15 days notice to the Unit Operator,declare this unit agreement terminated. Failure to commence drilling theinitial obligation well, or the first of multiple obligation wells, ontime and to drill it diligently shall result in the unit agreement approvalbeing declared invalid <T3>ab initio</T3> by the AO. In the case of multiple well requirements,failure to commence drilling the required multiple wells beyond the firstwell, and to drill them diligently, may result in the unit agreement approvalbeing declared invalid <T3>ab initio</T3> by the AO;B. Amending Section 13 by removing from the beginning of the first paragraphthe phrase ``Any party hereto owning or controlling the working interestin any unitized land having thereon a regular well location may'' and replacingit with the phrase ``Any operator may'', by removing from the first paragraphthe phrase ``drill a well to test'' and replacing it with the phrase ``drilla well on the unitized land to test'', by removing from the second paragraphthe phrase ``by a working interest owner results in production'' and replacingit with the phrase ``by a non-unit operator results in production'', andby removing from the third paragraph from where it appears the phrase ``bya working interest owner that obtains'' and replacing it with the phrase``by a non-unit operator that obtains'';C. Amending Section 14 by removing from where it appears in the first paragraphthe phrase ``or the working interest owner in case of the operation ofa well by a working interest owner as herein provided'' and replacing itwith the phrase ``or the non-unit operator in the case of the operationof a well by a non-unit operator as herein provided'', by removing thephrase ``be made by working interest owners responsible'' and replacingit with the phrase ``be made by an operator responsible'', and by removingthe phrase ``to relieve the lessees of any land'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``to relieve the responsible parties of any land'';D. Amending Section 15 by removing from where it appears in the first paragraphthe phrase ``paid by appropriate working interest owners under existingcontracts, laws, and regulations, provided that nothing herein containedshall operate to relieve the lessees of any land from their respectivelease obligations'' and replacing it with the phrase ``paid by the appropriateparties under existing contracts, laws, and regulations, provided thatnothing herein contained shall operate to relieve the responsible partiesof the land from their respective obligations'';E. Amending Section 18(g) by removing from where it appears in the firstparagraph the phrase ``sec. 17 (j)'' and replacing it with the phrase ``sec.17(m)'', by removing the phrase ``(30 U.S.C. 226(j))'' and replacing itwith the phrase ``(30 U.S.C. 226(m))'', and by adding at the end of thesecond paragraph a new sentence to read: ``If public interest requirementis not satisfied, the segregation of a lease and/or extension of a leasepursuant to 43 CFR 3107.3-2 and 43 CFR 3107.4, respectively, shall notbe effective.'';F. Amending Section 20 by revising the last sentence of the section toread: ``If the public interest requirement is not satisfied, the approvalof this unit by the AO shall be invalid.''; andG. Amending the portion entitled ``Certification_Determination'' by addingat the end of paragraph A a new sentence to read: ``This approval shallbe invalid <T3>ab initio </T3>if the public interest requirement under andSection; 3183.4(b)of this title is not met.''<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3200_[AMENDED]</ITAG>111. The authority citation for Part 3200 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>The Geothermal Steam Act of 1970, as amended (30 U.S.C.1001-1025).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3200.0-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>112. Section 3200.0-3 is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970'' and replacing it with the phrase``the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970, as amended.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3200.0-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>113. Section 3200.0-5 is amended by: A. Revising paragraph (b) to read:(b) ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.B. Revising paragraph (e) to read:(e) ``Party in interest'' means a party who is or will be vested with anyinterest under the lease as defined in paragraph (f) of this section. Noone is a sole party in interest with respect to an application, offer,competitive bid or lease in which any other party has an interest in suchlease.C. Revising paragraph (f) to read:(f) ``interest'' means any interest whatever in a geothermal lease, including,but not limited to: (1) A record title interest; (2) a working interest;(3) an operating right; (4) an overriding royalty interest or other similarfiduciary payments or arrangements; or (5) options. ``Interest'' does notinclude stock ownership, stockholding or stock control in a lease applicationor offer or in a bid, except for purposes of acreage limitations in andSection;3201.2 of this title and qualifications of leases in Subpart 3202 of thistitle.D. Revising paragraph (g) to read:(g) ``Director'' means the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.E. Amending paragraph (k), by removing paragraphs (k)(1) through (k)(3)in their entirety; and F. Adding new paragraphs (m) through (w) to read:(m) ``Authorized officer'' means any employee of the Bureau of Land Managementauthorized to perform the duties described in Group 3200.(n) ``Proper BLM office'' means the Bureau of Land Management office havingjurisdiction over the lands subject to the regulations in Group 3200. (o) ``Anniversary date'' means the same day and month in succeeding yearsas that on which the lease became effective. (p) ``Surface managing agency'' means any Federal agency outside of theDepartment of the Interior which has jurisdiction over the surface overlyingFederally-owned minerals.(q) ``Bureau'' means the Bureau of Land Management.(r) ``Service'' means the Minerals Management Service.(s) ``Transfer'' means any conveyance of an interest in a lease by assignment,sublease or otherwise. This definition includes the terms: ``assignment''which means a transfer of all or a portion of the lessee's record titleinterest in a leasee; and ``sublease'' which means a transfer of a non-recordtitle interest in a lease, i.e., a transfer of operating rights is normallya sublease and a sublease is a subsidiary arrangement between the lessee(sublessor) and the sublessee, but a sublease does not include a transferof a purely financial interest, such as overriding royalty interest orpayment out of production, nor does it affect the relationship imposedby a lease between the lessee(s) and the United States.(t) ``Lessee'' means a person or entity holding record title in a leaseissued by the United States.(u) ``Operating rights owner'' means a person or entity holding operatingrights in a lease issued by the United States. A lessee also may be anoperating rights owner if the operating rights in a lease or a portionthereof have not been severed from record title.(v) ``Operator'' means any person or entity, including but not limitedto the lessee, operating rights owner, or facility operator, who has statedin writing to the authorized officer that it is responsible under the termsand conditions of the lease for the operations conducted on the leasedlands or a portion thereof.(w) ``Public domain lands'' means lands, including mineral estates, thatnever left the ownership of the United States, lands that were obtainedby the United States in exchange for public domain lands, lands that havereverted to the ownership of the United States through the operation ofthe public land laws, and other lands specifically identified by the Congressas part of the public domain.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3200.0-6 and 3200.0-7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>114. Sections 3200.0-6 and 3200.0-7 are removed in their entirety.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3200.0-8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 3200.0-6]</ITAG>115. Section 3200.0-8 is redesignated as andSection; 3200.0-6 and paragraph(a) thereof is amended by removing the third sentence thereof in its entiretyand by removing from the end thereof the word ``chapter'' and replacingit with the word ``title''.116. A new andSection; 3200.1 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3200.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Competitive and noncompetitive leasing areas.</ITAG>The authorized officer shall determine the boundaries of known geothermalresource areas. All lands within such boundaries shall only be leased competitivelyto the highest qualified bidder in accordance with Part 3220 of this title.All other lands shall be leased noncompetitively, if at all, to the firstqualified offeror in accordance with Part 3210 of this title.(a) In determining whether the geology of an area is of such a nature thatthe area should be designated as a KGRA, the authorized officer shall usesuch geologic and technical evidence as he/she deems appropriate, includingthe following:(1) The existence of siliceous sinter and natural geysers;(2) The temperature of fumaroles, thermal springs and mud volcanoes;(3) The SiO<T2>2</T2> content of spring water;(4) The Na/K ratio in spring waters or hot-water systems;(5) The existence of volcanoes and calderas of late Tertiary or Quaternaryage;(6) Conductive heat flows and geothermal gradient;(7) The porosity and the permeability of a potential reservoir;(8) The results of electrical resistivity surveys;(9) The results of magnetic, gravity and airborne infrared geophysicalsurveys; and(10) The information obtained through other geophysical methods, such asmicroseismic, seismic ground noise, electromagnetic and telluric surveysif such methods prove to have significant use in evaluation.(b) For purposes of KGRA classification, a ``discovery'' or ``discoveries''shall be considered to be any well deemed by the authorized officer tobe capable of producing geothermal resources in commercial quantities.Where the geological structure is not known, ``nearby'' shall be consideredto be 5 miles or less from any such discovery. Lands nearby a discoveryshall be classified as KGRA unless it is determined that the lands areon a different geological structure from the discovery. Where the authorizedofficer has determined the extent of a structure on which a discovery hasbeen made, all lands in that structural area contributing geothermal resourcesto that discovery shall be deemed a KGRA regardless of the distance fromthe discovery.(c) ``Competitive interest'' shall exist in the entire area covered byan application for a geothermal lease if at least one-half of the landscovered by application are also covered by another application which wasfiled during the same application filing period, whether or not that otherapplication is subsequently withdrawn or rejected. Competitive interestshall not be deemed to exist in the entire area covered by an applicationbecause of an overlapping application, if less than one-half of the landssubject to the first application are covered by any other single applicationfiled during the same application filing period; however, some of the landssubject to the first application may be determined to be within a KGRApursuant to the first sentence of this paragraph.117. A new andSection; 3200.2 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3200.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Management of Federal minerals from reserved mineral estates.</ITAG>Where nonmineral public land disposal statutes provided that in conveyancesof title all or certain minerals shall be reserved to the United Statestogether with the right to prospect for, mine and remove the minerals underapplicable law and regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the leaseor sale, and administration and management of use of such minerals shallbe accomplished under the regulations of Group 3200 of this title. Suchmineral estate include, but are not limited to, those that have been orwill be reserved under the authorities of the Recreation and Public PurposesAct, as amended (43 U.S.C. 869 <T3>et seq.</T3>), the Small Tract Act of June 1, 1938, as amended (43U.S.C. 682(b)) and the Federal Land Policy and Management of 1976 43 U.S.C.1701 <T3>et seq.</T3>).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3201.1-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>118. Section 3201.1-1 is amended by:A. Adding a new paragraph (a) to read:(a) The Secretary may issue a geothermal lease when he/she determines suchissuance would be in the public interest;andB. The existing paragraph of the section is designated as paragraph (b)by inserting the figure ``(b)'' at the beginning of the paragraph, andthe figures (a), (b), and (c) are changed to (1), (2), and (3).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3201.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>119. Section 3201.1-2(b)(2) is amended by removing from where it appearsthe word ``chapter'' and replacing it with the word ``title''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3201.1-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>120. Section 3201.1-4 is amended by removing the phrase ``Federal PowerCommission'' from the title and the place it appears in the body of thesection and replacing it with the phrase ``Federal Energy Regulatory Commission''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3202.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>121. Section 3202.2 is amended by revising the first sentence of the sectionto read: ``Submission of an executed lease application or offer, competitivebid or request for approval of a transfer of record title or of operatingrights (sublease) constitutes certification of compliance with the regulationsof this group and the Act.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3202.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>122. Section 3202.2-2 is removed in its entirety.123. Section 3202.2-3 is redesignated as andSection; 3202.2-2 and revisedto read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3202.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Attorney-in-fact/agent.</ITAG>An attorney-in-fact or an agent may execute and file an application, offer,competitive bid or transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease),request for approval of a transfer or other lease-related document.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3202.2-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>124. Section 3202.2-4 is removed in its entirety.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3202.2-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 3202.2-3]</ITAG>125. Section 3202.2-5 is redesignated as andSection; 3202.2-3 and is amendedby removing the last two sentences thereof and replacing them with thesentence to read: ``All interested parties may be required to furnish evidenceof their qualifications upon the written request of the authorized officer.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3202.2-6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection; 3202.2-4]</ITAG>126. Section 3202.2-6 is redesignated as andSection; 3202.2-4 and is amendedby removing in its entirety all language following the first two sentencesof the section.127. Section 3203.1-1 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.1-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Dating of leases.</ITAG>All geothermal leases shall be considered issued when signed by the authorizedofficer. Geothermal leases, except future interest leases issued underSubpart 3207 of this title, shall be effective as to the first day of themonth following the date the leases are issued. A lease may be made effectiveon the first day of the month within which it is issued if a written requestis made prior to the date of signature of the authorized officer. A renewallease shall be dated from the termination of the original lease.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.1-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>128. Section 3203.1-3 is amended by removing from the beginning of thesection the designation ``(a)''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.1-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>129. Section 3203.1-4 is amended by removing from where it appears in paragraph(d) the citation ``30 CFR 270.17'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection;3205.3-8 of this title''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>130. Section 3203.2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears at the endof the second sentence the phrase ``, or as provided for in Part 3230 ofthis chapter with respect to `conversion rights' ''; andB. Amending paragraph (d) by removing from where is appears in the firstsentence thereof the word ``will'' and replacing it with the word ``shall'',by removing from where it appears in the first sentence thereof the word``chapter'' and replacing it with the word ``title'' and by removing fromwhere it appears in the third sentence thereof the word ``will'' and replacingit with the word ``shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>131. Section 3203.3 is amended by removing from where it appears the citation``andSection; 3203.2'' and replacing it with the phrase ``andSection; 3203.2of this title''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>132. Section 3203.5 is amended by:A. Removing from where it appears the phrase ``lessee or designated operator,''and replacing it with the word ``operator'', andB. Removing from the 2 places where it appears the word ``supervisor''and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>133. Section 3203.6 is amended by removing from where it appears in theintroductory paragraph the citation ``andSection; 3209.9-5(d)'' and replacingit with the citation ``3209.0-5'', by removing from where it appears inthe introductory paragraph and paragraph (a) the word ``chapter'' and replacingit with the word ``title'', by removing from where it appears in paragraphs(a) and (b) the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase``The operator shall'', by removing from where it appears in paragraph(a) the citation ``43 CFR 3264.4'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection;3264.4 of this title'', by removing from where it appears in paragraph(b) the citation ``43 CFR 3262.4'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection;3262.4 of this title'', and by removing from where it appears in paragraph(b), the citation ``43 CFR 3262.4-2'' and replacing it with the citation``andSection; 3262.4-2 of this title''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3203.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>134. Section 3203.8 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears the phrase``the Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the authorized officer''and by removing from where it appears the phrase ``consent of any lesseeaffected'' and replacing it with the phrase ``consent of any operatingrights owner affected''; andB. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears the phrase``the lessee must drill'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operatingrights owner shall drill'', by removing from where it appears the phrase``wells, the lessee may, with'' and replacing it with the phrase ``wells,the operating rights owner may, with'', by removing from where it appearsthe phrase ``the Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the authorizedofficer'', and by removing from where it appears at the end of paragraph(b) the citation ``43 CFR Part 3260'' and replacing it with the citation``andSection; 3262.3 of this title''.135. The title of Subpart 3205 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3205_Fees, Rentals and Royalties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>136. Section 3205.1-2(a)(1) is amended by removing from where it appearsthe phrase ``all first-year rentals'' and replacing it with the phrase``all first-year advance rentals''.137. Section 3205.2 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Filing fees.</ITAG>(a) No filing fee is required for competitive lease applications.(b) Applications for noncompetitive leases, including future interest leases,shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $75 for each application.(c) Applications for approval of a transfer of a lease or any interesttherein shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $50 for eachseparate transfer.(d) No filing fee is required for requests or nominations for parcels tobe offered for competitive sale.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.3-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>138. Section 3205.3-1 is amended by revising the first sentence thereofto read: ``Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the first-year'sadvance rental of $1 per acre or fraction thereof based on the total acreageincluded in the application, except that no advance rental payment is requiredwith an application for a future interest.'', by removing where it appearsin the second sentence thereof the phrase ``first-year's rental'' and replacingit with the phrase ``first-year's advance rental'' and by removing fromwhere it appears in the last sentence thereof the phrase ``of the application''and replacing it with the phrase ``or the application''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.3-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>139. Section 3205.3-2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears the phrase``proper BLM office'' and replacing it with the phrase ``designated Serviceoffice'' and by removing from where it appears the word ``chapter'' andreplacing it with the word ``title'';B. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears the word ``chatper''and replacing it with the word ``title''; andC. Revising paragraph (d) to read:``(d) If the payment is due on a day in which the designated Service officeis closed, payment received on the next official working day shall be deemedto be made on time.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.3-7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>140. Section 3205.3-7(b) is amended by revising the introductory paragraphto read:``(b) An application hereunder shall be filed with the authorized officerand shall:''.141. Section 3205.3-8 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.3-8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Suspension of operations and production or suspension of operations.</ITAG>(a) A suspension of all operations and production on a producing leasemay, upon application by the operating rights owner, be consented to bythe authorized officer, including cases where the operator is preventedfrom continuing production, despite the exercise of due care and diligence,by matters beyond the operator's reasonable control. Applications for suspensionsof all operations and production shall be filed in the proper BLM office.Complete information showing the necessity for such relief shall be furnished.(b) The authorized officer may, in the interest of conservation, directthe suspension of operations on any lease.(c) The term of any lease shall be extended by adding thereto the periodof the suspension, and no lease shall be deemed to expire during any suspension.(d) A suspension shall take effect as of the time specified in the directionor assent of the authorized officer and shall last for the period specifiedin the order or approval, except as provided in paragraphs (f) and (g)of this section.(e) Rental or minimum royalty payments shall be suspended during any periodof suspension directed or assented to by the authorized officer beginningwith the first day of the lease month in which the suspension becomes effectiveor, if the suspension becomes effective on any date other than the firstday of a lease month, beginning with the first day of the lease month followingsuch effective date. Rental or minimum royalty payments shall resume onthe first day of the lease month in which the suspension is terminated.Where rentals are creditable against royalties and have been paid in advance,proper credit shall be allowed on the next rental or royalty due underthe terms of the lease.(f) Where operations only or all operations and production have been suspendedon a lease and the authorized officer approves resumption of operationsonly or all operations and production, such resumption shall be regardedas terminating the suspension, including the suspension of rental or minimumroyalty payments, as provided in paragraph (e) of this section.(g) Whenever it appears from information obtained by or furnished to theauthorized officer that the interest of the lessor requires additionaldrilling or producing operations, he/she may, by written notice, orderthe beginning or resumption of such operations.(h) The relief authorized under this section also may be obtained for anyleases included within an approval unit or cooperative plan or developmentand operation. Unit or cooperative plan obligations shall not be suspendedby relief obtained under this section but shall be suspended only in accordancewith the terms and conditions of the specific unit or cooperative plan.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.3.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>142. Section 3205.3-9 is amended by removing from the two places it appearsthe word ``Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer'',by removing from where it appears the word ``chapter'' and replacing itwith the word ``title'', by removing from where it appears in fourth, seventhand eighth sentences the word ``will'' and replacing it with the word ``shall''and by removing from where it appears in the seventh sentence the word``must'' and replacing it with the word ``shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.4-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>143. Section 3205.4-1 is amended by removing from where it appears thecitation ``andSection; 3205.3'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection;3205.3 of this title''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3205.4-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>144. Section 3205.4-2 is amended by removing from where it appears thecitation ``Subpart 3205'' and replacing it with the citation ``subpart3205 of this title'' and by removing from where it appears the citation``andSection; 3205.3'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection; 3205.3of this title''.145. Sections 3206.1, 3206.1-1 and 3206.1-2 are revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3206.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Bond obligations and filing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3206.1-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Bond obligations.</ITAG>A surety or personal bond conditioned upon compliance of the terms andconditions of the entire leasehold(s) covered by the bond shall be submittedby the lessee, operating rights owner (sublessee), or operator prior tothe commencement of drilling operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3206.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Filing.</ITAG>A single originally executed copy of a bond on the appropriate form approvedby the Director shall be filed in the proper BLM office. Nationwide bondsmay be filed in any Bureau State office (See andSection;1821.2-1). For unitbond forms see subpart 3284 of this title.146. Section 3206.2 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3206.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Lease bond.</ITAG>A lease bond may be posted by a lessee, operating rights owner (sublessee),or operator, in an amount of not less than $10,000 for each lease conditionedupon compliance with all of the terms of the lease. Where 2 or more pricipalshave interests in different portions of the lease, separate bonds may beposted. The operator on the ground shall be covered by a bond in his/hername as principal, or in the name of the lessee or sublessee, providedthat lessee or sublessee and surety consent is provided.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;andSection; 3206.3 and 3206.3-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>147. Sections 3206.3 and 3206.3-1 are removed in their entirety.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3206.3-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3206.3-3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated from andSection; 3206.3]</ITAG>148. Section 3206.3-2 is removed in its entirety, and andSection; 3206.3-3is redesignated as andSection; 3206.3 and revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3206.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Liability.</ITAG>Where a bond is furnished by an operating rights owner (sublessee) or operator,the Secretary may bring suit thereon without joining the lessee if he/sheis not a party to the bond.149. Section 3206.5 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3206.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Statewide bond.</ITAG>In lieu of bonds required under this subpart, the lessee, operating rightsowner (sublessee), or operator may furnish a bond in an amount of not lessthan $50,000 for full statewide coverage for all geothermal leases in theapplicable State.150. Section 3206.6 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3206.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Nationwide bond.</ITAG>In lieu of bonds required under this subpart, the lessee, operating rightsowner (sublessee), or operator may furnish a bond in an amount of not lessthan $150,000 for full nationwide coverage for all geothermal leases.151. A new andSection; 3206.9 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3206.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Termination of period of liability.</ITAG>The period of liability of any lease shall not terminate until all leaseterms and conditions have been fulfilled.152. Section 3207.2-3(c) is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3207.2-3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Leasing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG>(c) No rental or royalty shall be due to the United States prior to thevesting of the mineral rights in the United States. However, as considerationfor the issuance of a noncompetitive future interest geothermal lease,the lessee shall agree that if, prior to the vesting of the mineral rightsin the United States:(1) The future interest lessee transfers all or a part of the lessee'spresent interests, such lessee shall file in the proper BLM office an assignmentor transfer, in accordance with Subpart 3241 of this title, of the futureinterest lease of the same type and proportion as the transfer of the presentinterest; and(2) The future interest lessee's present lease interests are relinquished,canceled, terminated, or expired, the future interest lease rights withthe United States also shall cease and terminate to the same extent.153. Section 3207.3-2(c) is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3207.3-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Leasing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) No rental or royalty shall be due to the United States prior to thevesting of the mineral rights in the United States. However, as considerationfor the issuance of a competitive future interest geothermal lease, thelessee shall agree that if, prior to the vesting of the mineral rightsin the United States:(1) The future interest lessee transfers all or a part of the lessee'spresent interests, such lessee shall file in the proper BLM office an assignmentor transfer, in accordance with Subpart 3241 of this title, of the futureinterest lease of the same type and proportion as the transfer of the presentinterest; and(2) The future interest lessee's present lease interests are relinquished,canceled, terminated, or expired, the future interest lease rights withthe United States also shall cease and terminate to the same extent.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3209.0-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>154. Section 3209.0-1(a) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``on the public land for geothermal resources'' and replacing itwith the following: ``unleased public lands, the surface of which is administeredby the Bureau, and on lands under a Federal lease for geothermal resourcesby the lessee. At the request of any other surface managing agency, theprocedures in this part may be applied on a case by case basis to unleasedpublic lands administered by such agency''; and by removing the last sentencethereof in its entirety.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3209.0-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>155. Section 3209.0-5 is amended by removing paragraph (c) in its entiretyand redesignating paragraph (d) as paragraph (c). 156. Section 3209.4-1(b) is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3209.4-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) A party shall be excused from compliance with the requirements of paragraph(a) of this section if he/she possesses either a nationwide bond in theamount of not less than $50,000 covering all exploration operations, ora statewide bond in the amount of not less than $25,000 covering all explorationoperations in the state in which the lands on which he/she has filed theNotice of Intent are situated, or a lease bond of not less than $10,000furnished in accordance with andSection; 3206.2 of this title.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3210_[AMENDED]</ITAG>157. The authority citation for Part 3210 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> The Geothermal Steam Act of 1970, as amended (30 U.S.C.1001-1025).</ITAG>158. Section 3210.2-1 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3210.2-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application.</ITAG>An application for a lease shall be filed in an original and 2 copies inthe proper BLM office on a form approved by the Director. The originalform, or a copy thereof, filled in by typewriter or printed plainly inink, manually signed in ink and dated by the offeror, or the offeror'sduly authorized agent or attorney-in-fact, shall be required. Copies shallbe an exact reproduction on 1 page of both sides of the approved form withoutadditions, omissions or other changes or advertising. The application shallbe submitted in a sealed envelope marked ``Application for lease pursuantto 43 CFR Part 3210.'' The application shall include a complete and accuratedescription of the lands applied for, which shall include all availablelands, including reserved geothermal resources, within a surveyed or protractedsection, or, if the lands are neither surveyed nor protracted and are describedby metes and bounds, all the lands which will be included in a sectionwhen the lands are surveyed or protracted. The description of lands inan existing lease shall be conformed to a subsequent resurvey or amendedprotraction survey, whichever is appropriate.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3220_[AMENDED]</ITAG>159. The authority citation for Part 3220 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>The Geothermal Steam Act of 1970, as amended (30 U.S.C.1001-1025).</ITAG>160. Section 3220.2 is revised and andSection;andSection; 3220.2-1 and 3220.2-2are added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3220.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Notice of lease sale.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3220.2-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contents of notice.</ITAG>The notice of lease sale shall state the time, date and place of the sale,shall include a general description of the lands offered for sale and informationon where the detailed statement of the precise description and terms andconditions of the lease(s), including rental and royalty rates, as wellas the form on which a bid(s) shall be submitted and where that form maybe obtained. Remittances for competitive bids shall be submitted as requiredin the detailed statement of sale notice.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3220.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Detailed statement.</ITAG>The detailed statement shall contain informtion on when and where to submitbids, bidding requirements, required payments, lease terms and conditions,the description of the leasing units being offered and any other informationthat may be helpful to the prospective bidder.161. Section 3220.3 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3220.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Publication of the notice.</ITAG>The notice of lease sale shall be published once a week for 3 consecutiveweeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the landsare situated or in such other publications as the authorized officer maydetermine approriate. The successful bidder shall, prior to lease issuance,pay his/her proportionate share of the total cost of publication of thenotice.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3220.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>162. Section 3220.4(a) is amended by removing from where it appears inthe second sentence the phrase ``, together with proof of qualificationsas required by these regulations'' and by removing the last sentence thereofand adding two new sentences to read: ``Execution and submission of a bidas prescribed in the detailed statement of lease sale constitutes certificationof compliance with Subpart 3202 of this title. Proof of qualificationsto hold a lease shall be furnished upon the written request of the authorizedofficer in accordance with andSection; 3202.2 of this title.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3220.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>163. Section 3220.5 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears at the endthereof the phrase ``, except as required under Part 3230 of this chapter''and by adding to the end thereof the sentence ``High bids determined tobe inadequate by the authorized officer shall be rejected.''B. Redesignating paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) as paragraphs (d), (e), and(f), respectively;C. Adding a new paragraph (c) to read as follows:(c) If the authorized officer cannot issue a decision to accept or rejectthe high bid within 30 days, the high bidder shall be notified and informedin writing of the reason for the delay and when a decision is expected.D. Revising redesignated paragraph (d) to read as follows:(d) The right to reject any and all bids is reserved by the Secretary.If the high bid is rejected or is determined by the authorized officerto not be in compliance with the requirements set out in the detailed statementor the award notice, the bonus bid submitted with the bid shall be refunded.; andE. Amending redesignated paragraph (e) by revising the first sentence thereofto read: ``If the lease is awarded, 3 copies of the lease shall be sentto the successful bidder who shall, within 15 days of receipt of notice,sign and return the lease forms together with payment of the balance ofthe bonus bid, the first year's rental and the bidder's proportionate shareof the notice of lease sale pubication costs.''; and F. Amending redesignated paragraph (f) by removing from where it appearsthe phrase ``the Secretary'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the authorizedofficer''.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3240_[AMENDED]</ITAG>164. The authority citation for Part 3240 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>The Geothermal Steam Act of 1970, as amended (30 U.S.C.1001-1025).</ITAG>165. The title to Subpart 3241 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3241_Transfers</ITAG>166. Section 3241.1 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers, interests and qualifications.</ITAG>167. Section 3241.1-1 is amended by:A. Revising the title to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.1-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers of record title.</ITAG>B. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the designation ``(a)'', by removing from where it appearsthe word ``will'' and replacing it with the word ``shall'', by removingfrom where it appears the word ``chapter'' and replacing it with the word``title'' and by removing from where it appears the word ``Secretary''and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''; andC. Removing paragraph (b) in its entirety.D. Designating paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) as paragraphs (a), (b), and(c).168. A new andSection; 3241.1-2 is added to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.1-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfers of operating rights.</ITAG>A working interest or operating right in a lease also may be transferredunder this subpart.169. Section 3241.2 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Requirements for filing of transfers.</ITAG>170. Section 3241.2-1 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.2-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Place of filing and filing fee.</ITAG>A request for approval of a transfer of a lease or interest therein shallbe filed in the proper BLM office and accompanied by a nonrefundable filingfee of $50. A transfer not accompanied by the required nonrefundable filingfee shall not be accepted and shall be returned.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>171. Section 3241.2-2 is removed in its entirety.172. Section 3241.2-3 is redesignated as andSection; 3241.2-2 and is revisedto read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Time of filing of transfers.</ITAG>(a) A request for approval of a transfer of a lease or of an interest therein,including a transfer of operating rights (sublease), shall be filed inthe proper BLM office within 90 days from the date of execution. The 90-dayfiling period shall begin on the date the transferor signs and dates thetransfer. If the transfer is filed after the 90th day, the authorized officermay require verification that the transfer is still in force and effect.(b) A separate transfer shall be filed in the proper BLM office for eachgeothermal lease involving transfers of record title or of operating rights(sublease). When transfers to the same person, association, including partnerships,or corporation, involve more than 1 geothermal lease, 1 request for approvalshall be sufficient.173. Section 3241.2-4 is redesignated as andSection; 3241.2-3 and is revisedto read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.2-3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Forms and number of copies required.</ITAG>A current form approved by the Director or an exact reproduction of thefront and back thereof shall be used for each transfer of record titleor of operating rights (sublease). A transfer filed on a form not currentlyin use shall be acceptable, unless such form has been declared obsoleteby the Director prior to the filing of the transfer. Three copies of theform, including at least 1 originally executed copy, shall be filed inthe proper BLM office.174. Section 3241.2-5 is redesignated as andSection; 3241.2-4 and is revisedto read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.2-4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Description of lands.</ITAG>Each transfer of record title shall describe the lands involved in thesame manner as the lands are described in the lease, except no land descriptionis required when 100 percent of the entire area encompassed in a leaseis conveyed.175. Section 3241.3 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Bonds.</ITAG>Where a transfer does not create separate leases, the transferee, if thetransfer so provides, may become a co-principal on the bond with the transferor.Any transfer which does not convey the transferor's record title in allof the lands in a lease shall also be accompanied by a consent of his/hersurety to remain bound under the bond as to the lease retained by saidtransferor, if the bond, by its terms, does not contain such consent. Ifa party to the transfer has previously furnished a statewide or nationwidebond, as appropriate, no additional showing by such party is necessaryas to the bond requirement.176. Section 3241.4 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Approval.</ITAG>The request for transfer of record title or of operating rights (sublease)shall be approved upon the execution of the forms by the authorized officer.Upon approval, a transfer shall be effective as of the first day of thelease month following the date of filing of the transfer. Transfers areapproved for administrative purposes only. Approval does not warrant orcertify that either party to a transfer holds legal or equitable titleto a lease.177. Section 3241.5 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Continuing responsibility.</ITAG>(a) The transferor and his/her surety shall continue to be responsiblefor the performance of any obligation under the lease until the transferis approved by the authorized officer. If a transfer of record title isnot approved, the obligation of the transferor and its surety to the UnitedStates shall continue as if no such transfer had been filed for approval.(b) Upon approval, the transferee and his/her surety shall be responsiblefor the performance of all lease obligations notwithstanding any termsin the transfer to the contrary.(c) When a transfer of operating rights (sublease) is approved, the sublesseeis responsible for all obligations under the lease rights transferred tothe sublessee.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.7-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>178. Section 3241.7-1 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears the phrase``assignment or transfer, a statement must'' and replacing it with thephrase ``transfer, a statement shall'';B. Redesignating paragraph (d) as paragraph (c) and amending the newlyredesignated paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears in the firstsentence thereof the phrase ``assignments by overriding royalty interestsmust'' and replacing it with the phrase ``transfers of overriding royaltyinterests shall'', and by removing from where it appears the phrase ``interestswill not'' and replacing it with the phrase ``intersts shall not''.179. Section 3241.8 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Lease account status.</ITAG>Unless the lease account is in good standing as to the area covered bya transfer at the time the transfer is filed, or is placed in good standingbefore the transfer is acted upon, the request for approval of the transfershall be denied.180. Section 3241.9 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3241.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Effect of transfer.</ITAG>A transfer of record title of the complete interest in a portion of thelands in a lease shall segregate the transferred and retained portionsof the lease into separate and distinct leases. A transfer of an undividedrecord title interest in the entire leasehold or a transfer of operatingrights (sublease) shall not segregate the lease into separate or distinctleases.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3242.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>181. Section 3242.1 is amended by removing from where it appears in thefirst sentence of the introductory paragraph the word ``Supervisor'' andreplacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer'', also by removing fromwhere it appears in the introductory paragraph the word ``he'' and replacingit with the phrase ``he/she'' and by removing from where it appears inparagraph (c) the word ``him'' and replacing it with the phrase ``him/her''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3242.2-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>182. Section 3242.2-2 is amended by removing from where it appears thecitation ``andSection; 3242.2-1'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection;3242.2-1 of this title''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3243.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>183. Section 3243.1 is amended by removing from where it appears in thesecond sentence thereof the word ``Supervisor'' and replacing it with thephrase ``authorized officer'' and by removing from where it appears atthe end of the second sentence thereof the citation ``43 CFR Part 3260''and replacing it with the citation ``part 3280 of this title.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3243.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>184. Section 3243.2 is amended by removing from where it appears in thefirst sentence thereof the word ``supervisor'' and replacing it with thephrase ``authorized officer''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3243.3-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>185. Section 3243.3-1 is amended by amending paragraph (a) by revisingthe first sentence thereof to read: ``When separate tracts under leasecannot be independently developed and operated in conformity with an establishedwell-spacing or well-development program, the authorized officer may approveor require lessees to enter into communitization or drilling agreementsproviding for the apportionment of production or royalties among the separatetracts of land comprising the drilling or spacing unit for the lease, orany portion thereof, with other lands, whether or not owned by the UnitedStates, when found in the public interest.'' And amending paragraphs (b)and (c) by removing from where it appears in those paragraphs the word``Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3243.3-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>186. Section 3243.3-2 is amended by removing from where it appears in thesecond sentence the word ``Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase``authorized officer'' and also by removing from where it appears in thesecond sentence the word ``must'' and replacing it with the word ``shall.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3243.4-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>187. Section 3243.4-1 is amended by:A. Revising paragraph (a) to read:(a) The authorized officer may, on such conditions as may be prescribed,approve operating, drilling or development contracts made by 1 or moregeothermal lessees, with 1 or more persons, associations, including partnerships,or corporations whenever the authorized officer determines that such contractsare required for the conservation of natural resources or are in the bestinterest of the United States.B. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears therein theword ``Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer'';andC. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears therein theword ``Secretary'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''and also by removing from where it appears the word ``will'' and replacingit with the word ``shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3243.4-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>188. Section 3243.4-2 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from the two places it appears thereinthe word ``must'' and replacing it with the word ``shall'' and also byremoving from where it appears therein the word ``Secretary'' and replacingit with the phrase ``authorized officer''; andB. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears the word ``must''and replacing it with the word ``shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3244.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>189. Section 3244.1(a) is amended by revising the introductory text ofthe paragraph to read:(a) A lease, or any legal subdivision thereof, may be surrendered by therecord title holder or the holder's duly authorized agent by filing a writtenrelinquishment in the proper BLM office. A partial relinquishment shallnot reduce the remaining acreage in the lease to less than 640 acres, exceptwhere a departure is occasioned by an irregular subdivision. The minimumacreage provision may be waived by the authorized officer when it is determinedthat an exception is justified on the basis of exploratory and developmentdata derived from activity on the leasehold. The relinquishment shall:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3244.2-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>190. Section 3244.2-1 is amended by removing from where it appears in thefirst sentence thereof the citation ``andSection; 3244.2-2'' and replacingit with the citation ``andSection; 3244.2-2 of this title'' and by revisingthe second sentence thereof to read: ``However, if the designated Serviceoffice is not open on the day a payment is due, payment received on thenext day the designated Service office is open to the public shall be deemedtimely made.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3244.2-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>191. Section 3244.2-2 is amended by: A. Amending paragraph (a) by removingfrom where it appears in the first sentence the word ``paid'' and replacingit with the phrase ``received'' and revising the third and fourth sentencesthereof to read: ``The designated Service office shall send a Notice ofDeficiency to the lessee. The Notice shall be sent by certified mail, returnreceipt requested, and shall allow the lessee 15 days from the date ofreceipt or until the due date, whichever is later, to submit the full balancedue to the designated Service office.''; andB. Amending paragraph (b)(1) by adding after the phrase ``part of the lessee;''the words ``(reasonable diligence shall include a rental payment that ispostmarked by the U.S. Postal Service, common carrier, or their equivalent(not including private postal meters) on or before the lease anniversarydate or, if the designated Service office is closed on the anniversarydate, postmarked on the next day the Service office is open to the public);''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3244.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>192. Section 3244.5 is amended by removing from where it appears the word``Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3250_[AMENDED]</ITAG>193. The authority citation for Part 3250 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 3 and 24, Geothermal Steam Act of 1970, as amended(30 U.S.C. 1001-1025).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3250.0-3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>194. Section 3250.0-3 is amended by removing from where it appears theword ``Stream'' and replacing it with the word ``Steam''.195. Section 3250.1-2 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3250.1-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Who may hold licenses.</ITAG>Licenses shall be issued only to citizens of the United States, associationsof such citizens, corporations organized under the laws of the United States,any State or the District of Columbia or governmental units, including,without limitations, municipalities.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3250.4-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>196. Section 3250.4-1 is amended to remove from where it appears the citation``andSection; 3200.0-8'' and replacing it with the citation ``andSection; 3200.0-6''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3250.4-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>197. Section 3250.4-2 is amended by removing the second and third sentencesthereof in their entirety and adding a new sentence at the end thereofto read: ``In order to install such a facility, a permit shall be obtainedfrom the authorized officer under the provisions of Part 3260 of this title.Permits granted under Part 3260 of this title shall conform with the requirementsof andSection; 3200.0-6 of this title.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3250.6-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>198. Section 3250.6-1(b) is amended by removing from where it appears theword ``Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''and by removing from where it appears the citation ``43 CFR Part 3260''and replacing it with the citation ``Part 3260 of this title''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3250.6-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>199. Section 3250.6-2(a) is amended by removing from where it appears theword ``Secretary'' and replacing it with the phrase ``authorized officer''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3250.6-3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>200. Section 3250.6-3 is amended by revising the first sentence to read:``Rental at a rate to be determined by the authorized officer shall bepaid annually, but said rental shall not be less than $100 per acre orfraction thereof if the utilization facility is for electrical generation,or not less than $10 per acre or fraction thereof if the utilization facilityis for non-electrical purposes.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3250.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>201. Section 3250.8 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from the three places it appearsthe word ``must'' and replacing it with the word ``shall'' and by removingfrom the two places it appears the word ``will'' and replacing it withthe word ``shall''; andB. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears the phrases``non-refundable fee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``nonrefundablefiling fee''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3250.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>202. Section 3250.9 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears in the firstsentence thereof the phrase'', in triplicate,'' and by removing from whereit appears in the third sentence thereof the word ``will'' and replacingit with the word ``shall''; andB. Amending paragraph (d) by removing from where it appears therein thephrase ``Area Geothermal Supervisor'' and replacing it with the phrase``authorized officer''.203. The authority citation for Part 3260 continues to read:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Geothermal Steam Act as amended (30 U.S.C. 1001-1025)and Order No. 3087 (dated Dec. 3, 1982, as amended Feb. 7, 1983) [48 FR8983].</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3260.0-5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>204. Section 3260.0-5 is amended by:A. Revising paragraph (a) to read:(a) ``Lessee'' means a person or entity holding record title in a leaseissued by the United States.andB. Revising paragraph (b) to read:(b) ``Operator'' means any person or entity, including but not limitedto the lessee, operating rights owner (sublessee), or facility operator,who has stated in writing to the authorized officer that it is responsibleunder the terms and conditions of the lease for the operations conductedon the leased lands or a portion thereof.C. Redesignating paragraphs (c) through (o) as (d) thorugh (p), respectively,and adding a new paragraph (c) to read:(c) ``Operating rights owner'' means a person or entity holding operatingrights in a lease issued by the United States. A lessee also may be anoperating rights owner if the operating rights in a lease or a portionthereof have not been severed from record title.D. Amending redesignated paragraph (i) by removing from the last sentencethereof the phrase ``exclusive right of a lessee to drill'' and replacingit with the phrase ``right to drill'';E. Revising redesignated paragraph (j) to read:(j) ``Casual use'' means activities that involve practices that do notordinarily lead to any appreciable disturbance or damage to lands, resources,or improvements. For example, activities that do not involve use of heavyequipment or explosives and that do not involve vehicle movement exceptover established roads and trails are ``casual use''.F. Revising redesignated paragraph (o) to read:(o) ``Facility operator'' means the operator, licensee, or the individual,corporation, association, or municipality that operates any facility ona Federal geothermal lease for the beneficial utilization of geothermalresources.andG. Amending redesignated paragraph (p) by removing from where it appearsthe phrase ``between a lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``betweenan operating rights owner''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3261.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>205. Section 3261.2 is amended by removing from where it appears in thenext to last sentence thereof the phrase ``State agencies, lessees, operators''and replacing it with the phrase ``State agencies, operating rights owners,operators,'' by removing from where it appears in the last sentence thereofthe phrase ``is authorized to conduct the proposed operations;'' and byadding at the end of the section a new sentence to read: ``Approval ofa plan of operations or other permit does not warrant or certify that theapplicant holds legal or equitable title to the subject lease(s) whichwould entitle the applicant to conduct operations.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3261.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>206. Section 3261.8 is removed in its entirety.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3262_[Amended]</ITAG>207. The title of Subpart 3262 is revised to read: ``Subpart 3262_Requirementsfor Operating Rights Owners and Operators''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3262.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>208. Section 3262.1 is amended by:A. Amending paragraph (a) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate, shall'';B. Amending paragraph (b) by removing from where it appears at the beginningof the paragraph the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it withthe phrase ``The operating rights owner or operator, as appropriate, shall'';andC. Amending paragraph (c) by removing from where it appears the phrase``created by the lessee's operations'' and replacing it with the phrase``created by the operations''.209. Section 3262.2 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3262.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conduct of operations.</ITAG>(a) Whenever a change in operator occurs, the authorized officer shallbe notified promptly in writing, and the new operator shall furnish evidenceof sufficient bond coverage in accordance with Subpart 3206 of this title.(b) In all cases where an individual production well facility, researchand demonstration facility, or plant facility is to be operated by a partyother than the operating rights owner or licensee, such other party shallsubmit to the authorized officer the joint facility operating agreementbetween the operating rights owner or licensee and the facility operator.Such joint facility operating agreement shall authorize, upon acceptanceby the authorized officer, the facility operator to enter upon the proposedfacility site and related sites and to conduct thereon, in accordance withandSection; 3262.4-1 of this title, such preliminary geologic and soil studiesas are appropriate for the planning and design of the facilities necessaryfor the utilization of geothermal resources in the manner proposed. Anoperating rights owner, operator, or licensee also may construct and operatesuch facilities as have been approved under a plan of operation or utilizationand for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the regulations in thispart and, if a plant facility, for which a license has been issued in accordancewith the regulations in this group.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3262.2-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>210. Section 3262.2-1 is amended by:A. Revising the title to read: ``andSection; 3262.2-1 Local representative.'';andB. Amending the language of the section by removing from where it appearsthe phrase ``the lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``theoperator shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3262.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>211. Section 3262.3 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of both paragraphs (a) and (b) the phrase ``The lessee shall''and replacing it with the phrase ``The operating rights owner shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3262.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>212. Section 3262.4 is amended by removing from where it appears in theopening paragraph three times the word ``lessee,'' and replacing it withthe word ``operator,''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3262.4-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>213. Section 3262.4-1 is amended by:A. Amending the opening paragraph of the section by removing from whereit appears in the first sentence the phrase ``the lessee, licensee, orthe designated facility'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operatingrights owner, operator, licensee, or facility'', and by removing from whereit appears in the third sentence of the opening paragraph the phrase ``thelessee, licensee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operating rightsowner, licensee''; andB. Amending paragraph (i) by removing from where it appears the phrase``The lessee, licensee,'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operatingrights owner, licensee,''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 3262.4-2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>214. Section 3262.4-2 is amended by removing from the 4 places it appearsthe phrase ``the lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator'',and by removing from where it appears the phrase ``a lessee'' and replacingit with the phrase ``an operator''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>215. Section 3262.5 is amended by removing from the 2 places it appearsthe phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Theoperator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.5-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>216. Section 3262.5-1 is amended by removing from the 2 places it appearsthe phrase ``The lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operator'',and by removing from where it appears in paragraph (c) the phrase ``lesseewill'' and replacing it with the phrase ``operator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.5-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>217. Section 3262.5-2 is amended by removing from the two places it appearsthe phrase ``The lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``The operator''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.5-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>218. Section 3262.5-3 is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``the lessee unless requested by an offset lessee, and then, atthe risk and expense of the offset lessee.'', and replacing it with thephrase ``the operator unless requested by an offset operating rights owneror operator, and then, at the risk and expense of the offset party.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.5-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>219. Section 3262.5-4 is amended by removing from the beginning of thesection the phrase ``The lessee or operator'' and replacing it with thephrase ``The operator''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.5-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>220. Section 3262.5-5 is amended by removing from the 2 places it appearsthe phrase ``lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``operatorshall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>221. Section 3262.6 is amended by removing from the 2 places it appearsthe phrase ``lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``operatorshall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.6-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>222. Section 3262.6-1 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the section the phrase ``The lessee or, as appropriate, thelicensee, designated operator, or designated facility operator'' and replacingit with the phrase ``The operator, licensee, or facility operator, as appropriate,''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.6-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>223. Section 3262.6-2 is amended by removing from the 2 places it appearsthe phrase ``the lessee'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operator''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.6-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>224. Section 3262.6-3 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the section the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacingit with the phrase ``The operator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>225. Section 3262.7 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the section the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacingit with the phrase ``The operator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3262.7-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>226. Section 3262.7-1 is amended by removing from the 2 places it appearsthe phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Theoperator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3263_[Amended]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3263.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>227. Section 3263.1 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the section the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacingit with the phrase ``The operator shall''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3263.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>228. Section 3263.2 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the section the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacingit with the phrase ``The operator shall''. 229. Section 3263.3 is revised to read:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3263.3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Commingling production.</ITAG>The authorized officer may authorize an operator to commingle productionfrom wells on a lease with production from other leases subject to suchconditions as may be prescribed.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3264_[Amended]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3264.2-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>230. Section 3264.2-2(d) is amended by removing from where it appears thephrase ``the lessee commences'' and replacing it with the phrase ``theoperator commences''. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3264.2-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>231. Section 3264.2-3 is amended by removing from where it appears at thebeginning of the section the phrase ``The lessee shall'' and replacingit with the phrase ``The operator shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3264.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>232. Section 3264.3 is amended by removing from where it appears the phrase``the lessee or operator must'' and replacing it with the phrase ``theoperator shall''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3264.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;3264.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Redesignated as andSection;3264.4 and amended]</ITAG>233. Section 3264.4 is removed in its entirety and andSection;3264.5 is redesignatedas andSection;3264.4 and is amended by removing the phrase ``the lessee solong'' and replacing it with the phrase ``the operating rights owner oroperator, as appropriate, so long''.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 3265.1_[Amended]</ITAG>234. Section 3265.1(a) is amended by removing from the beginning of thesection the phrase ``Whenever a lessee or'' and replacing it with the phrase``Whenever an operating rights owner, operator, or'', by removing fromwhere it appears in the first sentence the phrase ``give the lessee notice``and replacing it with the phrase ``give notice'', and by removing fromthe beginning of the second sentence the phrase ``Failure by the lesseeto perform'' and replacing it with the phrase ``Failure by the party toperform''.<ITAG tagnum="52">Group 3000_[Amended]</ITAG>235. The Note at the beginning of Group 3000 is amended bya revising thefirst sentence there of to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>The information collection requirements contained in Part3000 have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under 44U.S.C. 3507 and assigned clearance number 1004-0145. andCx.188; andCx.188;andCx.188;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Group 3100 _[Amended]</ITAG>236. The Note at the beginning of Group 3100 is amended by revising thefirst sentence thereof to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>The information collection requirements contained in Parts3100, 3110, 3120, 3130, 3140, 3150, and 3160 have been approved by theOffice of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3507 and assigned clearancenumbers 1004-0034, 1004-0065, 1004-0067, 1104-0074, 1004-0132, 1004-0134,1004-0135, 1004-0136, 1004-0137, 1004-0138, and 1004-0145. andCx.188; andCx.188;andCx.188;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Group 3200_[Amended]</ITAG>237. Group 3200_Beothermal Resources Leasing is amended by inserting atthe beginning thereof the following Note:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>The information collection requirements contained in Parts3200, 3210, 3220, 3240, 3250, and 3260 of Group 3200 have been approvedby the Office of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3507 and assignedclearance numbers 1004-0074 and 1004-0132. The information is being collectedto permit the authorized officer to determine whether an applicant is qualifiedto hold a lease for the exploration, development, and utilization of geothermalresources on the public lands. The information will be used to make thisdetermination. A response is required to obtain a benefit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3210_[AMENDED]</ITAG>238. The Note at the beginning of Part 3210 is removed.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3250_[AMENDED]</ITAG>239. The Note at the beginning of Part 3250 and the Note at the beginningof Subpart 3250 are removed.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 3260_[AMENDED]</ITAG>240. Note 1 at the beginning of Part 3260 is amended by revising the clearancenumber at the end of the first sentence of paragraph (b) to read ``1004-0132''.241. Note 2 at the beginning of Part 3260 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note 2: </T4>The information collection requirements contained in Part3260 have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under 44U.S.C. 3507 and assigned clearance number 1004-0132. The information isbeing collected to evaluate the technical feasibility and environmentalimpacts of geothermal operations on Federal lands. Clearance number 1004-0132also covers information required by andSection; 3264.3 as is required todocument exploration expenditures for which diligence credit is desiredin accordance with andSection; 3203.5. A response is required to obtain abenefit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-10808 Filed 5-13-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-84-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>