<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR88922-0017 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-22-88.f2.A1016</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">10 CFR Part 26</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Fitness-for-Duty Program</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Commission is proposing to create a new part to itsregulations to require licensees authorized to operate nuclear power reactorsto implement a fitness-for-duty program, the general objective of whichis to provide reasonable assurance that nuclear power plant personnel arenot under the influence of any substance, legal or illegal, or mentallyor physically impaired from any cause, which in any way adversely affectstheir ability to safety and competently perfom their duties. One majorelement of a fitness-for-duty program and the focus of this rule, is toassure safety by creating an environment which is free of the effects ofdrugs. The rule would, with limited exceptions, apply to all individualsgranted unescorted access to protected areas, and to any licensee or contractorpersonnel required to respond to the licensee's Technical Support Center(TSC) or Emergency Operations Facility (EOF) in accordance with licenseeemergency plans and procedures. Under the proposed rule, testing for impermissibledrug use would be conducted prior to authorizing unescorted access to protectedareas or assignment to out activities within the scope of the proposedrule, randomly for such licensee and contractor personnel, after certainoperational events, based on reasonable cause, and to verify continuedabstention. In addition, the proposed rule provides for other basic fitness-for-dutyprogram elements such as the development of written policy and procedures,provisions for the training of supervisors and employees, standards fordrug testing, management actions, and requirements for employee assistanceprograms and appeal procedures.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments should be submitted by November 21, 1988. Commentsreceived after this date will be considered if it is practical to do so,but assurance of consideration cannot be given except as to comments receivedon or before this date.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments should be sent to the Secretary of the Commission,Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, or may be hand-delivered to the Office of the Secretary,U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 11555 Rockville Pike, Rockville, Maryland,between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. weekdays, or the Public DocumentRoon, 2120 L St., NW., Washington, DC 20555, between the hours of 7:45a.m. and 4:30 p.m. weekdays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Loren Bush, Reactor SafeguardsBranch, Division of Reactor Inspection and Safeguards, Office of NuclearReactor Regulations, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC20555, Telephone: (301) 492-0944.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background  </ITAG>On August 5, 1982, the Commission published for comment a proposed ruleto require licensees to develop and implement written procedures concerningfitness for duty (47 FR 33980). Seventy-three responses containing 310comments were received and considered during the Commission deliberationson the proposed rule (51 FR 27872). Subsequently, in recognition of initiativesand commitments made by the industry to develop and self-manage fitness-for-dutyprograms, the Commission decided to defer implementation of the rule, toissue a policy statement to further encourage such self-improvement andto reconsider the need for rulemaking after evaluating the experience gainedunder the industry program. The Commission's Policy Statement on Fitnessfor Duty of Nuclear Power Personnel was published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on August 4, 1986 (51 FR 27921). Ten respondentscommented on the policy statement (SECY-87-64). On December 1, 1987, theCommission was briefed by the Nuclear Utility Management and ResourcesCouncil (NUMARC) and the NRC staff on the experience gained to date andon the status of implementation of the Commission's fitness-for-duty policystatement. <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion  </ITAG>The Commission recognizes and appreciates the significant efforts alreadyundertaken by NUMARC, the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations (INPO),the Edison Electric Institute (EEI), and each nuclear power reactor licenseein developing and implementing fitness-for-duty programs for nuclear powerplant personnel. Much progress has been made through the industry effortsin achieving an environment in which nuclear power plant operations arefree of the effects of alcohol and durgs. Nevertheless, the Commission'sevaluation of experience gained in the 18 months since the policy statementbecame effective indicates that rulemaking is now appropriate. During theDecember 1, 1987 briefing on the implementation of the policy statement,the Commission was informed that licensees did not have uniform programstandards, there were significant differences in key program elements,and that there were many factors that made it unlikely that the nuclearindustry could achieve uniformity at the desired level. For example, (1)not all licensees were conducting random tests, some because of union interventionor prohibition by state laws, (2) drug testing cutoff levels varied significantly,some of which were inadequate, (3) disciplinary actions in response topositive test results varied partly due to the degree of local tolerancetoward the various fitness-for-duty conditions, and (4), training and awarnessprograms needed to be improved by many licensees. The current and apparentlycontinuing lack of uniformity in these key program elements was the basisfor the Commission request that a proposed rule be prepared. The rule isdesigned to take into account existing programs, rectify the shortcomingsas stated above, and establish uniform standards to promote the publichealth and safety.  The proposed rule takes into account the many positive aspects of existingindustry programs while providing for more uniform program standards, withdue regard to both public and worker safety and the rights of individuals.In developing this proposed rule, the NRC staff considered public commentsreceived in response to the 1982 proposed rulemaking and the 1986 policystatement. The staff also considered industry experience reported to theCommission, together with lessons learned by the staff from evaluatingthe effectiveness of utility fitness-for-duty programs, from assessingreported drug related incidents, and from reviewing similar rules beingdeveloped by other Government agencies.  The Commission also considered whether the proposed rule should be applicableto persons having access to information requiring protection, such as nationalsecurity information, safeguards information, or proprietary information.The Commission believes that determinations of eligibility for access toprotected information based on the current 10 CFR Part 10, or the proposedNuclear Power Plant Access Authorization Program policy statement publishedon March 9, 1988 (53 FR 7534), will provide a suitable mechanism to protectthat information from those individuals whose trustworthiness may be inquestion.  In considering the minimum requirements of this proposed rule, the Commissionhas decided to require certain programs that could be viewed as rightfullybeing left to the discretion of licensee management in structuring theirprograms to meet fitness-for-duty objectives, dealing with employees, andin establishing their benefits. For example, the Commission proposes torequire that licensees maintain Employee Assistance Programs and that individualsbe trained in the health hazards of drug abuse. The Commission seeks commentsas to whether these program elements should be in the rule or includedas recommendations in implementing guidance.  In addition, the Commission has preliminarily decided not to include severalmatters in the rule. These matters are summarized in the Appendix to this<T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice. The Commission seeks comments as to whetherthese matters should be added to the rule or included as recommendationsin implementing guidance. In this regard, Public Citizen (a public interestgroup) submitted a letter on June 4, 1987, petitioning the Commission toamend its regulations to require licensees to report: (1) All instancesof drug and alcohol use by personnel while on duty, (2) the details offitness-for-duty programs, (3) the results of rehabilitation programs,and (4) the results of drug testing programs. This letter was not noticeddue to the moratorium on rulemaking on fitness for duty established bythe Commission's Policy Statement (51 FR 27921). However, NRC staff communicatedwith Public Citizen and informed them of the Commission's intent to addressthe issues raised. The Commission will address this request in conjunctionwith its consideration of public comments provided in response to thisproposed rule. The Commission seeks comments from knowledgeable persons on the scientificand technical basis of the proposed rule and the consequences of drug useon the safe operation of a nuclear power reactor. The Commission also seekscomments on the following: 1. Are there practical alternatives to random testing, not discussed herein,that provide equivalent deterrence and detection of drug use? 2. What practical alternatives, not discussed herein, exist that coulddetermine physical and mental impairment? 3. What rates of random testing and retesting provide an acceptable probabilityof detection and adequate deterrence? What should be the basis for anyfuture modifications in the rate for random testing? Chairman Zech andCommissioner Carr believe, in view of the military's experience with testingcited in section IV of this notice, that a 300 percent annual testing frequencyis more appropriate to ensure that the testing program provides an adequatedeterrent. They request specific comments as to whether a 300 percent annualtesting frequency (Alternative B) or Alternative A in andSection; 26.24.(a)(2)in the proposed rule is the more effective testing scheme. Is there someother alternative that should be considered? Data to support recommendationsare requested. 4. Are there effective alternatives to the ``Mandatory Guidelines for FederalWorkplace Drug Testing Programs'' issued by Health and Human Services (HHS)on April 11, 1988 (53 FR 11970) that the Commission should adopt as minimumstandards for fitness-for-duty programs at nuclear power plants?5. Are there any additional quality control measures or appeal proceduresthat should be considered to protect the rights of individuals being tested,to ensure that individuals are not misidentified in the process as drugusers, and to provide a mechanism to correct any errors? Specifically,who should have access to knowledge of the results of unconfirmed initialtest results (employee, immediate supervisor, higher management levels)?What procedures are necessary to assure appropriate privacy?6. Should the Commission provide general guidance on potential impairments,such as alcohol abuse and prescription drugs? How should such guidancebe implemented in a fitness-for-duty program? Should any random testingprogram be expanded to encompass legal drug and alcohol? If so, shouldthe response to a positive test for alcohol be the same as for illegaldrugs? What should be the response to a positive test for legal drugs?7. How long should a person be barred from performing activities withinthe scope of the proposed rule following removal under the fitness-for-dutypolicy, and under what circumstances should reinstatement be allowed? Howlong should records of this removal be retained to facilitate future employmentdecisions?8. Are the categories of workers identified for testing appropriate, oris some other population (whole site, control room operators only) necessary/sufficientfor safety?9. Should training on the items covered under 3, 4, and 5 of andSection;26.22(a) be provided to all employees covered under the rule so each employeecan recognize drugs, indications of the use, sale, or possession of drugs,and impairment of a person covered under the rule and know what actionto take?10. Finally, the Commission is especially interested in receiving commentson the extent to which NRC regulations on fitness for duty should addressother regulated activities not currently within the scope of this proposedrule. Regulated activities being considered for rulemaking or a Commissionstatement of policy include:andbullet; The construction and pre-operational testing of nuclear powerplants prior to the issuance of a license and the loading of nuclear fuel.andbullet; The operation of nonpower reactors used in academic, research,and commercial applications.andbullet; Fuel cycle facilities involved in the possession and processingof plutonium or uranium in highly enriched, low enriched, or natural uraniumforms.andbullet; The utilization of nuclear materials in other activities suchas radiography, product irradiation, radiopharmaceutical production, nuclearmedicine, uranium milling activities, production and use of various sources,and radioactive waste disposal activities.While fully supportive of programs to address the national problems ofdrug and alcohol abuse and to provide for the health and safety of individualworkers, the Commission's policy on the regulation of fitness-for-dutyprograms for persons involved in the above activities will primarily bebased upon considerations for the safety of the public and fellow workers.In the matter of requirements for fitness-for-duty programs at nuclearpower plants undergoing construction and pre-operational testing, the Commissionrequests views on: (1) The relative safety significance of the wide varietyof specific construction steps and crafts involved, (2) the extent to whichthe controls described above do or do not tend to provide adequate identificationor mitigation of individual failures in performance in these areas and,accordingly, (3) the nature and extent of any fitness-for-duty programelements which shoud be applied to these activities. An example might bethe welding or reactor primary system boundaries, structures and supports,and safety-related systems, as opposed to balance of plant welding.Although fitness for duty programs are intended to provide reasonable assurancethat individuals are not using or under the influence of any substance,or mentally or physically impaired from any cause that could adverselyaffect safety, the specific program elements and procedures contained inthe proposed rule apply only to drugs. In meeting the proposed rule's requirementsthat licensees provide reasonable assurance that its employees are fitto perform their duties, specific measures for addressing alcohol, legaldrugs, and other health problems, such as mental stress and fatigue, areleft to the discretion of each licensee.Commissioner Roberts has the following additional comments: After reviewingthe proposed rulemaking ``Fitness-for-Duty Programs'', I feel a certainkinship with Sisyphus. I must, then, repeat my objections to this proposaland request public comments on them.The stated general objective of the proposed rule ``is to provide reasonableassurance that nuclear power plant personnel are not under the influenceof any substance, legal or illegal, or mentally or physically impairedfrom any cause, which in any way adversely affects their ability to safelyand competently perform their duties.'' As one who believes in zero toleranceof drugs or alcohol abuse, I fully agree with this objective. However,the proposed rule as written is insufficient in certain fundamental respectsand I question whether it can accomplish this objective. My specific commentsare as follows:andbullet; I still find no nexus made between the categories of workers chosenfor testing and their safety related duties. ``The rule would, with limitedexceptions, apply to all individuals granted unescorted access to protectedareas, and to any licensee or contractor personnel required to respondto the licensee's Technical Support Center (TSC) or Emergency OperationsFacility (EOF) in accordance with licensee emergency plans and procedures.''I would like to see a documented basis for this. Why not the whole site?Why not only control room operators? This may be the correct class of workersbut I would like a rationale.andbullet; The rule portends to provide reasonable assurance that workersare not impaired from a variety of substances, yet it is only focused on<T3>illegal </T3>drugs. I would like comments on the nature of the impairmentsuffered by abusing legal drug and alcohol. If the industry program issufficient to provide a reasonable assurance that legal drugs and alcoholare not causing impairment of workers at nuclear power plants, why is itnot sufficient_in conjunction with the local law enforcement agencies_toprovide the assurance for illegal drug? Why are alcohol and abuse of legaldrugs excluded from our area of concern?andbullet; The staff does an excellent job in describing the effects of marijuana,cocaine, opiates, phencyclidine, and amphetamines and of citing expertworks to support their descriptions. I note that <T3>each one </T3>of the categories of drugs to be tested have observableeffects. Given that the purpose of random testing is detection and deterrence,it seems to me that <T3>testing for cause </T3>would be the preferred alternative since itcan also offer detection, and deterrence while having a much better chanceof being found to be constitutional.andbullet; Finally, I am concerned that we indicate the illegal drugs tobe tested, the frequency of the tests, the mode of testing and yet aresilent, other than for a ``do good'' statement, on the details of proceduresto ensure protection of the rights of those tested. How is the NRC goingto ensure that those rights are protected? If we rely on the unions toprotect their members, how are we going to assure there will be <T3>``uniform program standards''</T3> within the industry?I firmly believe the prudent Constitutional path leads to modificationof this rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Options Considered</ITAG>In developing this proposed rule, various options were considered coveringthe following subjects:I. Impairment amd ReliabilityThe use of alcohol and drugs can directly impair job performance. The effectsof alcohol, which is a drug, are well known and documented, and therefore,are not repeated here, Drugs such as marijuana, sedatives, hallucinogens,and high doses of stimulants could adversely affect an employee's abilityto correctly judge situations and make decisions (NUREG/CR-3196, ``Drugand Alcohol Abuse: The Bases for Employee Assistance Programs in the NuclearIndustry,'' available from the National Technical Information Service).The greatest impairment occurs shortly after use or abuse, and the nagativeshort-term effects on human performance (including subtle or marginal impairmentsthat are difficult for a supervisor to detect) can last for several hoursor days.The problem with determining impairment is that there are many degreesof physical and mental impairment, some of which cannot be detected bycurrent methods. Furthermore, a positive urine test result does not establishthat an individual is currently subject to any physiological or psychologicaleffects of a drug. The most direct measurements of current impairment fromtests of body fluids are obtained from tests of fluid in brain tissue,followed by tests of blood serum. Although a positive urine test resultmay not indicate current impairment, it can provide reasonable evidenceto support the conclusion that the person was impaired or marginally impaired.For these reasons, the actions taken by employers in response to drug useare typically based on ``reliability'' determinations rather than observableevidence of impairment.Reliability determinations are based upon a well-founded assumption thatthe use of the drug or alcohol results in impaired motor and mental functioning.The assumption that the use of illicit drugs and the misuse of alcoholcan cause significant on-the-job impairment is supported by the scientificliterature. The findings of the studies cited herein suggest the likelyeffects of substance use on job performance at nuclear power plants. Thesewere refereed studies (i.e., subject to peer review by experts in the fieldprior to publication) and so represent acceptable experimental techniqueswith findings that are likely to be valid.The following provides a summary of the research literature on drug useand impairment for the five drug types for which random drug testing isrequired (marijuana, cocaine, opiates, phencyclidine, and amphetamines).The recently published ``Second Triennial Report on Drug Abuse and DrugAbuse Research to the Congress,'' from the Secretary, Department of Healthand Human Services, published in 1987, contains a summary of recent researchfindings which are consistent with those described below.<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Marijuana </ITAG>1. <T3>Background.</T3> Frequent smoking of marijuana is associated with adecline in social, mental, psychomotor, and perceptual skills. Marijuanaintoxication impairs motor vehicle driving skills such as motor coordination,eye tracking skills, and perceptual functions (Schwarz and Hawks, 1985).Marijuana intoxication impairs sensory/perceptual performance such s hearingand vision (Murray, 1986). Marijuana intoxication can shorten attentionspan, decrease manual dexterity, and impair motor steadiness (Murray, 1986;NUREG/CR-3196, 1983).Marijuana intoxication impairs performance of cognitive and physical tasks(Fehr and Kalant, 1983). Studies have shown forms of cognitive impairmentsuch as interference with learning, impaired numerical reasoning, and interferencewith the transfer of information from short-term to long-term memory andsusceptibility to distraction or stress (Murray, 1986; NUREG/CR-2196, 1983).The larger the dose, the greater the perceived subjective effect of a ``high,''and the greater the effect on physiologic indexes, such as increased heartrate (Blum, 1984). Research has clearly demonstrated that the degree ofimpairment in individual subjects is dose related; i.e., the greater thedose, the greater the degree of impairment (Chesher, 1986). It should benoted that the potency of street samples of marijuana continues to rise,and is typically two to four times (and for some 14 times) greater thanthat used in most research (Cohen, 1986). The implication is that impairmentfrom marijuana is likely to be more acute than that reported in the literature.There are significant differences between casual and heavy users of marijuana.In one study, casual users of marijuana made five times as many errorson a divided-attention task when they were smoking an ad libitum dose ofmarijuana as they did when they were smoking the placebo. Heavy users didnot show any increase of errors in the ad libitum dose condition. A similarstudy comparing casual and heavy users showed that heavy users displayedmore hostility, poorer work adjustment, and worse interpersonal relationsthan did the casual users. (Murray, 1986).The effects of marijuana intoxication on social interaction vary. Somesubjects become withdrawn; other subjects more aggressive. Marijuana intoxicationgenerally affects social behavior and interaction in a variety of measurableforms, a fact with some implications for crew as well as individual performance.A study of the effects of marijuana intoxication on vehicle driving performancedemonstrated that those who were intoxicated had worse composite drivingperformance than those who were not intoxicated. The study also showedthat even small doses of marijuana impaired driving ability (Klonoff, 1974;Fehr and Kalant, 1983).Studies of the effects of marijuana on aircraft pilot performance showedthat marijuana can produce residual behavioral effects 24 hours after ingestion.Simple performance measure returned within baseline levels in a relativelyshort time; highly complex aspects of the task showed deficits 24 hoursafter ingestion (Yesavage, et al., 1985; Walsh, 1987). Hangover effectsof marijuana induce significant residual subjective and behavioral effectsat least nine hours after smoking (i.e., the next morning) (Chait, et al.,1985; Walsh, 1987).Relatively low amounts of marijuana combined with alcohol can have seriousdisruptive effects on performance (Sutton, 1983; Ross and Ross, 1985).On some tasks, the effects of combined alcohol and marijuana have shownan antagonistic or less than additive reaction between the two drugs. Lowdoses of marijuana combined with alcohol produced an antagonistic effect;high doses of marijuana combined with alcohol produced additive effects.The effects produced by these drugs when used singularly and in combinationproduce qualitatively and quantitatively different effects (Chesher, 1986).Another study concluded that both marijuana and alcohol had significanteffects on driving performance, and the effects were particularly detrimentalwhen both drugs were combined. Marijuana effects had a more rapid onsetthan those of alcohol and were somewhat less severe for most tasks (Peck,et al., 1986).Combining alcohol with marijuana can significantly impair cognitive andpsychomotor task performance. Studies of airplane pilot performance insimulate flight demonstrated that pilots made significant major errors(becoming lost or stalling) and minor errors (altitude and heading deviations)in performance, even though they knew they were under the influence ofmarijuana and attempted to compensate for the effects (Janowsky, et al.,1976; Ross and Ross, 1985). Similar driving simulator studies showed majorperformance decrements (ability to maneuver, negotiate curves, followinganother car, passing a car, etc.) (Smiley, et al., 1981; Moskowitz 1985).Performance decrements are also noted for handsteadiness, execution ofmovements, and body sway (Moskowitz, 1985). A battery of cognitive testsalso revealed performance decrements that were additive when marijuanaand alcohol were combined (Chesher, 1986).Based on evaluations of a variety of actual and simulated driving performancetasks under the influence of marijuana, one study noted that subjects intoxicatedon marijuana appeared to realize that they were impaired and compensatedfor this impairment on task performance whenever they could. Such compensationis obviously not possible in unpredictable or emergency situations (Smiley,1986).One study notes that when the subject is intoxicated due to marijuana,even though the subjective feeling of being ``high'' may no longer be present,performance decrements may still exist, possibly lasting several hours.Thus an operator may be impaired without realizing that his or her performanceis still being affected by marijuana intoxication (Blum, 1984).Factors such as dosage, degree of impairment, and age and experience ofthe operator must be considered when generalizing from clinical resultsto work settings (Fehr and Kalant, 1983). Other factors for considerationinclude the type of task to be performed and the environment in which itis performed.Studies of the long-term or chronic effects of marijuana use on behaviorare sparse. However, one study notes that heavy chronic cannabis usersexhibit behavior labeled as ``amotivational Syndrome''. Characteristicsof amotivational syndrome include apathy, reduced drive and ambition, impairedability to carry out complex tasks, failure to pursue long-term plans,reduced tolerance to frustration, diminished communication skills, neglectof personal appearance, and sluggish mental responses. These characteristicsare not specific to chronic cannabis use; they are found with a numberof psychoactive drugs, primarily those of a sedative-hypnotic nature, andmay be labeled ``chronic cannabis intoxication'' (Fehr and Kalant, 1983).Lasting effects of marijuana use may impair the transfer of new informationinto long-term memory storage (Fehr and Kalant, 1983). There is increasingevidence that long-term, chronic use of marijuana may lead to adverse healtheffect in the individual (Cohen, 1986). However, empirical evidence linkingthe effects of chronic use to decreased performance is not as well developedas research on the acute effects of recent use or intoxication. Marijuanacan induce acute memory impairment that directly affects learning througha dysfunction of normal storage and retrieval mechanisms (See discussion,Walsh, 1987).2. <T3>Physical Signs of Abuse. </T3>Symptoms of marijuana use are chronicfatigue and lethargy, chronic dry irritating cough, chronic sore throat,chronic conjunctivitis (red eyes), or dilated pupils (Blum, 1984).3. <T3>Tolerance and Withdrawal. </T3>Tolerance to cannabis is complex. Itis know that tolerance to tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) develops with prolongeduse. Novice users have a moderate degree of tolerance which actually decreaseswith repeated use. Tolerance then increases with heavy use. There is nodefinitive evidence that chronic users require increasing amount of THCto maintain the same effects. Experienced users do withstand higher dosesthan novices, though, and it is evident that chronic marijuana users developtolerance to the effects of THC (Agurell and Hollister, 1986; Blum, 1984).Withdrawal symtoms after marijuana intoxication are mild, such a lassitudeor mild headache. Withdrawal symptoms after chronic marijuana use is halted(e.g., headaches, stomach cramps, feelings of lassitude) are attributedto psychological dependence (Murray, 1986).4. <T3>Discussion. </T3>The studies to date have focused upon the observableshort-term effects of marijuana intoxication. These studies of marijuanaintoxication show significant effect on cognitive and physical task performance.The findings are not entirely conclusive; there are inconsistencies, forinstance, on the findings regarding memory and learning. This is attributedto the methodology of the studies as well as the unique characteristicsof cannabis, which is a complex psychoactive substance. The majority ofstudies suggest, however, that the more complex a physical or cognitivetask becomes, the greater the likelihood that detectable marijuana intoxicationwill significantly affect or impair performance. Certainly, the performanceof both routine and emergency-related tasks in a nuclear power plant wouldusually qualify as complex.Long-term studies of chronic marijuana use are less conclusive. This isattributed to the general inadequacy of reported data in clinical studies;poor sample sizes; and a lack of adequate differentiation between intoxication,withdrawal, and residual effects. There is also an absence of before-and-afterlongitudinal studies or regular users (Fehr and Kalant, 1983). Evidenceis accumulating that marijuana may also have long-term health effects whichdirectly affect performance, such as impaired memory (Murray, 1986). Long-termadverse health effects due to chronic use, such as physiological damage,are increasingly evident (Cohen, 1986).Cultural and socioeconomic factors may influence the definition and identificationof adverse effects, especially those related to complex emotional or cognitivefunctions (Fehr and Kalant, 1983). For example, impaired performance dueto marijuana intoxication is more likely to be recognized in a controlroom operator than a janitorial worker.Cannabis use is usually combined with tobacco and alcohol, and less frequentlywith cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), and other drugs. When combined withother drugs, the effects of cannabis on the user can be influenced by theother drugs; cannabis can also affect the reaction of other drugs in thesystem (Fehr and Kalant, 1983).Marijuana is known to impair human judgment, short-term memory, and psychomotorfunctions such as driving an automobile (Murray, 1986). Research in thecomplex psychoactive and behavioral effects of marijuana has produced somewhatlimited and qualified conclusions. It is known, however, that marijuanacan significantly impair performance during intoxication. Impairment dueto hangover effects, chronic use, and withdrawal are also possible.<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Cocaine</ITAG>1. <T3>Background. </T3>Cocaine is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant.Cocaine has many behavioral and pharmacological properties which are similarto amphetamines (Fischman, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984).Cocaine primarily affects brain functions. Cocaine can induce feelingsof euphoria, relieve fatigue and boredom, and produce effects which aresimilar to local anesthetics (Washton and Gold, 1987). Given cocaine'srecent elevation to the status of a major drug of abuse, cocaine psychopharmacologyand studies of the general behavioral effects of its consumption by humanbeings are not as well developed as studies of other drugs of abuse (Jones,NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984). Methods of consumption andamounts of dosage vary widely. Cocaine consumption has risen dramaticallyin the United States throughout the 1980s. Cocaine is listed as secondamong the top 20 controlled substances in 1986, or a percentage increaseof 253 percent for emergency room admissions in a 6-year period (Frank,1987). Cocaine is a powerful drug; single doses have been known to induceseizures (Washton and Gold, 1987).2. <T3>Effects on Performance. </T3>The primary physiological effects of cocaineare cardiovascular: heart rate, blood pressure, and body temperature aresignificantly raised following ingestion (Byck, 1987). The effects causedby cocaine are relatively short in duration. Cocaine heightens mental stimulation(Jones, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984). Many cocaine usersbelieve that cognitive and psychomotor task performances are heightenedunder the influence of cocaine. Studies do not support this contention(Fischman, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984). Subjective moodprofiles of individuals under the influence of cocaine revealed heightenedconfusion, anxiety, friendliness, vigor, elation, arousal, and positivedisposition, i.e., moods characteristic of stimulant or amphetamine use(Fischman, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984).Cocaine intoxication dramatically affects vision. Studies have demonstratedthat vision is impaired during cocaine intoxication; subjects reportedincreased sensitivity to light, halos around bright objects, and difficultyfocusing the eyes (Siegel, 1987). During one study which measured drivingperformance of subjects while intoxicated on cocaine, 100 percent of thesubjects reported lapses of attention while driving and ignoring relevantstimuli, such as changes in traffic signals (Siegel, 1987). Cocaine canincrease irritability, hyperexcitability, and startle responses (Davis,1985; Siegel, 1987). Sudden sounds, such as horns or sirens, caused violentresponses in intoxicated subjects (i.e., rapid steering or braking whiledriving an automobile).Studies have demonstrated that cocaine intoxication interferes with theacquisition of new behavior patterns that require learning (Fischman, NIDAResearch Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984). Impairment in learning has beenevidenced in the first 10-15 minutes after intravenous administration ofcocaine; these effects are seen only in the short-term immediately afteradministration (Fischman, 1984; Walsh, 1987).The belief that cocaine enhances work performance because Inca Indian workerschewed coca leaves and supposedly worked harder is not supported by recentresearch. The subjective perception of working harder is present, yet thereis no measurable improvement in performance (Fischman, NIDA Research Monographandplusmin;50, 1984). It should be noted that current routes of administration(intravenous, nasal, smoked) and dose concentrations are much more intensein effects than chewing coca leaves and may preclude an accurate comparisonother than anecdotal observations.Tests which measured subjects' hand-grip strength and reaction time underthe influence of cocaine showed no significant enhancement or decrementin performance (Fischman, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984).Substantial data exist that demonstrate cocaine's similarities to amphetaminesin that performance in non-sleep deprived subjects is neither enhancednor impaired with normal dosages; these drugs are effective, however, inreturning sleep-deprived subjects to pre-deprivation performance levels.For example, inhalation of up to 96 mg of cocaine allowed a sleep-deprivedsubject to return to pre-deprivation performance levels (Fischman, NIDAResearch Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984).Cocaine is often used with other drugs such as alcohol, opiates, or CNSdepressants; this polydrug use can affect complex performance, however,specific performance effects have not been adequately studied (Byck, 1987).Cocaine use with alcohol may mask alcohol's effects, i.e., a person mayfeel sober and alert under the influence of cocaine and alcohol thoughhe or she may be significantly impaired (Stone, et al., 1984; Siegel, 1987).Depression is symptomatic of withdrawal or abstinence from cocaine abuse.This is coupled with irritability, anxiety, hypersomnolence, episodic unconsciousness,and attentional dysfunction and ataxia during the initial phase. Cocainesmokers in one study reported impaired driving during this time; severalwere involved in separate collisions resulting in major injuries (Gawinand Kleber, 1986; Siegel, 1987).3. <T3>Physical Signs of Abuse. </T3>Psychological and behavioral symptomsof cocaine abuse are marked by irritability, decreased or dysfunctionalattention, restlessness, hypervigilance, paranoia, and hallucinations (Siegel,1987). Chronic or habitual use produces unacceptable irritability, paranoidand delusional thinking, and other unpleasant effects (Jones, NIDA ResearchMonograph andplusmin;50, 1984). Cocaine psychosis may occur with prolongedhigh-dose cocaine use (Fischman, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984).Acute physical symptoms of cocaine use include increased blood pressureand heart rate, hypertension, blurred vision, increased muscle tension,tremors, palpitations, slurred speech, dysarthria, thirst, anorexia, mydrisis,increased body temperature with sweating, headaches, dizziness, nausea,and diarrhea (Siegel, 1987).4. <T3>Tolerance and Withdrawal. </T3>Tolerance develops quickly in cocaineusers. The effects on the central nervous system which are sought for thecocaine ``high'' are rapidly lessened in frequent or regular cocaine users(Washton and Gold, 1987). In a recent study, the subjective euphoric effectincreased in intensity to a peak one hour after intravenous cocaine injection,then declined toward the baseline at four hours despite the presence ofconstant plasma cocaine levels. This rapid tolerance development is acutein persons who use cocaine on a regular basis. Tolerance development isquantified as an exponential process based on the findings of the study(Ambre, et al., 1988). This acute tolerance development accounts for theprogressive alteration of the cocaine concentration/effect relationshipin individuals (Ambre, et al., 1988).Symptoms of withdrawal from cocaine can occur even with relatively highdoses of cocaine still present in the user's system. Due to acute tolerancedevelopment, increasing the frequency or size of the doses failes to producethe desired effects. The euphoric effects are consistently replaced bydysphoria and global sensations of ``feeling bad'' (Ambre, et al., 1988).Withdrawal following complete cessation of cocaine use is marked by disturbanceand changes in sleep patterns. One study suggests that these changes areinadequately explained by the term ``psychological dependence'' (Jones,NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;50, 1984). These withdrawal symptoms posea strong negative incentive that makes it very difficult to quit usingcocaine as long as the drug is available (Jones, NIDA Research Monographandplusmin;50, 1984; Jones in Washton and Gold, 1987). Further use followingwithdrawal can produce irritability, paranoia, delusional and confusedthinking, and other unpleasant effects leading to a cycle of ceasing andresuming the use of cocaine known as the ``run'' (Jones in Washton andGold, 1987). The nature of cocaine abuse in the workplace will presumablybe cyclical within individuals over time (DuPont in Washton and Gold, 1987).5. <T3>Discussion. </T3>Acute tolerance development and severe and unpleasantwithdrawal symptoms pose a two-fold problem for cocaine users: increasingamounts of cocaine are required to maintain the euphoric ``high'' whichbecomes harder to achieve; and cessation of cocaine use is a difficultand painful process which casts serious doubts upon terming addiction tococaine as merely ``psychological dependence.'' Acute tolerance development hinders accurate studies of cocaine effectson cognitive and psychomotor task performance. Many single-dose studieshave been conducted, yet their applicability to regular users (e.g., multipleuse on a daily basis) is questionable. Cocaine has been much less studiedthan other drugs of abuse such as marijuana or heroin. This is partly dueto the pharmokinetics of the drug itself, and partly due to the inattentiongiven to the drug until the late 1970s, when cocaine became very popular.Cocaine is a relatively fast-acting drug and is quickly metabolized andexcreted from the body. Peak effects are usually experienced 10 to 20 minutesafter ingestion, and total effects last no more than 40 to 50 minutes (Walshand Yohay, 1987). Cocaine'e effects are similar to amphetamines in thatit stimulates the CNS and produces feelings of euphoria. It has been shownthat cocaine does not significantly enhance performance nor does it alwayscreate significant performance decrements in normal dosages; however, acutetolerance development definitely complicates the concentration/drug effectequation, making ``normal'' dosages and consequent effects of cocaine difficultto define. As with amphetamines, cocaine use appears to return sleep-deprivedsubjects to normal pre-depreivation performance levels. Cocaine causes paranoia and aggressiveness. Cocaine abusers tend towardviolence, suspiciousness, and paranoia. There are serious implicationsfor users of cocaine in the workplace at all levels. Social interactionis presumably worsened by cocaine use. Cyclical ``runs'' of cocaine useby a worker create withdrawal and recurrent use symptoms such as irritabilityand lassitude followed by the previously mentioned symptoms of chronicuse. Thus, while the immediate effects of the drug on the central nervoussystem may not necessarily cause impairment, the overall effects on theindividual and his or her interaction with others are likely to createperformance problems in the nuclear power plant setting. The behavioraleffects of cocaine during all phases of use_intoxication, hangover, dependence,and withdrawal_directly and indirectly impact performance. <ITAG tagnum="81">C. Opiates </ITAG>1. <T3>Background. </T3>Opiates, or opioids, encompass natural drugs derivedfrom the opium poppy and synthetic drugs that possess distinct chemicalstructures, but similar pharmacological characteristics to natural opiumproducts. The term ``narcotics'' is used to describe this class of drug(Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983). Opioids are used both for medical treatment and personal (recreational)reasons. Opioids primarily affect the Central Nervous System (CNS). Opioidsare among the most effective drugs known to relieve pain. Common effectsinclude mood changes, mental clouding, or more commonly, euphoria. Naturalopioid drugs include opium, heroin, codeine, and morphine. Synthetic opioidsinclude hydromorphone (Dilaudid) oxymorphone (Numorphan), oxycodone (inPercodan), hydrocodone (in Hycodan), methadone, propoxyphene (Darvon),meperidine (Demerol), and other synthetic variations. Though these variousopioids have subtle differences in the duration of effects, withdrawalpatterns, and absorption, the pharmocologic characteristics of these drugscan be described for the group as a whole (Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis,and Woolf, 1983). Opioids are ingested intravenously, orally, and by inhalation.Heroin overdose ranks first among the top 20 controlled substances basedon national estimates of emergency room admissions, a 108 percent increasesince 1980; codeine combinations and Percodan (licit use) are listed as5th and 14th (Frank, 1987). 2. <T3>Effects on Performance. </T3>There are many known effects of opioids.Opioids produce mental clouding, promote faulty judgment, reduce hunger,induce feelings of euphoria, reduce the ability to concentrate, reducesex drive, produce drowsiness, produce apathy, reduce activity, and reduceaggressive drives (Woolf, in Bennet, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983). Cognitive and psychomotor performance are generally impaired by narcotic-likedrugs, although the duration and extent of the impairment depends on thetype of opioid, the dose, and the experience and drug history of the user.Ingestion of low to moderate amounts produces a short-lived feeling ofeuphoria followed by a state of physical and mental relaxation which persistsfor several hours (Walsh and Yohay, 1987). Use of other drugs with opioids can produce additive effects: combiningalcohol with opioids produces marked sedation and respiratory depressiondue to the sedative effects of these drugs on the CNS; this can lead tounconsciousness or death (Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983).3. <T3>Physical signs of Abuse. </T3>Opioid use may produce side effects ofdrowsiness, constipation, nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic hypotension(Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983).Characteristics of opioid users include pupillary constriction, depression,apathy, or lethargy. Flu-like symptoms are common symptoms of opioid withdrawal,e.g., watery eyes, nausea and vomiting, muscle cramps, loss of appetite,and other symptoms (Blum, 1984).4. <T3>Tolerance and Withdrawal. </T3>Selective tolerance may develop withopioid use; tolerance may develop to one effect of an opioid but not toothers (Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983). Tolerance decreasesrapidly following cessation of the drug. Chronic users may abstain fromopioid use for short periods of time to regain the ``high'' which theylost due to increased tolerance.All opioids are physically and psychologically addictive. All produce withdrawalsymptoms with individual differences in type and severity. The degree towhich addiction occurs varies among the opioids. Withdrawal symptoms canbe violent. For instance, withdrawal from morphine produces the followingsymptoms in order of severity and progression (4 to 10 weeks) after cessationof drug use: runny nose, extreme yawning, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, sweating,cold/hot flashes, aching joints, muscles, and bones, twitchings, tremor,muscle spasm, elevated temperature, goose flesh, dilated pupils, blurredvision, high blood pressure, restlessness, anxiety, irritability, increasedrespiration, and insomnia (Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983).If an opioid user is addicted and tolerant of the effects of one opioid,he or she will usually be tolerant of another. If one opioid is substitutedfor the effects of another, then withdrawal symptoms will cease until thesecond opioid is withdrawn (Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983).5. <T3>Discussion. </T3>The opioids are a large class of drugs primarily derivedfrom the poppy. Opioid drugs are either natural or synthetic. Opioids affectCNS functions, primarily acting as a pain reliever, or, in larger doses,a hallucinogen. Cognitive and psychomotor performance are generally impairedduring opioid intoxication. Opioids are physically and psychologicallyaddictive, with severe withdrawal symptoms during abstention, lasting upto 4-10 weeks (Woolf, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983).Particular attention should be given to licit use on the job of opioid-basedproducts, such as pain relievers or other prescription and over-the-counterdrugs. Sufficient dosages can impair on-the-job performance, especiallywhen combined with other drugs such as alcohol (Moskowitz, 1985).<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Phencyclidine</ITAG>1. <T3>Background. </T3>Phencyclidine, commonly known as PCP, was first introducedin 1957. It is now a major drug of abuse and is listed as 8th among thetop 20 controlled substances based on national estimates of emergency roomadmissions (Frank, 1987). PCP has a variety of effects on the central nervoussystem (CNS), making an adequate classification of the drug difficult.It is best understood as a hallucinogen (Holbrook, in Bennett, Vourakis,and Woolf, 1983). PCP can cause CNS stimulation and depression with a greatdeal of variability depending upon the dose and type of PCP. PCP intoxicationbegins several minutes after ingestion of the drug and usually lasts upto 8 hours or more (Walsh and Yohay, 1987). PCP is well known for producingunpredicable side effects following intoxication, such as acute psychosisor fits of agitation and excitability. Intoxication in low doses of 5 to20 mg of PCP resembles an acute confused state (Marwah and Pitts, NIDAResearch Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986). Higher doses in excess of 20 mgcan elicit serious neurological, cardiovascular, and psychotic reactions.In fact, PCP-induced psychosis is similar in effects to clinical schizophrenia(Marwah and Pitts, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986).There have been relatively few studies of the behavorial effects of PCPin humans due to the volatility and unpredictability of the side effectsof PCP. Also, PCP's opularity as a drug of abuse is relatively recent.However, there are sufficient clinical studies, criminal cases, and behavioralobservations that conclusively demonstrate PCP's erratic and serve behavioraleffects.2. <T3>Effects on Performance. </T3>The behavioral effects associated withPCP use are variable and often dependent upon both the person and the environment.Clincal studies have identified four phases of PCP abuse that may appearin successive stages. The first phase is termed acute PCP toxicity. Behavioraleffects include combativeness, catatonia, convulsions, and coma, all ofwhich are dose related. Visual disturbances, particularly distortion ofsize, shape, and distance perception are common. The first phase may lastup to 72 hours. The second phase is characterized by grand mal seizures,coma, and death due to respiratory depression following sufficiently highdoses. The second phase may last up to 7 days or longer. The third phaseis characterized by schizophrenia which may last a month or longer. Thefourth phase is characterized by PCP-induced depression, especially seriousdue to the high likehihood of suicide at this time (Holbrook, in Bennett,Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983). Performance impairment at any of these levelsis highly probable. Clinical cases have documented the severe debilitatingphysical and psychological effects of PCP abuse and the extremely unpredictablebehavior that the drug causes. Persons under the influence of PCP may precipitatelife-threatening situations due to the disorienting and hallucinogeniceffects of PCP intoxication (Holbrook, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf,1983).Studies have demonstrated that PCP can also elicit behavioral effects inusers similar to barbiturates or other sedative/anesthetics (Balster, NIDAResearch Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986). It is obvious that heavy users ofPCP would exhibit motor impairment. Task performance requiring motor coordination,such as driving an automobile, would be signficantly disrupted by PCP (Balster,NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986). In fact, several fatal accidentsinvolving PCP-intoxicated drivers highlighted severe coordiantion impairment,acute confusional state, and an inability of the intoxicated driver tothink abstractly or make rational decisions (Lerner and Burns, NIDA ResearchMonograph andplusmin;64 1986).In combination, PCP significantly enhances the effects of classical depressantdrugs, including barbiturates and ethanol (Balster and Wessinger, 1983;Balster, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986). Use of PCP with otherdepressants such as alcohol is a potentially lethal combination which hasan additive effect on PCP intoxication, and may explain some behavioralobservations of PCP intoxication (Balster, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64,1986).PCP users have reported unique intoxicating effects of the drug unlikethose of other drugs of abuse. However, self-administration studies ofPCP reveal that patterns of abuse similar to barbiturate and alcohol abuse:dosage intake is sufficiently high to cause marked behavioral effects (Balster,NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986).3. <T3>Physical Signs of Abuse. </T3>PCP intoxication is marked by difficultiesin coordination; severe confusional or agitated state; inexplicable moodchanges between lassitude and extreme agitation; moods such as suspicion,anger, or terror; and erratic of violent actions (Balster, NIDA ResearchMonograph andplusmin;64, 1986; Holbrook, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf,1983).4. <T3>Tolerance and Withdrawal. </T3>Animal studies have shown tolerancedevelopment following continuous use of PCP (Balster, NIDA Research Monographandplusmin;64, 1986). Tolerance develops in human subjects with mildly frequent(daily) use (Holbrook, in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983), althoughimplications of long-term use are not yet fully understood (Jain, et al.,1977; Marwah and Pitts, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986).Animal studies have shown dramatic withdrawal symptoms following the terminationof PCP use, such as vocalizations; hyperactivity; lassitude; tremors; and,in one case, convulsions (Balster, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64,1986). These symptoms appeared within 8 hours of abstinence and were mostsevere at 24 hours (Balster, NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;64, 1986).PCP has not been reported to produce physical dependence even with chronicuse in humans. However, psychological dependence is reported frequentlyamong chronic users (Holbrook in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983).5. <T3>Discussion. </T3>PCP is a complex hallucinogenic drug with diverse,and often dangerous or lethal, behavioral effects on humans. The understandingof PCP's physiologic and psychologic effects on humans is still relativelynew. It is well known, however, that PCP is an unusually dangerous psychoactivesubstance with unpredictable behavioral effects.Long-term adverse health effects of PCP use are significant. Irreversiblememory loss, personality changes, and thought disorders have been documented.Spontaneous recurrences of drug effects (flashbacks) are possible. Numerousfatalities due to PCP intoxication have been documented (Walsh and Yohay,1987). Obviously, these characteristics of PCP intoxication, chronic use,and withdrawal have serious job performance implications. It may be assumedthat any use of PCP will significantly impair the abuser's short-term,and perhaps permanent, cognitive and psychomotor capabilities.<ITAG tagnum="81">E. Amphetamines</ITAG>1. <T3>Background. </T3>Amphetamines are central nervous system (CNS) stimulants.The term ``amphetamine'' is generic and applies to the group of syntheticcompounds derived from ephedrine (Holbrook in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf,1983). Examples of common trade name amphetamines are Benzedrine (racemicamphetamine); Dexerdrine (dextroamphetamine); and Desoxyn (methamphetamine).The behavioral effects of amphetamines are similar to cocaine; however,the two types of stimulants differ in that amphetamines have a longer durationof behavioral effect and greater toxicity than cocaine (Holbrook; see Bennett,Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983). Amphetamines are found in licit and illictform. In general, amphetamines stimulate pulse; heart beat; blood pressure;respiration; perspiration; and, at higher doses, increase body temperatureand basal metabolism rate (Caldwell, 1980).2. <T3>Effects on Performance. </T3>Amphetamines are widely used to increasealertness and fight fatigue. Studies have shown that in therapeutic doses,amphetamines increase alertness, decrease fatigue, elevate mood, and frequentlyproduce euphoria. Motor activity is increased and physical performanceof simple tasks is improved. Sleep patterns are distrubed and total sleeptime is decreased (Holbrook in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf, 1983). Usersof small doses experience a heightened sense of well-being, sharp attentiveness,an increaed acuity of reflexes, and idealization (Caldwell, 1980).The effects of amphetamines on cognitive and psychomotor task performanceare well documented. Amphetamines improve short-term physical performancein a variety of areas, such as vigilance performance (the ability to attendto sensory input); motor performance (swimming, running, etc.); learningor acquisition of motor skills; and reaction time. With controlled doses,the adverse effects on physical performance were minimal (NUREG/CR-3916,1983). Simple short-term cognitive performance, such as performing repetitivetasks which elicit fatigue or boredom; simple math tests; verbal abilitytests; learning of visual information; and enhanced ability to read andunderstand a foreign language improves with controlled doses (NUREG/CR-3196,1983). Tests of cognitive tasks requiring relatively more complex skillssuch as calculus did not show performance changes under the influence ofamphetamines (NUREG/CR-3196, 1983). High doses of amphetamines, however,produce an exaggerated sense of well-being, high energy, restlessness,urgency, overideation, and gross temporal distortion (Caldwell, 1980).Cognitive and psychomotor task performance decrements due to amphetamineuse on a regular basis are highly likely: ``runs'' or cycles similar tococaine runs of abuse and abstinence are also characteristic of amphetamineabuse. Behavioral effects due to these cycles of abuse would directly impactcognitive and psychomotor task performance. Secondary effects of amphetamineabuse such as hangovers, rebound depressions, and insomnia directly impactcognitive and psychomotor task performance. Amphetamine abuse among truckdrivers is cited as one example (Caldwell, 1980).Because of acute tolerance development, there are fewer performance decrementsexperienced by regular users of amphetamines than by initial users. Onestudy revealed, however, that after the establishment of tolerance andsustained drug levels throughout a 24-hour period, drug cessation producedthe following performance effects: performance impairment initially decreasedas the drug level in the subject declined, followed by increased impairmentas the adverse effects of drug withdrawal_hyperexcitability and/or delirium_appeared(Ellinwood and Nikaido, 1987).3. <T3>Physical Signs of abuse. </T3>With high doses, gastrointestinal functionmay be altered, and nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and cramping may occur.Cardiovascular signs of heavy use include headache, hypertension, pallor,palpitations. CNS signs of heavy use include hyperreflexia, restlessness,talkativeness, insomnia, violence, and increased libido (Caldwell, 1980).High dose may result in amphetamine psychosis, which resembles a true paranoidschizophrenia in the clinical sense. Amphetamine addiction is probablewith continued or frequent use (Holbrook in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf,1983).Evidence of stimulant intoxication in the form of hyperexcitability anddeterioration of driving skills occurs with increasing doses (Ellinwoodand Nikaido, 1987). Aggression and violence are potential side effectsof higher doses of stimultants. Highly toxic doses can induce hallucination,delirium, and delusions (Ellinwood, 1971; Ellinwood and Nikaido, 1987).4. <T3>Tolerance and Withdrawal. </T3>Similar to cocaine, amphetamine tolerancedevelopment is rapid (Caldwell, 1980). Chronic use of the amphetaminesleads to development of a tolerance for the stimulant and appetite-suppressanteffects of amphetamines, even when administered in low therapeutic doses.Chronic abuse leads to high tolerance (Holbrook in Bennett, Vourakis, andWoolf, 1983).Amphetamines are psychologically addictive. Though no physical withdrawalsymptoms occur following abrupt discontinuation of use, psychological changes,such as apathy, long periods of sleep, irritability, depression, and disorientation,may be prominent for several months. Paranoia may follow the first sevendays of withdrawal following the abrupt cessation of heavy use; delusionsmay persist for up to a year (Holbrook in Bennett, Vourakis, and Woolf,1983).5. <T3>Discussion. </T3>Amphetamines stimulate the CNS and cardiovascularsystem. Short-term physical and simple cognitive task performance is heightenedto a minor degree by the use of amphetamines. Complex cognitive task performanceis not heightened by the use of amphetamines. Small and moderate dosesof amphetamines enhance cognitive and psychomotor task performance on specificand simple tasks, such as vigilance, but these performance enhancementsare lost as the complexity of the task increases (Ellinwood and Nikaido,1987). Significant performance decrements occur as a result of acute tolerancedevelopment, hangover effects, and withdrawal symptoms. Thus, many short-termgains in cognitive and task performance are outweighed by the adverse performanceeffects due to regular use of amphetamines.Secondary effects of amphetamine abuse such as ``runs'' and withdrawal``crashes'' may adversely affect cognitive and psychomotor task performance.If used frequently, amphetamine addiction is likely. Chronic users of amphetaminesare likely to develop tolerance to the CNS effects of amphetamines as wellas psychological dependence. Withdrawal symptoms are psychological andproduce a variety of adverse behavioral effects which directly impact cognitiveand psychomotor task performance. Similar to cocaine abuse, the natureof amphetamine abuse in the workplace will presumably be cyclical withinindividuals over time (Hurst, 1987).<ITAG tagnum="81">F. Summary</ITAG>Use of any of the five listed drugs in the preceding discussion can directlyand indirectly affect or impair on-the-job performance through intoxication,hangover, dependence, or withdrawal effects.Emphasis should be placed upon examining all phases of drug use in theworkplace, since drug-seeking behavior, administration, acute and chronicintoxication, hangover, and withdrawal phases of drug usage may all havedetrimental effects on individual and team performance (Walsh, 1987).The present ability to predict the behavioral consequences of drug useis limited; the ability to accurately predict the specific behavioral performanceof an individual under the influence of a certain drug is minimal (Walsh,1987).One applicable measure of drug-induced impairment in the nuclear industrymay be injury rates. As one researcher states, ``A common but incompleteand poorly understood thread that passes through injury reports is thefrequency with which alcohol and drugs are involved'' (Walsh, 1987).A multiplicity of variables complicates the drug dosage/impairment relationship:the type and potency of the drug, patterns of consumption, the individual'sphysical and psychological characteristics, the environment in which thedrug is used, and group interaction. However, three generalizations maybe made regarding the drug dosage/impairment relationship: high doses generallyhave greater behavioral effects than low doses, well-learned tasks areless affected by drugs than novel tasks, and motivation regarding the taskis an important factor (Walsh, 1987). Further, the studies conclusivelydemonstrate certain behavioral effects of drug use that impair the userin a variety of cognitive, psychological, and social performance areas.A clear relationship has been demonstrated among drug use (nonspecificdosage), general behavioral effects, and impairment. It is obvious fromthe research that use of any of these five drugs or types of drugs aloneor in combination has the overwhelming potential to impair workers in theperformance of their duties. The question is not whether drugs impair performance,but how they do so under given circumstances.II. Alternatives to UrinalysisThe Commission considered techniques for analyzing blood, breath, saliva,fingernails, and brainwave patterns and concluded that there is no viablesubstitute for urinalysis in the near future, either technically or practically.<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Analysis of Blood Plasma</ITAG>The analysis of blood has some significant advantages over urinalysis.The main advantage is that there is a much more direct relationship betweenblood levels of a drug and impairment, since levels in the blood are moredirectly reflective of effects on the CNS. In the case of alcohol, of course,legal limits defining probable impairment have been established in statelaw. Equivalent standards for other drugs are not generally available,but an analysis of blood can identify the extreme cases where there isno doubt of impairment. However, current data are insufficient to establishcutoff levels to distinguish between impaired and unimpaired individuals(Consensus Report, Nov. 8, 1985). Blood tests are useful in post-accidentanalyses if the subjects can be sampled quickly. Another minor advantageof blood testing is that tests can usually deal directly with the drugof interest, rather than one of its metabolites (in urine), and may thusavoid some of the problems with cross reaction.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Cross reaction occurs when a substance other than thedrug or drug matabolite being tested for in a specimen creates a positivetest result.There are problems with testing blood or plasma, however. One of the mostsignificant is the higher level of intrusiveness (Dogoloff and Angarola,1985). The drawing of blood involves pain and trauma for some; concernabout AIDS would heighten the anxiety, though unreasonably. The collectionof samples would be more expensive, requiring trained medical personnel(Walsh and Yohay, 1987).There are also particular substances, such as cocaine, with such a shorthalf-life in the blood that the chances of identifying users through bloodtests are substantially reduced (Washton and Gold, 1987). Also, the concentrationof metabolites in urine is sometimes higher than the concentration of thedrug in plasma, as in the case of amphetamines (Nelson and Moffat 1980,in <T3>Amphetamines and Related Stimulants</T3>) and cocaine (Washton andGold, 1987). In general, drugs and their metabolites can be identifiedover a longer period of time through urinalysis (Washton and Gold, 1987).<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Analysis of Saliva</ITAG>The analysis of saliva is receiving considerable attention. Radioimmunoassay(RIA) procedures for testing saliva exist; also there is a commercial kitavailable for testing saliva. If technically feasible, the use of salivawould avoid some of the intrusiveness and embarrassment of urinalysis.While clinical studies using saliva have been conducted for a number ofyears (Caddy, 1984), saliva testing currently does not represent a viablealternative to urinalysis (Walsh and Yohay, 1987). Analyses of saliva forpurposes of detecting marijuana use, for example, have found that suchthings as food consumption and mode of ingestion can dramatically affectthe ability of assays to detect marijuana use (Hawks, 1982). Also, thereis rarely a large enough volume of specimen for confirmation purposes.<ITAG tagnum="81">C. Analysis of Hair</ITAG>One drug testing technique involves the use of hair. Hair can be used toidentify where there has been a past history of drug use. In fact, it canprovide information on drug use over a much longer period than can urinalysis(Baumgartner, Black, Jones, and Blahs, 1982). However, ``hair analysishas not been validated extensively enough in clinical studies to make anadequate assessment of its suitability for general drug screening. (Walshand Yohay, 1987).'' (Puschel, Thomasch, and Arnold 1983). This is a veryexpensive test, which would prohibit its use for a large volume of tests,especially the initial screening tests. A more appropriate applicationmay be for objective diagnosis of a patient's drug history.<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Analysis of Speech</ITAG>Another technique involves the analysis of speech to determine the stateof a person's intoxication. Since drugs affect the neurotransmitters andreceptors in the brain, the speech of the alcohol or drug user is affectedaccordingly. The measure of impairment is derived from the time and frequencyof spoken numerical digits. This technique is intended to be a measureof impairment of a subject at the time of examination, and should avoidchallenges based on invasion of privacy. It is not a test for prior useof drugs where measurable impairment no longer exists. Since the impairingeffects of drugs are usually of briefer duration than the detectable levelsin urine, the opportunities for detection of drug use are somewhat lessthan with urinalysis.<ITAG tagnum="81">E. Analysis of Other Specimens</ITAG>Other techniques are at the experimental or developmental stages. For example,breathalizers are being developed for testing for marijuana smoking. Generalizedtests are being developed for body fluids ranging from sweat to mucousfrom the eyes. Techniques are being developed to analyze brainwave patternsand measure eye movement. Anaylsis of fingernails is also being considered.However, a review of the literature indicates that the technical basisdoes not yet exist to support a legally defensible, wide scale use of thesetechniques either for screening or confirmatory purposes. Since urinalysistesting appears feasible in the short run, other techniques will not beconsidered at this time. The Commission will continue to monitor developmentsin other testing technologies to determine when and if they offer an improvementover urinalysis.III. Random Testing and Alternatives Random testing (unannounced drug testing imposed in a statistically randommanner) serves two purposes: detection and deterence. It would appear thatany form of <T3>unannounced</T3> testing that would be administered so that a personcompleting a test is immediately eligible for another unannounced testwould satisfy criteria for deterrence. Several potential alternatives wereconsidered, including employee awareness, other types of testing (preemployment,announced periodic, for-cause, etc.), reliance on behavioral observationsand the Employee Assistance Program, various security measures, and combinationsof these alternatives. One goal of the Commission in proposing this rule is to bring about a nuclearpower plant workplace free from the effects of drugs. Such a workplacewould ensure, to a large measure, that impairment of function from druguse would not adversely affect the safety of nuclear power plant operations.A workplace free from the effects of drug use would also help assure thereliability of the nuclear power plant workforce to properly perform activitiesthat require scrupulous adherence to rules and procedures. Random testingappears to be an effective means of achieving this goal. The Commissionconcludes that unannounced random testing is a strong deterrent to druguse, is a necessary element of an effective fitness-for-duty program, andthat no alternative or combination of alternatives would provide an acceptablelevel of both detection and deterrence. Systematic data on the efficiency of random testing are only availablefrom the various programs implemented by the Department of Defense. Illicitdrug use in the Army has been reported as dropping from 29 percent in 1980to 11.5 percent in 1986 (Raezer, 1987). In the Navy, rates have been reportedto have dropped from 47 percent in 1981 to around 4 percent in 1986 (citedin <T3>C andamp; EN</T3>; June, 1986). Rates among U.S. Coast Guard personnelare down from 10 percent in 1983 to 3 percent in 1986; this decrease isattributed to a random drug testing program (Bureau of National Affairs,1987). In all three cases, the reduction was measured by the rates of confirmedpositive tests during random drug testing, and the observed decrease inrates followed the implementation of the random drug testing program. Thispattern is consistent with what would be expected if random drug testingwas to have a strong deterrent effect. Although other factors, such asdrug education programs, negative press associated with drug abuse, stringentdisciplinary action, and a better selection (hiring) process, may be affectingthe results, available data indicate that there are substantial reductionsin drug use associated with the implementation of a random drug testingprogram. The Department of Transportation (DOT) has been the leading federal agencyin implementing drug testing programs for private sector employees subjectto federal regulatory jurisdiction. None of the agencies in the Departmentcurrently requires random drug or alcohol testing of private sector employees,but such requirements are being actively considered through proposed rulemaking.The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) has detailed regulations coveringalcohol and drug use by railroad employees whose working hours are regulatedunder the Hours of Service Act (15 U.S.C. 61). Under the provisions of49 CFR Part 219, employees are prohibited from using, possessing, or beingimpaired by alcohol or controlled substances while on duty. Blood and urinesamples of employees involved in railroad accidents are to be taken andpreserved. Railroad companies may require breath or urine tests from employeeswhen there is reasonable cause for suspecting prohibited use of alcoholor drugs. Railroads are required to administer a drug test to new employeescovered under the Act. The Federal Highway Administration (FHA) prohibits interstate commercialtruck drivers from using amphetamines, narcotics, or any habit-formingdrugs, and also requires that they have no current clinical diagnosis ofalcoholism (49 CFR 391.41). FHA is preparing a notice of proposed rulemakingthat will propose a comprehensive drug control program applicable to alldrivers in interstate commerce (See entry in Unified Agenda of FederalRegulations published on October 26, 1987; 52 FR 40630). The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) prohibits flight crewmembersfrom being under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Tests must be takenwithin four hours of acting as a crewmember when there is a reasonablebasis to suspect a violation. The FAA has suggested that random and scheduleddrug and alcohol testing may be needed for flight and certain ground crewmembersto protect the public safety (December 9, 1986; 51 FR 44433). A DOT proposedrule that would require random testing of airline employees involved inflight operations and maintenance has been published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (53 FR 8386). The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) is the primary maritime law enforcement agencyfor the U.S. It has proposed regulations prohibiting operation of a vesselwhile intoxicated (February 9, 1987; 52 FR 4116). For commercial operators,intoxication is defined to be .04 percent by weight or more alcohol inthe blood or when the effect of alcohol or an illegal drug on the operator'smanner or behavior is apparent. For recreational operators, the only differenceis that the applicable percentage is 0.1 percent. The USCG is preparinga notice of proposed rulemaking covering use of dangerous drugs by merchantmarine personnel. The option being considered is a requirement that individualsapplying for licenses, certificates of registry, and merchant mariner'sdocuments provide the results of drug tests before issuance or renewal(See entry in Unified Agenda of Federal Regulations published on October26, 1987; 52 FR 40582). The proposal also addresses the need for randomdrug testing. The potential alternatives to random unannounced drug testing are manyand varied. They include the following: andbullet; Take no alternative action; andbullet; Testing before employment or badging; andbullet; Periodic drug testing (announced testing);andbullet; ``For-cause'' drug testing; andbullet; Behavioral Observation Program; andbullet; Medical Screening; andbullet; Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs); andbullet; Access Authorization Program; andbullet; Workplace security measures; and andbullet; Employee awareness and education programs. Although systematic data do not exist to compare the efficacy of theseapproaches, the literature and the findings of the staff's data-gatheringactivities do suggest some advantages and disadvantages for each. Theseare discussed below: <ITAG tagnum="81">A. Take no Alternative Action </ITAG>The first alternative to random drug testing to be considered is to takeno alternative action. This is clearly not a viable alternative. Statisticsavailable on drug use in the workplace indicate that a significant minorityof workers have or are currently abusing drugs or alcohol in the workplace(Neuner, 1985). While the exact statistics vary from one source to another,a middle range estimate is that approximately 10-25 percent of Americanworkers abuse drugs and alcohol in the workplace. While the incidence ofdrug abuse in the nuclear industry can be expected to be lower, based inpart on the existing security measures at power plant sites and the relativelyaggressive fitness-for-duty programs that characterize the industry, thepotential for drug abuse still exists. The fact that approximately two-thirdsof the power plant licensees have not implemented random testing programs,some because of union intervention or prohibition by State laws, suggeststhat significant reductions in the abuse of drugs by nuclear utility workerscould be realized when the preventive and deterrent effects of industry-widerandom testing programs are realized. <ITAG tagnum="81">B. Testing Before Employment or Badging </ITAG>Testing before employment or badging is conducted by many employers toensure that individuals who cannot meet fitness-for-duty standards arenot placed into sensitive jobs. Considered by industry as the first lineof protection against drug problems, preemployment testing is specificallyused to detect and identify the nature of drug use, if any, by job applicants,and to identify abusers prior to hiring. Although screening has focusedon drug abuse, most large industrial companies now include tests for alcoholas part of preemployment testing (Willette, 1986). Individuals with positiveresults generally do not receive further consideration for employment (McClellan,1984). Preemployment testing is currently the most prevalent type of drugtesting (Hanson, 1986). Virtually every nuclear power utility currentlyemployees this type of testing. Preemployment testing has some disadvantage. As part of a company's hiringpolicy, it will certainly be known to most applicants. This knowledge removesany element of surprise, essentially making it an announced test and, therefore,allows applicants to be prepared for the test. A sophisticated or ``streetsmart'' drug abuser may be able to avoid detection, and less frequent usersmay be likely to abstain long enough to guarantee a ``clean'' sample. Newtesting techniques are in the process of being developed that may be capableof identifying previous (several months) drug use. However, these techniqueshave not yet been refined. Consequently, the ability of preemployment todetect substance abusers currently is limited. Even so, licensees reportthat, typically, 5 percent or more of applicants for employment or unescortedaccess to a power reactor are tested positive. The primary disadvantage to using preemployment testing as an alternativeto random drug testing is that it in no way addresses substance abuse ordependency problems among the workforce subsequent to employment. Applicantswho pass the preemployment testing and become employees may never facetesting again. The deterrence factor, implicit in random drug testing programs,is absent. Preemployment testing is probably most effective when it isdirected to keeping individuals currently experiencing chemical dependencyout of the workforce, and is thus a necessary part of a total fitness-for-dutyprogram but is not sufficient in itself. <ITAG tagnum="81">C. Periodic Drug Testing (Announced Testing) </ITAG>Periodic Testing appears to have few, if any, advantages over random testing.Periodic testing, whether announced or unannounced, may be perceived byemployees as less discriminatory than random testing in that, on a givendate <T3>all</T3> available employees are tested. In a random testing program,some employees are selected at random and tested. Because it may be impracticalto test the entire body of employees on any given day, utilities may optto use a random testing program. Under random testing, some employees maycoincidentally be tested more frequently than others, and the utility maybe required to prove that the selection process is truly random in reponseto a legal challenge. If testing is announced and scheduled at regularintervals, however, all employees would be tested equally, at least theoretically.Further, if selection for random testing is truly random, an employee could,strictly through chance, not be selected for testing for an extended periodof time. As a result, employees with substance abuse problems may not bedetected in a timely manner, and their abuse problems may increase in severitybefore they are detected in the random testing program or the behavioralobservation program. Periodic testing could ensure that all employees aretested with adequate frequency. Should the testing be announced, immediate, pronounced disciplinary actioncould be taken without concern that the action is inappropriately severe,because any employee who cannot remain drug- or alcohol-free for an announcedtest most likely has a severe substance abuse problem and displays an obviousdisregard for the safety of the public, co-workers, and self. It is apparent that announced, periodic tests would not identify some drugabusers that periodic or random unannounced testing would identify, andthat the deterrent value of announced testing would only be short-term.Announced, periodic testing would be less effective in detecting abuseof drugs that are rapidly metabolized, such as cocaine. It is expected,however, that an announced, periodic program would identify some regularusers of prescription drugs, and users of slowly metabolized drugs suchas marijuana. Because announced, periodic testing would potentially allowmany employees who abuse drugs to escape detection, it seem clear thatannounced tests would be less effective than random tests at identifyingand deterring the occasional drug users. None of the industries surveyedin NRC's review of other regulated industries or those described in literaturehave adopted this approach. <ITAG tagnum="81">D. For-cause Drug Testing</ITAG>  A for-cause testing program has several positive features. In a properlyimplemented program, when there is cause for a supervisor or co-workerto suspect that an employee is unfit or the employee has been involvedin an on-the-job accident, the employee is given a complete physical examinationwhich includes drug testing. This examination may identify health problemsother than drug abuse that have diminished the employee's ability to performsafety-related responsibilities. The examination can also include testingfor legal drugs of potential abuse, such as alcohol, over-the-counter drugs,and prescription drugs.  A for-cause program may have fewer legal problems than a random testingprogram becaus there is a specific reasonable cause for the individualtest. In a random testing program, the legal justification is that thereis a possibility that impaired employees are present who represent a potentialrisk to the safety of themsleves, their co-workers, or the public. However,when a for-cause test is conducted, the employee in question presents anindividualized suspicion of illegal conduct. Further, if the motivationfor testing is the investigation of an accident, the utility has a clearresponsibility to do everything possible to identify the cause of the accidentto ensure that similar accidents are prevented in the future. There isa body of legal precedent in support of for-cause testing from variousindustries with safety concerns, including railroads, transportation companies,and the aviation industry.  Some of the leading cases supporting for-cause testing include: <T3>Schmerber </T3>v. <T3>California, </T3>384 U.S. 757 (1966), (blood tests for alcohol on drunkdriving arrest); <T3>Division 241 Amalgamated Transit Union </T3>v. <T3>Suscy, </T3>538 F. 2d. 1264 (7th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 429 U.S.1029, (blood and urine testing of bus drivers after an accident upheld);<T3>Shoemaker </T3>v. <T3>Handel, </T3>795 F. 2d 1136 (3rd Cir.), cert. denied, 107 S. Ct. 577(1986), (urine and breath test for licensed jockeys upheld); <T3>McDonnell </T3>v. <T3>Hunter, </T3>809 F. 2d. 1302 (8th Cir. 1987), (testing of prison guards);of <T3>RLEA </T3>v. <T3>Burnley, </T3><T2>XX</T2>F. 2d <T2>XX</T2>, (9th Cir., decided February 11, 1988.  A random testing program can be expected to be a stronger deterrent tochronic drug use than would a for-cause testing program. When drug testsare administered to all employees on a random basis, a chronic drug usercan expect, sooner or later, to be identified through the progrma. Someliterature on chronic abusers indicates that they can effectively hidetheir drug or alcohol problems from supervisors and fellow employees fora considerable length of time. On the other hand, an occasional drug usercould hope to escape being detected by a random drug test, expecially ifboth the tests and the employee's drug use are infrequent. In either case,if supervisors are highly proficient in observing probable impairment,the drug-abusing employee may have little expectation that he or she couldbe impaired on duty and avoid a for-cause test. Knowing that fellow workersare disciplined for on-the-job impairment also can be expected to deteremployees from being impaired on the job. Therefore, for-cause testingmight be more effective in deterring users from being impaired on the jobthan would a random testing program alone.  There are two principal disadvantages of for-cause testing as a substitutefor random testing. First, for-casue testing, as discussed above, is likelyto be a less effective deterrent against chronic drug use. Second, if managersare unable to identify impaired employees, for-cause tests will only beadministered after a gross indicator, such as an accident, shows that thetests are warranted; i.e., the test will be after the fact and not preventative.Therefore, with the exception of post-accident testing, the value of for-causetesting is highly dependent on managers' and co-workers' abilities to idenfityemployees who are impaired and an organizational culture which allows managersto require testing without disrupting employer/employee relationships orincurring adverse consequences. Thus, enhanced supervisor proficiency inbehavioral observation through training and experience, and strong supportfrom company management, is important in the administration of for-causetesting.  While for-cause drug testing is an important element of a fitness-for-dutyprogram, it does not appear to be an acceptable alternative to random testing.<ITAG tagnum="81">E. Behavioral Observation Program  </ITAG>Behavioral observation programs are intended to enable supervisors to detectchanges in an employee's behavior and to initiate the appropriate correctiveaction, usually a referral to the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) forinitial evaluation and for-cause testing.  Supevisory referrals typically occur when a job performance problem becomesapparent. In these cases, the supervisor is responsible for identifyingand documenting the job performance decrement. In addition, he or she meetswith the employee to describe the problem, to refer the employee to theEAP, and to indicate that continued impaired performance is likely to leadto disciplinary action or termination from employment. The supervisor isdiscouraged from trying to diagnose the root cause of the problem or fromtrying to provide any counseling (Trice andamp; Beyer, 1984; Hoffman andamp;Roman, 1984). The EAP counselor takes the responsibility for these tasksand for referring the employee to appropriate resources (the same procedureis followed when an employee self-refers to the program). If the employee'sjob performance does not improve, then disciplinary action is taken.  The training that supervisors receive, usually from the EAP staff, in observingemployee behavior may allow them to detect problems that may be missedaltogehter by a drug screening program or that are obvous to everyone oncethe problem has reached severe proportions. Whereas a sophisticated and``street smart'' drug abuser may be able to avoid detection from drug tests,he or she is unlikely to be able to maintain satisfactory levels of jobperformance on a day-to-day basis. As a witness to the employee's dailyfunctioning, the supervisor represents a significant opportunity for identifyingand removing from duty the emloyee whose job performance may adversleyaffect public health and safety.  There are several disadvantages to relying on behavioral observation alone.The primary disadvantage is the reliance on supervisors' behavioral assessmentskills to identify persons unfit for duty and on their willingness to confronttroubled employees. The reliance on supervisors' behavioral assessmentskills can be undermined by the fact in the course of a regular work day,supervisors have little, if any, opportunity to exercise the skills theyhave received through training. If training is provided on an annual basisonly, the skills can become rusty and heighten any reticence the supervisorsmay have initially experienced in utilizing these skils. Also, while thebehaviors displayed by an individual intoxicated by alcohol are obviousand recognizable to most observers, the various effects of the wide spectrumof drugs currently abused may be less familiar to supervisors, furtherdisminishing any confidence in recognizing impairment, or allowing impairmentto escape notice (Wrich, 1988).  Several barriers to supervisory referral have been identified in the literature.These include (1) the supervisor's desire to help the impaired employee,rather than expose him or her to potential disciplinary action, (2) a beliefthat the formal system [i. e., the Employee Assistance Program (EAP)] shouldbe used only as a last resort, and (3) the attempt on the supervisor'spart to counsel the impaired employee (Hoffman andamp; Roman, 1984). Thepossibility that an employee could lose his or her job, nuclear safetyresponsibilities, or unescorted access clearanace if found to be unfitfor duty may make supervisors in the nuclear industry just as reluctantto refer the employee as supervisors in other industries in similary circumstances.. A number of program components that can encourage supervisors to make referralshave been identified in the literature. In addition to a clear companypolicy and strong management support for the EAP, the importance of thoroughand ongoing supervisory training has been consistently emphasized in studiesdesigned to identify factors that increase EAP effectiveness (Gregoire,1979; Morgan-Janty, 1982; Martin, Heckel, andamp; Long, 1984). Providingconsultation services by EAP counselor for supervisors and continued programpromotional efforts (e.g., posters and notices in company newsletters)have also been suggested as a means of encouraging supervisory referrals(Hobson, 1981).  While an effective behavioral observation program is an important elementof a fitness-for-duty program, it does not appear, alone, to be an acceptablealternative to random testing. <ITAG tagnum="81">F. Medical Screening</ITAG>A method currently used by one licensee is a medical evaluation for fitnessof randomly selected employees to establish a basis for the collectionand testing of urine.The employee is medically evaluated in three areas: chemical use or dependency,physical well-being, and psychological well-being. Chemical use or depencencyis established by using eye evaluation techniques covering such items aspupil size, pupil reaction to light, and the ability of the eyes to convergeon an object coming toward the nose or to track an object from side toside and around the face. In addition, the condition of a patient's skin,nose and mouth, coordination, and reflex response are evaluated. Some ofthe evaluation is quite similar to field sobriety tests conducted by locallaw enforcement agencies. Physical well-being is reviewed through a completeevaluation of vital signs, including blood pressure, temperature, pulse,respiration, and heart rate. A medical history survey is also conductedto determine the current medical status of the employee. Psychologicalwell-being is determined through a question-and-answer session evaluatingmental awareness, depression, paranoia, self-esteem, anxiety and job stress,abnormal personality traits, and major life changes.There have not been sufficient data collected by the licensee to establishthe effectiveness of the medical screening approach. There has been a relativelylow rate of testing and, of those few actually submitting urine specimensfor testing, less than one half tested positive.It would seem that a strong behavioral observation program with highlytrained and proficient supervisors would have advantages over infrequentmedical screening because the supervisor would have opportunities to observemore people more frequently. It would appear that the medical screeningalternative would be less effective than random testing at detecting anddeterring occasional use of drugs.Medical screening does not appear to be a currently viable alternativeto random testing.<ITAG tagnum="81">G. Employee Assistance Programs</ITAG>A preliminary review of the literature pertaining to Employee AssistancePrograms (EAPs) indicates that EAPs can play a significant role in assuringthat persons with unescorted access to nuclear power plants are fit toperform their duties. The major advantages of the EAP approach is thatthe EAP can respond to a broad spectrum of fitness-for-duty problems, suchas psychological stress, that cannot be addressed in a random drug testingprogram alone. There are several disadvantages to this approach, however,that suggest that the NRC may now want to rely on EAPs alone to assurea workplace free of the effects of alcohol and drugs.EAPs have been defined as ``systems to provide professional care to employeeswhose job performance is or may be adversely affected by alcoholism, drugdependence, emotional problems, family difficulties, legal issues, eatingdisorders, and similar personal problems that not only threaten the employee'seffectiveness on the job but also tend to trigger a whole range of healthproblems'' (Blair, 1985). Thus, the EAP alternative is relevant of theentire range of fitness-for-duty problems.The EAP literature describes several program elements necessary to thesuccessful resolution of employee personal problems (McGaffey, 1978; Sonnenstuhlandamp; O'Donnell, 1980; Foote andamp; Erfurt, 1981; Phillips andamp; Older,1981; Roman, 1981; Bierman, 1982; Walsh, 1982; Gam, Sauser, Evans, andamp;Lair, 1983; Wrich, 1988). The ``ideal'' EAP has been described as including:andbullet; Management support for the EAP in the form of a written policystatement describing the program and explicit written procedures for implementingthe program,andbullet; Support for the EAP and cooperation from employee unions,andbullet; Clearly defined job performance standards,andbullet; Well-trained supervisory staff and knowledge of the EAP amongemployees,andbullet; A recognition by management that performance problems can resultfrom many different causes,andbullet; Program staff who provide problem diagnoses, appropriate referrals,treatment coordination, and follow-up,andbullet; Comprehensive treatment resources,andbullet; Health insurance coverage that is compatible with the EAP or companyprovided treatment funds.andbullet; A program evaluation process,andbullet; An adequate budget.Employees typically gain access to EAP services through two routes, self-referralsand supervisory referrals. When the employee self-refers, he or she maycontact the EAP counselor directly or seek assistance from a supervisorto make the contact. The EAP counselor then meets with the employee toassess the nature of the problem and to determine what resources are neededto resolve it. The counselor may provide the required assistance in somecases, but more frequently will refer the employee to existing resourcesin the community. The EAP counselor maintains contact with the employeeduring the problem resolution phase and often acts as a coordinator betweenthe employee and his or her supervisor while the employee receives inpatienttreatment and when the employee returns to work.As discussed previously under the Behavioral Observation Program, supervisoryreferrals typically occur when a job performance problem becomes apparent.The EAP counselor is responsible for diagnosing the root cause of the problemand for referring the employee to appropriate resources (the same procedureis followed when an employee self-refers to the program). If the employee'sjob performance does not improve, then disciplinary action is taken.Although the literature suggests that an EAP can serve as a valuable toolin assuring that employees in the nuclear industry are fit for duty, theprimary benefit of an EAP lies in the potential it represents for assistingemployees to overcome personal problems that are not alcohol or drug relatedbut that may interfere with job performance. For example, the psychologicalstress associated with marital or financial difficulties can impair performanceof job responsibilities but will obviously not be detected with drug testing.The EAP staff is typically responsible for conducting employee awarenesstraining, and for training supervisors in behavioral observation techniques.There are regarded by the NRC staff as important elements of an effectiveprogram.The EAP literature typically discusses program effectiveness in terms ofthe benefits accrued from program implementation compared to the costsof the program. A number of studies have documented benefits along severaldimensions. These dimensions include reduced employee turnover (Gam, Sauser,Evans and Lair, 1981), reduced training and employee replacement costs(Starr andamp; Byram, 1985) reduced employee utilization of insurance benefits(Foote, Erfurt, Strauchy, andamp; Gazzardo, 1978), reduced costs associatedwith incidental absence (Gaeta, Lynn, andamp; Grey, 1982), and reduced disabilitypayments (Shore, 1984). Although the NRC cannot be primarily concernedwith these cost savings to the industry, these data suggest that implementationof an EAP can have significant positive effects on employee availabilityand so may improve plant safety indirectly by contributing to adequatestaffing.Of greater relevance to the NRC's concern with public safety are data pertainingto reductions in on-the-job accidents. Rowland Austin of General Motorsreports, ``We have found that those who participate in the employee assistanceprogram, as a group, reduce their on-the-job accidents upward of 50 percent''(1983). A study done by the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company found drugusers almost four times as likely to be invoved in plant accidents (citedin <T3>Journal of American Insurance,</T3> 1984-85); ATandamp;T found that of110 participants in EAP, 26 had been involved in accidents in the 2 yearsbefore participation and only 5 were involved in accidents after participation(Gaeta, 1982). The U.S. Postal Service also reports that the rate of on-the-jobaccidents has been significantly reduced since implementation of theirEAP (Business Insurance, 1983). To the extent that accidents in the nuclearindustry are related to impaired employee performance, the existence anduse of an EAP by troubled employees may directly improve the safety ofplant operations. Data are not currently available that directly assess the effectivenessof EAP's in reducing drug abuse with objective measures. Therefore, therelative effectiveness of EAP's and random drug screening programs on directmeasures of drug use cannot be compared. There are several disadvantages in relying on the EAP approach alone toassure that employees in the nuclear industry are fit for duty. The primarydisadvantage of the EAP approach alone is its reliance on supervisors'behavioral observation skills to identify persons unfit for duty and ontheir willingness to confront troubled employees. (See related discussionon Behavioral Oberservation Programs.) There are two additional disadvantages of the EAP approach used alone.First, the deterrent effect thought to result from random drug screeningwill be absent, although fear of supervisory detection in some cases mayserve a similar deterrent function. Second, an EAP without random follow-updrug testing lacks any objective means of ensuring that employees who haveentered treatment for drug or alcohol abuse problems have been rehabilitatedand can be considered reliable. While there are drawbacks on the EAP approach alone, the merits suggestthat EAPs would perform a vital role in assuring fitness for duty in thenuclear industry. An EAP's ability to address potential employee impairmentcaused by problems that are not alcohol or drug related justifies carefulconsideration. It is also apparent that an EAP can play a significant functionin detecting substance abuse problems that may otherwise continue undetectedthrough a drug testing program, as the EAP-trained supervisor can havefrequent opportunity to identify on-the-job impairment and a diminishingjob performance. <ITAG tagnum="81">H. Access Authorization Program</ITAG>The NRC is considering promulgation of an access authorization programto govern the granting of unescorted access to employees in nuclear powerplants. The proposed program, contained in a policy statement issued forpublic comment on March 9, 1988 (53 FR 7534), would require backgroundinvestigations, psychological assessments (i.e., testing and interviews),and an ongoing behavioral observation program for employees with unescortedaccess. The behavioral observation program that would be implemented, shouldthe proposed policy statement become effective, is the same behavioralobservation program that would be implemented in accordance with this proposedfitness-for-duty rule. The requirement in this proposed rule for licenseesto conduct a suitable inquiry to determine if a person has a history offitness-for-duty problems is compatible with the background investigationthat would be conducted under the access authorization program. The program under consideration would expect the licensee to determinewhether the individual considered is not only reliable (ie., fit for duty)but also can be trusted with access to nuclear facilities. There are anumber of advantages as well as disadvantages to this approach when comparedto implementing a random drug testing program. The unique benefit provided by the access authorization program is thatthe background investigations and psychological assessments are intendedto detect an individual with a history of, or potential for, drug or alcoholabuse or other problems that might make him or her unfit for duty beforethe person is granted unescorted access. The background investigations and psychological assessments, of course,do not deter drug abuse and would not detect individuals who develop substanceabuse problems after they have been granted access. The behavioral observationcomponent of the proposed program is designed to improve the probabilitythat unreliable and untrustworthy persons are detected. Background investigations, psychological assessments, and behavioral observationprograms, although sometimes controversial in terms of effectiveness, arewell accepted for sensitive positions in various industries and types ofgovernment service. The disadvantages of sole reliance on the access authorizationapproach, however, include a relatively weak deterrent to drug abuse incomparison to that provided by random drug testing, and a lack of any preemploymentdrug testing or ongoing objective assessment of drug use. <ITAG tagnum="81">I. Workplace Security Measures</ITAG>This approach to assuring that employees with unescorted access are fitfor duty includes such techniques as searches of the workplace. The advantageof this approach over random drug testing is that employees are likelyto be deterred from possessing or selling illegal drugs onsite to a greaterdegree than with random drug testing, because these security measures directlydetect possession while random drug testing only assesses recent use. Thedisadvantages are that it cannot establish use of drugs, and it cannotaddress other types of fitness for duty concerns. Therefore, workplacesecurity measures, although important elements to an effective program,should not be considered an adequate substitute for random drug testing.<ITAG tagnum="81">J. Employee Awareness and Education Programs </ITAG>Any fitness-for-duty program based solely on employee awareness and educationabout the deleterious effects of drug abuse is likely to be ineffective.Behavior is notoriously resistant to change on the basis of knowledge alone.Consequently, this approach is not likely to provide a powerful deterrentto drug abuse. As an adjunct to other fitness-for-duty approaches, however,employee awareness and education can contribute to a drug-free workplace.An employee awareness and education program is a necessary component ofdrug testing and employee assistance programs (EAPs). Employees must beinformed about the rationale for drug testing and about procedures formaking referrals to the EAP. Employee awareness and education also providefurther evidence of the seriousness with which management views fitness-for-dutyissues. In addition to these benefits, an employee awareness and education programcan be developed to make use of the troubled employee's co-workers to detectpotential fitness-for-duty problems. With training in behavioral observation,co-workers may be able to spot unusual behavior even before the employee'ssupervisor notices it. In addition, co-workers may hear of drug use, alcoholabuse, or other employee problems that would not be detected by the supervisoruntil the problem had become so severe that public health and safety hadbeen jeopardized. Although co-workers may be reluctant to report unusualbehavior or potentially damaging information in a public manner, the availabilityof a confidential hotline can encourage them to report and provide managementwith an opportunity to investigate the problem. Knowing that his or herco-workers are trained to identify aberrant behavior also may serve todeter an employee from substance abuse. <ITAG tagnum="81">IV. Rate of Random Tests </ITAG>The purpose of random (unannounced) testing is to provide reasonable assurancethat employees are fit for duty by identifying current drug users and bydeterring drug users from further use or potential users from initial use.The frequency with which an individual is tested is relevant to both theidentification and deterrence goals of the drug testing program. Generally,the more frequent the testing, the greater the deterrent effect and thebetter the detection capabilities. However, very frequent testing may resultin unacceptable economic or social costs. Although there is no researchupon which the testing frequency may be based, it seems reasonable to assumethat: andbullet; Any form of <T3>unannounced</T3> testing would provide some level of deterrence. andbullet; There would be little deterrent if the testing dates were predictableand the drug user knew he was not immediately susceptible to another test.andbullet; Testing each day would provide more of a deterrent than testingonce each week or month, especially if the daily activity was highly visible.andbullet; Deterrence is related to either the actual or perceived probabilityof detection. andbullet; The actual probability of detection is related to the type ofdrug, dose, frequency of use, rate of metabolism and excretion from thebody, and the frequency of testing. andbullet; The perceived probability of detection is related to the frequencyof testing, the ``publicity'' given positive findings and sanctions imposed,and the abuser's knowledge of the rate of metabolism and actual probabilityof detection. For example, the probability of detecting the use of marijuana, since itis metabolized slowly, is much greater than for alcohol, which is excretedin a matter of hours. Chronic users of marijuana would probably have thegreatest probability of detection. An individual ingesting a ``typical'' dose\2\<NOTE/> of marijuana (e.g., one cigarette) once each month wouldhave a probability of detection of about six percent if the workforce wererandomly tested using a cutoff level of 100 ng/ml at a rate equal to 100percent during the year. By selecting persons for testing daily at thatrate, approximately 63 percent of the workforce actually would be tested.Lowering that cutoff level to 20 ng/ml would increase the probability ofdetection to about 22 percent. More chronic or heavier use (i.e., onceeach week or 2 or 3 cigarettes each month) would raise the probabilityof detection to near 63 percent. If the workforce were randomly testedusing a cutoff level of 100 ng/ml at a rate equal to 75 percent duringthe year, the probabilities of detection would be about 2 percent for monthlyuse and 50 percent for chronic use. If the rate of random testing wereequal to 125 percent of the workforce, the probabilities of detection wouldbe about 9 percent and 72 percent respectively. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\Since there are no quality controls in the drug culture,the quantity and purity of doses vary considerably. An individual ingesting a ``typical'' dose of cocaine, i.e., 50-100 mg,once each week would have a probability of detection of about 13-15 percentif the workforce were randomly tested at a rate equal to 100 percent duringthe year. If the workforce were randomly tested during the year at a rateequal to 75 percent, the probability of detection for weekly use of cocainewould be about 7 percent. If the workforce were randomly tested at a rateequal to 125 percent, the probability of detection would be about 18-23percent. With less frequent testing (e.g., 10 to 20 percent of workforce each year)the probability of detection for an individual becomes unacceptably smalleven for relatively frequent use. It should be noted that those utilitiescurrently using random testing report between one and two percent positivesassociated with various rates of testing of the workforce. The DOT proposedanti-drug program proposes that each employer annually test, randomly 125percent of all airline employees involved in flight operations and maintenance(53 FR 8368). At the upper end of the scale, the individual U.S. Navy commands typicallytest randomly at a rate of 20 to 25 percent each month (approximately 300percent per year). The evidence from the military experience shows thatthere is an increasing deterrent effect from increasing the frequency oftesting (Stoloff, 1985). Increasing the rate to as high as 700 percentof the workforce continues to show increasing deterrence. However, mostof the deterrent effect is realized below 300 percent. The nuclear workforcemay have different characteristics than the military workforce. The samefactors that bear on favorable rehabilitiation outcomes, discussed in SectionVIII.C., may also lead to deterrence at lower testing rates. In addition to the need to conduct random tests at a rate that will provideboth suitable deterrence and detection, the Commission desires to use asampling strategy that assures that a high percentage of the populationis tested once per year, and that a low percentage of individuals is testedmore than once each year. The selection of a sampling strategy is guided by several objectives. Thetwo primary objectives, deterrence and detection, have been discussed above.An effective testing strategy must assure that all workers subject to therule are continuously subject to testing at a rate suitable for deterrence.The strategy should not be overly burdensome to either the licensee orthe employee. The strategy should be cost effective and easy to administer.Specific individuals should not be tested overly frequently (unless theyhave had a confirmed positive test). The strategy should be nondiscriminatory;it should be administered fairly across all individuals and categoriesof individuals to minimize negative effects on employee morale. While itcan be demonstrated that different categories of workers may be more inclinedto drug abuse (e.g., males versus females, younger versus older, contractorpersonnel versus utility employees), considerations of perceived fairnesssuggest that all categories of workers be tested at the same rate. In selecting from among the various strategies, however, some compromiseamong the various objectives will be necessary. For example, decreasingthe testing rate relieves some of the burden on the licensee and the individualworker. However, decreasing the rate too far jeopardizes the deterrentand detection objectives of the program. A strategy that combines a high testing rate for workers not yet testedin a given calendar period, with a relaxed testing rate for already testedworkers (those with negative test results), provides for a reasonable balanceamong the program objectives. Several alternative models were considered.andbullet; A model that tested at a flat rate of 100, 125, 150, 200 and 300percent of the population for the year (see Table 1). andbullet; A model that tested at the rate of (e.g.) 100 percent per yearof the population for the first period and continued at this rate of testingfor subsequent periods for those not yet tested. However, the rate of testingof the already tested population was reduced to a lower rate during subsequentperiods of the testing year. Variations of the model were considered using:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Monthly, quarterly, and semi-annual periods for adjusting the testedpopulation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Testing rates for the untested population of 100, 125, and 200 percentper year of the </ITAG><T3>total</T3> population. <ITAG tagnum="15">_Testing rates for the actual tested population of 10 and 30 percentper year. (See Table 2 for these variations.) </ITAG>In Tables 1 and 2, estimates were based on an assumption of 1,000 workersin the population subject to testing. Estimates based on larger populationsand populations as low as 200 workers would generate figures essentiallyequivalent to those shown in the tables. <ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table </T4>1._<T4>Probabilities Associated With Various Sampling Rates</T4><H1>Sampling rates</H1><H1>Probability of being selected</H1><H2>100%</H2><H2>125%</H2><H2>150%</H2><H2>200%</H2><H2>300%</H2><ITAG tagnum="1">Not at all <D>0.37 </D><D>0.29 </D><D>0.22 </D><D>0.13 </D><D>0.05</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">At least once <D>0.63 </D><D>0.71 </D><D>0.78 </D><D>0.87 </D><D>0.95</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">At least twice <D>0.26 </D><D>0.36 </D><D>0.44 </D><D>0.60 </D><D>0.80</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">At least three times <D>0.08 </D><D>0.13 </D><D>0.19 </D><D>0.32 </D><D>0.58</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table 2._Probabilities Associated With Various Sampling Strategies\2\</T4><H1>Probability of being selected</H1><H1>Base 1</H1><H2>100% flat rate</H2><H1>Base 2</H1><H2>200% flat rate</H2><H1>Case 1</H1><H2>100/10/S</H2><H1>Case 2</H1><H2>200/10/S</H2><H1>Case 3</H1><H2>100/10/Q</H2><H1>Case 4</H1><H2>200/10/Q</H2><H1>Case 5</H1><H2>100/10/M</H2><H1>Case 6</H1><H2>100/30/Q</H2><H1>Case 7</H1><H2>125/10/Q</H2><H1>Case 8</H1><H2>125/30/Q</H2><H1>Case 9</H1><H2>100/30/M</H2><H1>Case 10</H1><H2>125/30/M</H2><ITAG tagnum="1">Not at all<D>0.37</D><D>0.13</D><D>0.26</D><D>0.02</D><D>0.18</D><D>Nearly</D><P>0.00 </P><D>0.09</D><D>0.18</D><D>0.07</D><D>0.07</D><D>0.09</D><D>Nearly</D><P>0.00</P></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">At least once<D>0.63</D><D>0.87</D><D>0.74</D><D>0.98</D><D>0.82</D><D>Nearly</D><P>1.00</P><D>0.91</D><D>0.82</D><D>0.93</D><D>0.93</D><D>0.91</D><D>Nearly</D><P>1.00</P></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">At least twice<D>\1\ 0.26</D><D>0.60</D><D>0.21</D><D>0.57</D><D>0.16</D><D>0.46</D><D>0.12</D><D>0.22</D><D>0.28</D><D>0.36</D><D>\1\ 0.21</D><D>0.30</D><R>n,sandCx.3;</R></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Total tests 1,000 workers<D>1,000</D><D>2,000</D><D>1,020</D><D>2,032</D><D>1,032</D><D>2,053</D><D>1,043</D><D>1,097</D><D>1,288</D><D>1,368</D><D>1,128</D><D>1,443</D><F>Key: 100/10 means 100% rate for untested/10% for tested, other numbersindicate rates chosen for that case.</F><F>S = Adjusted semiannually.</F><F>Q = Adjusted quarterly. </F><F>M = Adjusted monthly.</F><F>\1\ The figures for ``at least three times'' are .03 for Base 1 and.062 for Case 9.</F><F>\2\ These figures were developed using methods based on approximations.</F></ITAG></ITAG>An evaluation of the alternatives indicated that strategies can be developedthat achieve an acceptable balance among the program objectives. For example,Case 9 in Table 2 would have the following characteristics and advantages:andbullet; Test at a rate equal to 100 percent/year for the first month.(For a population of 1,000, about 83 tests)andbullet; For the part of the population that remains untested at the endof a month, test at a rate equal to 100 percent/year of the entire population.(That is, continue at 83 tests per month on the successively reduced untestedpopulation.)andbullet; For the part of the population that has been tested prior to thestart of a given month, test at a rate equal to 30 percent per year (2\1/2\ percent per month) of the already tested population. (For a totalpopulation of 1,000, this would mean 2 additional tests in the second monthincreasing to about 20 additional tests in the 12th month for the previouslytested population.) A testing rate of 30 percent per year for individualsalready tested at a rate of 100 percent or more would provide a modestlevel of detection and deterrence while relieving some of the burden fromthe individuals who have been tested and found free of drugs at the timeof the test. However, it should be noted that the deterrent effect potentiallywill be reduced for the tested population. A testing rate of 10 percentper year was judged so low that a deterrent effect was questionable. This strategy results in only a few more total tests than testing at aflat, 100 percent rate, and substantially increases the percent of theworkforce sampled during the year (from about 63 percent to about 91 percent).Further, the amount of retesting done on particular individuals is notexcessive, given the need to retain some deterrent effect, even for thealready tested population. While Case 9 of Table 2 achieved an acceptable balance among the programobjectives, it may not be the only method which does. To allow a reasonableamount of flexibility in program inplementation, the Commission proposes,as one alternative, to state performance based objectives rather than aspecific methodology in the rule. Alternative A of the rule as proposedwould require random tests to be administered in a way that at least 90percent of the individuals within the scope of the rule are tested eachyear, that testing is performed through the year and that testing ratesfor individuals already tested with negative results not be lower then30 percent per year (2\1/2\ percent per month) for the remainder of thetesting year. Alternative B of the proposed rule would require random teststo be administered at an annual rate equivalent to 30 percent of the populationsubject to such testing. Other approaches were also considered including: andbullet; Occasional, unannounced, mass testing. andbullet; Testing as a part of the annual medical exam. andbullet; Testing ``windows'' of a few months duration associated with anannual event, such as a birthday. However, these approaches were considered to provide too little assurancethat testing would be truly random, and individuals would not be subjectto testing through the calendar year. V. Cutoff LevelsThe selection of cutoff levels for declaring the results of a drug testto be ``positive'' and to take some personnel action is as much an issueof policy as science. Whereas the technologies of the test may permit verylow cutoff levels under ideal situations, a cutoff level set slightly higherthan the lowest that is technically feasible provides generally adequatesensitivity to identify abusers while providing a sufficient buffer towithstand challenges. Prior to implementing a program to test urine for drugs of abuse, it isimportant to understand what information urine tests provide and how theresults can be interpreted. Simply stated, urine test results provide informationabout the concentration of particular substances in the urine. The concentrationof a drug or drug metabolite in the urine does not provide much informationabout pharmacologically active drugs in a person's system, nor does itprovide information about impairment (Hawks, 1982). The concentration ofa drug or drug metabolite in the urine is influenced by several factors;these include the dose of the drug taken, the route of administration,frequency of use, and the time lapse from drug use to urine collection(Manno, 1986, Hawks andamp; Chiang, 1986). The concentration is also influencedby several factors unrelated to drug use such as amount of liquid recentlyconsumed, time since previous void, time of day (urine is more concentratedin the morning than later in the day), and recent dehydrating exercise.Hence, a positive <T3>confirmed </T3>test result indicates only that an individual has recentlyingested the drug. A positive result does not provide information aboutfrequency of drug use, pattern of use, drug dependence, legitimacy of use,or whether the person was impaired when the urine sample was collected(Manno, 1986). Similarly, a negative test result only means that a person'surine sample did not have the drug or drug metabolite in sufficient concentrationto give positive results (Manno, 1986). It does not necessarily provideinformation about whether or not the individual has ever used the drugor whether someone currently uses the drug infrequently (Hawks, 1986).Because of the numerous factors that influence both the concentration ofa drug or drug metabolite in the urine and the levels of impairment experiencedby individuals at various concentrations (see previous discussion undersection I, Impairment and reliability), it is not possible within the currentstate of the art to set cutoff levels that relate to a precise measurementof performance impairment. Research has been initiated and sometime inthe future it may be possible to address determination of impairment basedon serum analyses.In determining the cutoff levels specified in the proposed rule, The NRCconsidered what levels of the drug would probably be found several daysafter use and the sensitivities of the various analytical methods available.For example, the longest time reported (actual times are shorter) thata ``heavy'' user of marijuana would display detectable quantities at acutoff level of 100 ng/ml would be 2 weeks; should the cutoff level belowered to 20 ng/ml, the ``detection time'' would be increased to 4 weeks,significantly increasing the probability of detection and deterrence. Foran occasional user of marijuana, the longest detection time at a cutofflevel of 100 ng/ml would be 3 days; lowering the cutoff level to 20 ng/mlwould extend the detection time to 10 days. For cocaine, a typical doseof 50-100 mg would be detectable for 37-45 hours at a cutoff level of 300ng/ml. Heavy or occasional use would not result in significant differencesin detection periods.The NRC also considered the cutoff levels established by the Departmentsof Health and Human Services (HHS), Defense (DOD), and Transportation (DOT).The NRC has concluded that the cutoff levels described in the ``MandatoryGuidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs'' issued by HHSon April 11, 1988 (53 FR 11970) should be adopted. Some authorities believethat lower cutoff levels for initial screening tests of marijuana are appropriate,as discussed below. The Commission has decided not to take exception tothe cutoff level for initial screening tests of marijuana for the sakeof consistency with the federal guidelines. The Commission invites commentson this matter.The Commission understands that all of the test levels set by HHS are subjectto change as warranted by advances in technology or other conditions. Anychanges to the HHS Guidelines subsequent to final NRC rulemaking of fitness-for-dutyprograms will be considered an appropriate rulemaking taken to amend theNRC rules. It should be clearly understood that the Commission regardsthe HHS Guidelines as minimum standards. Licensees, at their discretion,may implement programs with more stringent standards (e.g., lower cutofflevels).Considerations relating to the cutoff levels for each drug are discussedbelow.<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Marijuana Metabolites</ITAG>An issue frequently raised when testing for marijuana metabolites is thata true positive test may result from passive inhalation. The cutoff levelof 100 ng/ml for initial screening tests was set by HHS to ensure thattests would not result in positives due to passive inhalation. It shouldbe noted that there is some disagreement on the level at which passiveinhalation is a problem. While some authorities believe that a cutoff levelof 209 ng/ml may be a problem, others believe that a cutoff level of 5ng/ml would not encounter significant passive inhalation problems. Recentstudies indicate that only under the most extreme conditions (prolongedexposure to high concentrations of marijuana smoke) would passive inhalationlead to a positive result at 20 ng/ml (Cone, E.J., et al., 1987).Assay reliability at 20 ng/ml has been raised as another potential problem.The early Enzyme Multiplied Immunoassay Technique (EMITr) tests were capableof detecting 50 ng/ml of marijuana metabolites in urine with 95 percentconfidence (Peat, Finkle, and Deyman, 1982). Improvements have been madein the EMITr test, however, and a number of clinical studies indicate thatfalse positives are no longer a problem at 20 ng/ml level (McBurney, Bobbie,and Sepp, 1986). In fact, some studies show an unnecessarily high levelof false negatives when higher cutoff levels are used (Kogan, Razi, Pierson,and Wilson, 1986).<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Cocaine Metabolites</ITAG>The initial and confirmatory cutoff levels as set forth by HHS (300 ng/mlinitial; 150 ng/ml confirmatory) are sufficiently low due to detect regularusers who would test at a much higher level, e.g., 10,000 ng/ml at peakconcentration for a normal user of cocaine. The EMITr tests currently usedby most licensees will result in a positive for 18-27 hours after use (Vereby,1987).<ITAG tagnum="81">C. Opiates</ITAG>The fundamental problem with opiate testing is dietary consumption of legalsubstances (e.g., poppy seeds) and the use of over-the-counter drugs thatyield true positives. Testing someone who took some cough syrup or atea poppy seed roll prior to the test could yield a true positive that wasnot due to drug use. For instance, a person who consumed a normal dosageof cough syrup prior to the test could have concentrations of 10,000 ng/mlin their urine. A person who ate a moderate amount of poppy seeds couldhave opiate concentrations of 1,700 ng/ml.The cutoff level for initial screening tests for total opiate metaboliteswas set by HHS at 300 ng/ml; with free morphine set at 25 ng/ml. Regularusers would have much higher concentrations. For example, a person whohas been given morphine as medication would have an approximate level of4,000 ng/ml; for codeine medication the level would be 2,000 ng/ml.The NRC concluded that lower cutoff levels greatly increase the risk oftrue positives due to dietary consumption of an opiate, not necessarilyconnected with illicit drug use. Chronic drug users of opiates would belikely to have much higher concentrations in their systems, e.g., for codeinethe level would be 30,000 ng/ml. To provide further protection againsttrue positives due to dietary consumption of an opiate, the Commissionis proposing that a Medical Review Officer review and interpret positiveconfirmatory test results as provided in the HHS Guidelines.<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Phencyclidine (PCP)</ITAG>A typical user would have concentrations of 500-600 ng/ml. As with cocaine,the HHS specified cutoff level of 25 ng/ml is sufficiently low to permitdetection for a few days. Many licensees are currently conducting initialscreening tests onsite using the EMITr test with a cutoff level of 75 ng/mlfor PCP.<ITAG tagnum="81">E. Amphetamines</ITAG>The fundamental problem with cutoff level determinations for amphetaminesis the potential for cross-reactivity and true positives due to over-the-counterdrugs. In light of this, HHS has set the cutoff levels at 500 ng/ml forconfirmatory tests. Assay techniques are sensitive well below this level.A regular user of amphetamines would have urinary concentrations of 5,000-20,000ng/ml. <ITAG tagnum="81">F. Alcohol </ITAG>Alcohol is a drug whose effects are well known and documented, yet differentjurisdictions have set different levels between 0.05 and 0.10 percent alcoholin the blood at which one is considered legally impaired. Studies haveshown that impairment depends on many factors unique to each individual,that impairment can exist at 0.04 or 0.05 percent alcohol in the blood,and that an upper limit of 0.05 percent is reasonable given the impairingeffects of alcohol. The effects of alcohol may be felt prior to reaching peak blood alcoholconcentration (BAC) levels in the body. In one study, researchers foundthat the time to peak BAC was an average of 24 minutes later than the timeto peak alcohol effect (Radlow and Hurst, 1985). Performance decrements due to alcohol consumption can occur at relativelylow BAC levels. One study which measured cognitive performance (dividedattention and information processing) at low BAC levels showed evidenceof impairment beginning at 0.015 percent BAC and increased impairment withincreasing BAC levels (Moskowitz, et al., 1985). One interesting note onthis study is that the subjects were 10 males averaging 25 years of age,all moderate drinkers. According to epidemiological studies this groupis relatively resistent to the effects of alcohol; thus it is anticipatedthat greater degrees of impairment at BAC levels between 0.015 and 0.06percent would typically exist for younger, older, and less frequent drinkers(Moskowitz, et al., 1985). A review of literature on physiological studies of low BAC levels showthat the amplitude and velocity of smooth pursuit eye movements and saccadiceye movements are reduced by alcohol. These changes are physiologicallysignificant at a BAC level of 0.05 percent (Linnoila, et al., 1986). Smootheye pursuit and saccadic eye movements have been shown to play a significantrole in visual information processing (Flom, et al., 1976). In a recent review of the literature for the aviation industry it was concludedthat significant impairment is generally noticed at the 0.04 to 0.05 percentlevels and that experience did not compensate for performance degradationresulting from alcohol use. The review also included studies of simulatedaviation flight, which showed that decremental effects on performance occurredin terms of aircraft position errors and procedural errors during the approachphase of landing, instrument flight involving standard maneuvers, and otherwork load measures at all BAC levels between 0.02 and 0.09 percent BAC(Ross and Ross, 1985). Another study (Clayton, 1980) reported significantimpairment of driving skills at the 0.04 to 0.05 percent levels, whilea more recent study (Moscowitz, 1985) reports significant impairment ofperception at even lower levels of blood alcohol. The FAA prohibits any person from acting as a crewmember of an aircraftwhile having 0.04 percent by weight or more alcohol in the blood (14 CFR91.11). In addition, the Council on Scientific Affairs of the AmericanMedical Association has endorsed the 0.05 percent cutoff limit for driving(COSA, 1986). In one recent analysis of the deterrent effects of reducingthe legal limits for blood alcohol from 0.08 to 0.05 percent, a 14 percentreduction in fatalities associated with drinking and driving was noted.Several statements may be made regarding the BAC level of 0.05 percentand consequent impairment: andbullet; BAC levels in general are highly correlated with accident riskand are a major causal factor of serious accidents (O'Hanlon, et al., 1986).andbullet; There is growing consensus that a BAC level of 0.05 percent impairscognitive and psychomotor task performance in a variety of measurable forms.andbullet; Performance decrements at low BAC levels (0.015-0.06 percent)in a dose-related manner have been demonstrated (cf. Moskowitz, et al.,1985). BAC levels above 0.04 percent are associated with an acceleratedrisk of causing accidents (O'Hanlon, et al., 1986). However, it may bereasonably assumed that even lower BAC levels (0.01-0.05 percent) potentiallyincrease the risk of accident. Some researchers have recommended that azero BAC level be established for tasks requiring complex cognitive andphysical performance. andbullet; Accident rates among persons with a BAC level of 0.05 percentare significant as measured by automobile accidents, aviation accidents,industry surveys, as well as general population studies, experimental research,and clinical studies. andbullet; Impairment of cognitive and task performance at the BAC levelof 0.05 percent and higher has significant implications for power plantsafety, and is thus a legitimate concern for fitness-for-duty policy development.While the potential adverse effects of alcohol cannot be discounted, basedupon industry commitments made to the Commission, the NRC believes thatprograms already established to meet the Commission's Policy Statement(51 FR 27921) and the Edison Electric Institute's ``EEI Guide to EffectiveDrug and Alcohol/Fitness-for-duty Policy Development,'' adequately addressthis matter without prescriptive NRC regulation. These programs includethe following attributes for coping with alcohol: andbullet; All licensees have policies which prohibit alcohol on companyproperty and, at a minimum, state that use of alcohol that adversely affectsjob performance is not acceptable. Violation of the company's policy mayresult in disciplinary action up to and including termination. andbullet; All licensees have Employee Assistance Programs that include treatmentof alcohol abuse. andbullet; All supervisors, and other key employees, are trained in behavioralobservation techniques, which include detection of symptoms of alcoholabuse.andbullet; Testing for alcohol is included in for-cause tests. Cutoff levelsare usually consistent with state law regarding driving while intoxicated.However, the Commission invites comment on whether the NRC should specifya cutoff level for alcohol.andbullet; Licensees have identified and taken action on a number of fitness-for-dutyproblems caused by abuse of alcohol.<ITAG tagnum="81">G. Issues Regarding Test Reliability at Very Low Cutoff Levels</ITAG>Although current assay techniques can accurately test for substance presenceat much lower levels than set by the HHS Guidelines, there are issues concerningtest reliability at very low cutoff levels. A well publicized issue isthat the presence of target substances due to the ingestion of legal substances,or in the case of marijuana, passive inhalation, can be detected throughlow cutoff levels. These alternate sources for true positive results areimportant to consider in setting legally defensible cutoff levels.In addition, there are fundamental questions concerning quality controlsof applied testing on a massive scale; e.g., test reliability, carryoverfrom one assay to another, and sample handling and storage. For example,the gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC/MS) method essentiallyproduces a fingerprint of the drug or metabolite. However, the assay requiresan ``internal standard''_a deuterated sample \3\<NOTE/> of the drug or metabolite. Some percentage of this addedinternal standard (approximately 7 percent) will not have been deuteratedand will thus show up as a drug or metabolite. This can be subtracted outof the reading but at low cutoff levels this adjustment may exceed reasonable/normaldeviations for the test itself. Thus, the purity of the internal standardposes problems for using very low cutoff levels. Also there is variationin the extraction procedures, and only 75-80 percent of the drug or metabolitemay be extracted. The internal standard can be used to adjust for thisvariation but within limits.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ A sample that is deuterated is a pure drug altered inorder to increase its molecular weight without changing how the substancebehaves under extraction, derivation, or chromotography procedures. Thetechnique involves replacing a few hydrogen atoms on the drug moleculewith deuterium atoms.Finally, technical and legal implications of these issues could pose aproblem. For example, THC (marijuana) deteriorates in samples even whenstored properly. The process of establishing low cutoff levels must addressthe problem of sample deterioration and reconfirmation at a later date.In general, the lower the cutoff level, the more difficult it will be toreconfirm. Although assay technology is sufficiently precise in a controlledand regulated setting, the fundamental issue is whether the technologycan be performed at 100 percent of its capability at all times. A generalrule of thumb used by the DOD for determining legally defensible and practicalcutoff levels is to double the detection limit of the specific assay technique.That is, the DOD requires that an essay be able to detect concentrationsof drug or metabolite in the urine at 50 percent of the set cutoff level.While not ``scientific'' in its basis, it is probably practical in itsanticipation of problems in the legal process.VI. Number of Positive TestsA significant policy issue associated with fitness-for-duty programs involvesthe question of how many confirmed positive tests should be allowed onany one individual before mandating action, such as removal from a safetysensitive job.One approach is to establish a ``zero tolerance'' for drugs; any involvementwith drugs results in mandatory removal from nuclear safety duties. Withthis approach, all violations of policy are treated with equal severity;onsite use would have the same consequences as offsite use. Furthermore,any previous offsite use admitted during Employee Assistance Program (EAP)counseling would also result in mandatory removal, which would have a severeadverse impact on the effectiveness of the EAP.Another approach is to permit licensees to determine on a case-by-casebasis what sanctions, if any, will be imposed. Inconsistencies in the actionstaken would probably result at the site level or between licensees, andleave fitness-for-duty programs vulnerable to challenges through legalproceedings.The NRC believes public health and safety can be well served if employeesare encouraged to voluntarily seek help before their problem is manifestedin observable abnormal behavior.The approach proposed by the NRC is a ``zero tolerance'' for any involvementwith illegal drugs within protected areas; i.e., any use, possession orsale of illegal drugs within a protected areas would result in removalfrom activities within the scope of the rule for a minimum of five years.Any offsite use of drugs would result in mandatory removal from activitieswithin the scope of the proposed rule until such time as a determinationis made that the person is fit for duty. A second positive test would resultin the removal from activities within the scope of the proposed rule fora minimum of three years. To ensure that personnel actions are based uponaccurate information and to provide safeguards for employees, the NRC proposedfinal review of test results by a Medical Review Officer as described inthe ``Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs''issued by HHS (April 11, 1988; 53 FR 11970).VII. Reinstitution of Unescorted AccessThe NRC has a strong interest in assuring that among nuclear power plantpersonnel who test positive, or are otherwise determined to be involvedwith impairing substances, only those who have succeeded in treatment areallowed to regain their unescorted access authorization. Consequently,the Commission believes that it is appropriate to require some time periodto elapse to assure, before the individual is returned to unescorted accessfollowing the first confirmed positive test result, that licensees haveobtained a high confidence that the problem has been resolved and thatthe individual does not constitute a threat to safety.One approach to this issue is to establish a relative lengthy period, suchas 90 days or longer, during which the individual is not permitted unescortedaccess while he or she successfully completes treatment. Another approachis to establish a shorter period of sufficient duration (e.g., two weeks)to permit the individual to be referred to the EAP for assessment and developmentof a treatment plan. With this approach, return of the person's unescortedaccess authorization depends upon the judgment that the individual willnot pose a threat to plant safety by a medical professional qualified inthe analysis and treatment of substance abuse disorders.Drug abuse ``careers'' vary to a great extent between individuals; furthermore,research indicates that a relapse to substance abuse can occur at any timeafter an apparently successful treatment episode. Therefore, treatmentprograms need to be tailored to the individual. To ensure that utilitiescarefully assess the nature of the individual's substance abuse problemand develop plans for appropriate treatment and future employment, theproposed rule would require removal for a minimum of 14 days. A discussionof these issues in greater detail follows.<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Substance Abuse Careers</ITAG>The treatment and recovery literature indicates that an individual's patternof substance abuse can best be viewed as a cycle that includes both recoveryand relapse (Senay, 1984; Tims and Leukefeld, 1986; Maddux and Desmond,1986). The cycle, which has been described as the ``substance abuse career''by Maddux and Desmond (1986), ranges from no use to recreational/socialuse, to problem use, to dependence with the inability to abstain. Patternswithin this cycle vary not only from individual to individual, but overtime in a given person. Substance abuse careers differ in terms of thetype and number of substances used, whether they are used sequentiallyor concurrently, and in terms of the intensity of use, whether episodicor continuous. Little is understood about the sources of these differences.Research has not yet provided a valid set of predictors that would allowindividuals to be screened for susceptibility to substance abuse.Those individuals who meet the diagnostic criteria for dependence willmost likely experience successive cycles of abstinence, occasional use,daily use, and treatment. ``Dependence'' refers to both the altered physiologicalstate resulting from continued use of a substance, and to the behaviorindicated by regular compulsive use (Maddux and Desmond, 1986).Substance abuse appears to not fit the usual medical treatment model ofa disease that is responsive to a singular treatment episode (Senay, 1984).Rather, the recovery research indicates that there is no one point in timethat an individual can be considered ``cured.'' However, attempts havebeen made to identify a point in time since treatment at which an individualcan be considered fully recovered. For example, the Americans Medical Associationhas developed criteria for recovery that include three years of abstinencefrom the primary drug of abuse and no abuse of other substances. Otherinvestigators have recommended five years of abstinence as a reasonablebenchmark. As will be discussed below, however, longitudinal studies havefailed to isolate a threshold for length of abstinence that determinespermanent recovery.Consequently, recovery is most accurately described as a process ratherthan as a state. Recovery can be defined as the process by which substanceabuse and related behaviors become decreasingly problematic for the affectedindividual. Alcoholics Anonymous developed their 12-step recovery modelon this premise; members refer to themselves as ``recovery alcoholics,''recognizing that they are always at risk for relapse (Senay, 1984; Madduxand Desmond, 1986: Wesson, Havassy and Smith, 1986). Because recovery representsa process rather than a state, and because an individual's progress throughthat process cannot be predicted by elapsed time since last treatment,revocation of an employee's unescorted access for an arbitrary period oftime following a confirmed positive test result alone would not ensurethat that the individual would remain drug free.<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Relapse Rates</ITAG>``Relapse'' has been defined as the ``return to substance use, followinga period of voluntary or enforced abstinence, at a level of intensity comparableto that attained before abstinence'' (Babor, Cooney, Lauerman, 1986, pg.20). Relapse to the use of alcohol and opioids has been extensively studied.Far less information is available on the substance abuse careers of thosewho primarily abuse marijuana, cocaine, phencyclidine, or other categoriesof drugs (Jaffe, 1984), because abuse of those substances is a relativelynew phenomenon.It is noteworty, however, that the alcohol and drug treatment communityhas recognized for several years that a combined approach to drug and alcoholtreatments is most effective, as the recovery process is similar acrossthe various substance categories (Cole, et al., 1981; Waldorf and Biernacki,1981; McClellan, 1984). Current research supports this belief: The behaviorsassociated with dependence and relapse to alcohol and opiates are highlysimilar (Rounsaville, 1986).Many studies are available that address the occurrence of alcohol relapseon both a short-term and long-term basis. The short-term studies, definedby tracking of post-treatment individuals for a period of two years orless, indicate that relapse rates for alcohol are quite high. For example,one study that followed 685 post-treatment individuals found that 63 percentwere abusing alcohol when contacted at the two year mark. A second two-yearstudy found a 67 percent relapse rate (Vaillant, 1983).The relapse rates for opiates are dramatically similar to those of alcohol.One study found 67 percent of opiate dependent individuals to be readdictedwithin the first six months following treatment (Maddux and Desmond, 1986).In a follow-up study of 2,009 post-treatment opiate addicts, 56 percentto 77 percent had resumed daily use at one year post-treatment (the varianceoccurred due to individual measurement of treatment groups) (Simpson andamp;Sells, 1982).A comparison of the longitudinal studies (i.e., studies that have followedalcohol and opiate clients for a period of five years or longer after theinitial treatment episode) again shows a significant similarity in patterns.For the majority of individuals, multiple episodes of relapse are followedby periods of abstinence (Maddux and Desmond, 1986; Simpson and Marsh,1986). However, the most critical finding suggests that while multipleepisodes of the abstinence/replapse cycle tend to occur, relapse does decreaseas the period of abstinence increases (Simpson and Marsch, 1986).Although there are fewer studies of other drug types, what research hasbeen conducted suggests that relapse patterns to other substances are similarto those for alcohol and opioids. A further study conducted by Hubbardand Marsden (1986) compared the relapse rates of four drug categories:heroin, other narcotics, cocaine, and other non-narcotics which includeamphetamines, sedatives, barbiturates, and the minor tranquilizers. Thestudy reviewed the post-treatment history of 2,280 clients, randomly selectedfrom 41 different treatment facilities representing the full spectrum oftreatment modalities (i.e. methadone maintenace, detoxification, therapeuticcommunities, inpatient facilities, out-patient drug free counseling). Thetiming of relapse was similar for all four categories. Two-thirds of thosewho relapsed did so within the first 90 days after leaving treatment. Awidely cited study that reviewed relapse rates over 12 months followingtreatment showed that smokers, alcoholics, and heroin addicts are alikein having relapse rates greater than 50 percent in the first three monthspost-treatment, and 60 percent relapse within the first year post-treatment(Rounsaville, 1986).In summary, the literature suggests that patterns of relapse may be consistentacross drug types among substance-dependent individuals. It is criticalin the interpretation of the relapse and recovery literature to understand,however, that the primary focus of study has been the seriously dysfunctionalalcoholic or drug abuser. The reasons for this are several. First, alcoholand opiate abuse have been the focus of the community-based treatment system,and a high percentage of the individuals who elect to participate in publiclyfunded treatment are also recipients of public assistance. The employedand educated middle class with employer-paid medical benefits have typicallysought treatment in private facilities or with private practitioners. Privatefacilities, unfortunately, generally do not participate in published research.Hence, most of the research literature is based upon the publicly fundedclient, and may not directly apply to the types of individuals employedin the nuclear industry. As will be discussed below, however, there area number of factors that may contribute to the effectiveness of treatmentfor individuals with unescorted access that are not present for seriouslydysfunctional substance abusers. Thus, although relapse to substance abuseis likely for dependent individuals and can occur at any time post-treatment,there is evidence to suggest that early detection of a developing substanceabuse problem and treatment may prevent relapse among nuclear workers.<ITAG tagnum="81">C. Treatment Effectiveness</ITAG>Within the context of the substance abuse cycle, treatment remains themost likely means by which the successive cycle will be broken. As mentionedabove, treatment may also serve to prevent relapse in those individualswhose substance abuse problems are still in the developing stage.The effectiveness of treatment is well documented, although it remainsunclear as to why treatment works. Numerous longitudinal studies have shownthat pre-treatment levels of substance abuse are generally higher thanthose of post-treatment abuse (cf. Jaffe, 1984). Consequently, the goalof the NRC to ensure fitness for duty will be enhanced by treatment.Of particular importance to the NRC is the suggestion by the treatmentliterature that the critical factor in obtaining a positive outcome isnot the type of treatment, but the amount of treatment contact (Simpson,1984; Senay, 1984). In fact, several large-scale treatment follow-up studieshave shown that the treatment outcomes for those participating in suchdiverse treatment protocols as outpatient drug-free counseling, methadonemaintenance, and therapeutic communities are statistically indistinguishable(Rounsaville, 1986, Simpson, 1984).Although the evaluation of treatment effectiveness in regarded by the researchcommunity as in an evolutionary stage, several factors associated withpositive outcomes have been identified. The most powerful determinant appearsto be the individual's commitment to treatment and the recovery process(Simpson, 1984; Time and Leukfeld, 1986). Secondly, the therapeutic processitself can directly impact the treatment outcome. To be effective, theprocess should incorporate the individual's commitment to change, sustainthe commitment, and translate it into action (Simpson, 1984), Third, thelength of time in treatment has also been identified as a factor, withlonger participation in treatment being positively related to treatmentoutcome (Simpson, 1984; Tims and Holland, 1984; Hubbard, et al., 1984).In addition to the various factors associated with treatment, there areseveral personal characteristics of patients that are associated with apositive treatment outcome. These factors include a stable family background,an intact marriage or relationship, a stable and supportive job situation,minimal involvement with the criminal justice system, and limited psychologicalproblems. Higher socioeconomic status is also a predictor. Those clientswith the least severe problems, and the greatest social and psychologicalassets, tend to have the best prognosis (Goodwin, 1988; Rounsaville, 1986).While the typical worker within the nuclear industry cannot be assumedto have all of these characteristics, some or most will be applicable tolicensee employees. In summary, it appears that the prognosis for rehabilitation among licenseeemployees may be quite positive. The NRC believes that the utilities shouldemphasize these factors where appropriate to secure the greatest probabilitythat an employee will remain drug free and not place public health andsafety ar risk in the future.<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Development of the Treatment, Follow-up and Future Employment Plans</ITAG>During the period that unescorted access is withdrawn following the initialfinding of a substance abuse disorder, the licensees should carefully assessthe nature of the individual's substance abuse problem, and develop appropriatetreatment, follow-up and employment plans. The goal of this process isto assure that the individual will regain unescorted access only afterdetermination that the he or she is fit for duty, and that the risk isminimal that the individual will pose a future threat to public safety.Prompt response to an initial confirmed positive test result in the formof a treatment and employment plan is likely to be effective in resolvingsubstance abuse problems among the types of persons granted unescortedaccess. The NRC recognizes that the evaluation of a substance abuse problem involvesnumerous factors unique to the individual, and that this task is appropriatelyleft to the trained judgment of a medical professional qualified in substanceabuse disorders. Consequently, any individual receiving a confirmed positivetest result who is retained for potential return to unescorted access,will be referred immediately to the EAP for assessment of the substanceabuse problem and formulation of treatment, follow-up and future employmentplans. Since the success of this effort is contingent upon the reliabilityof the assessment, the NRC expects that each utility will engage qualifiedindividuals for evaluating substance abuse problems. Additionally, theassessment process should utilize assessment tools that specifically identifythe nature and extent of the individual's substance abuse problem. Thediagnosis should directly trigger the development of the treatment, follow-up,and employment plans. To be most effective, the treatment plan should be designed to meet thespecific needs of the individual, giving consideration to the various factorsdiscussed above. Individual attention is especially critical in the lightof the various possible meanings of a confirmed positive test result. TheNRC recognizes that a positive test can indicate any stage of substanceabuse along the substance cycle. For example, an appropriate treatmentplan for a ``recreational'' user might require the completion of the EAPassessment and additional designated hours of drug education. Treatmentmay not be necessary. Instead, it may be more effective to place an emphasison follow-up random drug testing (e.g., a weekly rate initially, graduallydecreased to monthly for at least one year) and periodic EAP contact (e.g.,sufficiently frequent over an appropriate period to achieve high confidencethat the problem has been resolved). Under this approach, the employmentplan would include a return of unescorted access authorization at the endof the two week revocation period, with minimal risk to plant safety. At the other end of the spectrum, an appropriate treatment plan for anindividual experiencing substance abuse dependency will be more complex.In this case, the EAP would likely make a referral to an inpatient facility,and the individual would not be allowed to regain unescorted access untilintensive rehabilitation is completed. While several studies have suggestedthat emphasis should be placed on the length of treatment and not on thetreatment type, these same studies further suggest significantly pooreroutcomes for seriously dysfunctional individuals who receive an assessmentonly, without additional treatment, or who receive detoxification only,without additional counseling (Simpson and Marsh, 1986). More extensivetreatment involvement appears to be necessary for these individuals. Licensees should place emphasis on the development of a follow-up plan.Assurances cannot be made that plant safety is maintained unless the individual'sprogress is monitored once he or she has regained unescorted access. Therelapse and recovery literature stresses the importance of after-care andfollow-up monitoring to prevent relapse. Because the critical period forrelapse falls during the first 90 days, frequent contract by the EAP, possiblyweekly, will best assure that the individual continues to remain substancefree. However, because most individuals who relapse do so within the firstyear, the follow-up should also provide for continued EAP contacts followingthe first 90 days, with decreasing frequency to perhaps one contact permonth. Follow-up random testing, intensely at first, with gradually decreasingfrequency as the patient progresses through the critical 90 day and oneyear periods and beyond to achieve a high confidence of full recovery,should also be emphasized in all follow-up plans. Follow-up testing willalso serve to assure that the goal of public health and safety continuesto be met. The employment plan should be based upon any limitations that need to beplaced on the individual being returned to work. The plan should help theindividual's supervisor understand what his role is in the follow-up plan,and set conditions for full restoration to duty, where appropriate. Totest and evaluate the individual's substance abuse disorders, develop theplans, and obtain assurances that an individual does not constitute a potentialhazard to safety (in the case of a ``recreational'' user), should be accomplishedwithin two weeks. In summary, the NRC expects the two-week minimum mandatory revocation periodto be used by the utilities in the following manner: Each individual receivinga first positive test result will be referred to the EAP for assessmentof his or her substance abuse problem. The assessment will direct the developmentof the treatment and employment plan, which should be designed to meetthe individual's specific fitness-for-duty needs. Finally, the processwill be completed with the development of a follow-up plan that specifiesthe frequency of EAP contact and follow-up random drug testing. <ITAG tagnum="84">Section-by-Section Analysis </ITAG>The general objective of fitness-for-duty programs is to provide reasonableassurance that nuclear powerplant personnel are not under the influenceof any substance, legal or illegal, or mentally or physically impairedfrom any cause, which in any way affects their ability to safely and competentlyperform their duties. To accomplish this objective, the Commission is proposingto amend its regulations by adding a new Part 26 to Title 10, Code of FederalRegulations. The following section-by-section analysis of the principalsections provide additional explanatory information. Section 26.2 Scope. This section sets out the Commission's proposal as to the employee andcontractor population to whom the regulation, including random testingapplies.To achieve the general objective, the Commission proposes that the ruleapply to all persons with unescorted access to protected areas, and tolicensee or contractor personnel required to respond to the licensees'Technical Support Center (TSC) or Emergency Operations Facility (EOF).The rule would apply to these latter categories of personnel because ofthe potential impact on public health and safety that could arise fromhuman failure on their part. The rule applies to all persons with unescortedaccess to protected areas because: andbullet; Current programs are implemented in accordance with the Commission'sPolicy Statement (51 FR 27921) which applies to all persons within protectedareas at nuclear powerplants. andbullet; Such persons could introduce and sell drugs in the workplace.andbullet; Any such person under the influence of any substance could causea safety hazard, if not to the general public, to him or herself and tofellow workers. Section 26.10 General performance objectives. This section is intended to facilitate proper management of fitness-for-dutyprograms by establishing clear program goals. Although fitness-for-duty programs are intended to provide reasonable assurancethat individuals are not using or under the influence of any substance,or mentally or physically impaired from any cause that could adverselyaffect safety, the specific program elements and procedures contained inthe proposed rule apply only to drugs. Specific measures for addressingabuse of alcohol, and legal drugs (prescription and over-the-counter) areto be developed by each licensee. Other factors that could affect fitnessfor duty such as mental stress, fatigue and illness are also expected tobe addressed by licensee programs. In this regard, the proposed rule does <T3>not </T3>specifically address the offsite sale or possession of drugs,the offsite use of drugs determined by means other than chemical testing,attempts to introduce alcohol or drugs onsite, nor what actions shouldbe taken for drug events in the owner controlled area. Licensees are expectedto take prudent measures to identify and correct such problems. These measures,at a minimum, should include for-cause testing, utilization of the accessauthorization program, and appropriate investigations and searches. Furthermore,licensees are expected to properly manage their programs and include elementssuch as audits and analysis of records to provide feedback on program performance.The specific requirements described in the Program Elements and Proceduressections of the proposed rule are not intended to prohibit any licenseefrom adopting and enforcing more stringent standards. Section 26.20 Written policy procedures. This section requires the establishment and implementation of written policiesand procedures to ensure that all persons clearly understand what is expectedof them and what consequences may result from violation of company policy.Section 26.21 Policy communication and awareness training. This section requires appropriate training to ensure understanding of thepolicy, how the program will function, and the hazards associated withabuse of drugs. This section is intended to ensure that all persons understandand support the program and its implementation. Section 26.22 Training of supervisors and escorts. This section requires appropriate training of managers and supervisorsto ensure they understand their role in the implementation of the fitness-for-dutyprogram. In addition, all persons are required to be trained to ensurethat they are sufficiently skilled to detect conditions that arise fromabuse or presence of drugs, and to ensure that the proper action is initiated.This section includes training in behavioral observation techniques whichare also expected under the proposed Access Authorization Program policystatement (53 FR 7534). The NRC will ensure that the expectations in theproposed policy statement and the implementing industry guidelines andthe requirements in this proposed rule are compatible prior to publicationof any final rule in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Section 26.23 Contractors.This section requires that contractor personnel be subject to, and abideby, a fitness-for-duty program. Furthermore, contractors are required tonot assign any personnel previously removed from any other nuclear powerplant without the knowledge and consent of the licensee.Section 26.24 Chemical testing.This section requires that chemical testing be conducted to deter and detectdrug abuse. The testing is required because the Commission is concernedwith the possible impact on public health and safety if individuals, whosereliability is questionable because of impairment due to the use of drugs,are permitted to perform important tasks, such as manipulating controlmechanisms or conducting maintenance on facility equipment or systems.Tests would be required.andbullet; Immediately before the initial granting of unescorted access toprotected areas or assignment to activities within the scope of this part.andbullet; On a random basis. The Commission specifically invites commentson a rate of testing that would provide a suitable deterrent. Two alternativesare proposed; others would be considered.andbullet; For-cause; andandbullet; As a follow-up to verify abstention.For-cause testing is required after accidents involving actual or potentialsubstantial degradation of the level of safety of the plant. This is thelevel of event characterized by an ``alert'' emergency classification.This section adopts the ``Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace DrugTesting Programs'' issued by the Department of Health and Human Servicesas minimum standards for procedures for collecting and testing of specimensand for ensuring the integrity of the testing program. This section alsoadopts the HHS standards for ``Certification of Laboratories Engaged inUrine Drug Testing for Federal Agencies.'' Licensees would be permittedto conduct preliminary tests to reduct the number of specimens forwardedto a contract laboratory for initial screening tests and confirmatory tests.This section requires, through the HHS guidelines, that a medical reviewofficer review and interpret positive, confirmatory test results.Section 26.25 Employee Assistance Programs (EAP).This section requires licensees to maintain an EAP designed to achieveearly intervention and to encourage self-referral. This section stipulatesthat confidentiality shall be extended, except where safety considerationsmust prevail. In this regard, any licensee receiving direct or indirectfederal financial assistance in any form, which may include revenue sharingor tax exempt status, may be required to maintain confidentiality of drugabuse patient records in accordance with 42 CFR Part 2. Although this lawis intended to ensure that an alcohol or drug abuse patient in a federallyassisted alcohol or drug abuse program is not made more vulnerable thana person who does not seek treatment, the determination of whether federalassistance is provided is much broader [42 CFR 2.12(b)]. Licensees whofind that 42 CFR Part 2 applies, should inform the Commission and proposea method to accomplish the goals of the requirements set forth in the proposedrule.Section 26.27 Management actions and sanctions to be imposed.This section requires that management:andbullet; Complete a suitable inquiry, i.e., verificaton of employment history,to determine if any person was ever removed from activities within thescope of the proposed rule or denied unescorted access due to not beingfit for duty.andbullet; As a minimum, remove from activities within the scope of the proposedrule for at least 14 days, and during any suspension period, refer forassessment and counseling, those persons having their first confirmed positivetest. Treatment, follow-up and future employment plans must be developed,and any rehabilitation program deemed appropriate must be initiated, duringsuch suspension period. Assurance of fitness must be obtained prior toreturn to duty.andbullet; Remove from activities within the scope of the proposed rule fora minimum of three years, those persons having a second confirmed positive,andbullet; Not assign to activities within the scope of the proposed rulefor a minimum of five years, those persons determined to have been involvedin the sale, use, or possession of illegal drugs within a protected area,andbullet; Permanently deny unescorted access to those persons, who, havingbeen restored unescorted access after the above three or five year periods,are subsequently found to be involved with illegal drugs.Section 26.28 Appeals.This section requires that there be an appeal process in accordance withdue process and fundamental fairness considerations so that adverse findingsas a result of the required testing program may be subject to further reviewat the instigation of the person found to test positive for proscribedsubstances. Rather than dictate what that appeal procedure should be, theCommisson has limited itself to proposing that there be an appeal procedureand notes that the grievance procedures contained in collective bargainingagreements may be suitable.Section 26.29 Protection of information.This section requires the licensee to ensure that personal privacy is protectedto the extent possible, consistent with the need to carry out the fitness-for-dutyprogram. Accordingly, specific exceptions to the information disclosureprohibition are provided. This list of exceptions is considered to be inclusiveand no other disclosures should be made. If disclosure of the informationis necessary for emergency medical purposes, it is assumed that the individual,or his/her representative, can provide the basis for such release. Regardless,it is not the intent of this provision to in any way create potential harmto anyone through nondisclosure during a medical emergency. It should benoted that 42 CFR Part 2 may prohibit licensees that receive federal financialassistance, from disclosing information to another licensee regarding thenature of a person's problem, if that person sought assistance on his owninitiative.Section 26.71 Recordkeeping requirements.This section licensees to retain records to facilitate inquires to determineif a person had been made ineligible for assignment to activities withinthe scope of 10 CFR Part 26. This section also requires licensees to collect,compile and analyze program performance data and to take appropriate actionsto correct any program weaknesses so identified. The collection and analysisof data is believed important for the following reasons:andbullet; Although the proposed rule would require elements that constitutean effective program based on current information, fitness-for-duty programsare part of an evolving discipline; and lessons learned and advances intechnology may warrant future revisions to the programs. The collectionand analysis of data would support any future considerations in that regard,e.g., to add, relax, or strengthen a specific requirement. The programperformance data would allow for empirical evaluation of alternative strategies.andbullet; It is expected that some utilities will have elements of theiroverall fitness-for-duty program that differ from and/or exceed the minimumrequirements of the rule. If performance data are available, the NRC couldevaluate whether these other program characteristics are contributing toor detracting from the program goals.andbullet; Trend analysis of the data would facilitate appropriate inquiryshould there be indications of any problems, such as a possible failurein program design or implementation.The NRC developed a list of data that appear to be appropriate based uponinformed reviews by appropriate professionals in other organizations. Toensure consistency of data and to facilitate analysis, a draft form accompaniesthe proposed rule. The Commission may request the data on an as-neededbasis.Section 26.73 Reporting requirements.This section requires licensee to inform the Commission by telephone, within24 hours of discovery, of all significant fitness-for-duty events, including:andbullet; Sale, use, or possession of illegal drugs within the protectedarea, andbullet; Any acts involving the illegal sale, use or possession of a controlledsubstance (onsite or offsite) by any person licensed under 10 CFR Part55 to operate a power reactor or by any supervisory personnel assignedto perform duties with the scope of this part. This includes the resultsof confirmed positive tests on such persons. Written reports are required within 30 days documenting such notificationsand specifying actions taken. Section 26.80 Audits.This section requires licensees to audit their fitness-for-duty program,including those sections implemented by contractors, and to take appropriateactions in response to the audit findings. <ITAG tagnum="84">BIBLIOGRAPHY </ITAG>I. Drug Use and Impairment<ITAG tagnum="25">Agurell, S.L., Hollister, L.E. 1986. ``Pharmacokinetics and Metabolismof Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol: Relations to Effects in Man.'' Alcohol,Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December, 1986.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ambre, et al. (To be published in 1988). ``Acute Tolerance to Cocainein Humans.'' Manuscript provided by author.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Bennett, G., Vourakais, C., Woolf, D., eds. 1983. Substance Abuse:Pharmacological Developmental, and Clinical Perspectives. New York: JohnWily andamp; Sons.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Blum, K., 1984. <T3>Handbook of Abusable Drugs. </T3>Gardner Press. New York/London.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Brady, et al., 1986. ``Behavioral Interactions and the Effects ofMarijuana.'' Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December,1986. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Byck, R., 1987. ``The Effects of Cocaine on Complex Performance inHumans.'' Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 3, No. 1. January-March, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Chait, L.D., Fishman, M.W., and Schuster, C.R., 1985. ``Hangover Effectsthe Morning After Marijuana Smoking.'' Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 15,229-238.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Chesher, G.B. 1986. ``The Effects of Alcohol and Marijuana in Combination:A Review.'' Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December1986. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cluouet, D.H., ed. 1986. NIDA. Research Monograph 64. ``Phencyclidine:An Update.'' Department of Health and Human Services. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cohen, S., 1986. ``Effects of Long Term Marijuana Use.'' Alcohol,Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December, 1986. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cohen, S., 1986. ``Marijuana and the Cannabinoids.'' <T3>Drug Abuse and Drug Abuse Research. </T3>The Second Triennial Reportto Congress from the Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cook., 1986. ``Analytical Methodology for Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinoland its Metabolites.'' Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December,1986. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Davis, M., 1985. ``Cocaine: Excitatory Effects on Sensorimotor ReactivityMeasured with Acoustic Startle.'' Psychopharmacology, 86(1-2), 31-36.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">DuPont, R.L., ``Cocaine in the Workplace: The Ticking Time Bomb.''In: Washton, A.M., Gold, M.S., ed. 1987. <T3>Cocaine: A Clinician's Handbook. </T3>Guilford Press. New York/London.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">DuPont, R.L., 1984. ``Getting Tough on Gateway Drugs: A Guide forthe Family.'' Washington, DC: The American Psychiatric Press. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Fehr, K.O., Kalant, H., ed. 1983. ``Cannabis and Health Hazards: Proceedingsof an ARF/WHO Scientific Meeting on Adverse Health and Behavioral Consequencesof Cannabis Use.'' Addiction Research Foundation, Toronto. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Fischman, M.W. ``The Behavioral Pharmacology of Cocaine in Humans.''See Grabowski, J., ed. 1984. NIDA. Research Monograph 50. ``Cocaine: Pharmacology,Effects, and Treatment of Abuse.'' Department of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Frank, R.S., 1987, November/December. ``Drugs of Abuse: Data CollectionSystems of DEA and Recent Trends.'' <T3>Journal of Analytical Toxicology. </T3>Vol. 11, No. 6.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gawin, F.H., Kleber, H.D., 1986. ``Abstinence Symptomology and PsychiatricDiagnosis in Cocaine Abusers.'' <T3>Archives of General Psychiatry, </T3>43, 107-113.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Grabowski, J., ed. 1984. NIDA. Research Monograph 50. ``Cocaine: Pharmacology,Effects, and Treatment of Abuse.'' Department of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Greaves, G.B., 1980. ``Psychosocial Aspects of Amphetamine and RelatedSubstance Abuse.'' In: Caldwell, J., ed. 1980. Amphetamines and RelatedStimulants; Chemical, Biological, Clinical, and Sociological Aspects. CRCPress. Boca Raton, Florida. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hawks, R.L., ed. 1982. NIDA. Research Monograph 42. ``The Analysisof Cannabinoids in Biological Fluids.'' Department of Health and HumanServices. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Holbrook, J.M., 1983. ``Hallucinogens.'' In: Bennett, G., Vourakis,C., Woolf, D., eds., 1983. Substance Abuse: Pharmacological Developmental,and Clinical Perspectives. New York: John Wily andamp; Sons. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Holbrook, J.M., 1983. ``CNS Stimulants.'' In: Bennett, G., Vourakis,C., Woolf, D., eds. 1983. Substance Abuse: Pharmacological Developmental,and Clinical Perspectives. New York: John Wily andamp; Sons. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Janowski, D.S., Meacham, M.P., Blaine, J.D., Schoor, J., and Bozzetti,L.P., 1976. ``Simulated Flying Performance after Marijuana Intoxication.''Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 47:124-128, 1976. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Jones, R.T., ``The Pharmacology of Cocaine.'' See Grabowski, J., ed.1984. NIDA. Research Monograph 50. ``Cocaine: Pharmacology, Effects, andTreatment of Abuse.'' Department of Health and Human services. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Jones, R.T., ``The Psychopharmacology of Cocaine.'' See Washton, A.M.,gold, M.S., ed. 1987. <T3>Cocaine: A Clinician's Handbook. </T3>Guilford Press. New York/London.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Klonoff, H., 1984. ``Acute Psychological Effects of Marijuana in Man,Including Acute Cognitive, Psychomotor, and Perceptual Effects on Driving.''See Fehr.andgreater; K. O., Kalant, H., ed. 1983. ``Cannabis and Health Hazards:Proceedings of an ARF/WHO Scientific Meeting on Adverse Health and BehavioralConsequences of Cannabis Use.'' Addiction Research Foundation, Toronto.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Marwah, J., Pitts, D.K., ``Psychopharmacology of Phencyclidine.''See Clouet, D.H., ed. 1986. NIDA. Research Monograph 64. ``Phencyclidine:An Update.'' Department of Health and Human Services. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">McBay A.J., 1986. ``Drug Concentrations and Traffic Safety.'' Alcohol,Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December, 1986. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Moffat, et al., NIDA. Research Monograph 42, 1982. Department of Healthand Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Moskowitz, H., 1985. ``Adverse Effects of Alcohol and Other Drugson Human Performance.'' Alcohol Health and Research World. Summer 1985.Vol. 9, No. 4.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Murray, J.B., 1986. ``Marijuana's Effects on Human Cognitive Functions,Psychomotor Functions, and Personality.'' <T3>The Journal of General Psychology,</T3> 113(1), 23-25.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">O'Hanlon, J.F., deGier, J.J., 1986. <T3>Drugs and Driving.</T3> Taylor andamp; Francis. London and Philadelphia.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Peck, et al., 1986. ``The Effects of Marijuana and Alcohol on ActualDriving Performance.'' Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December,1986.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Podolsky, D.M., Richards, D., 1985. ``Investigating the Role of SubstanceAbuse in Occupational Injuries.'' Alcohol Health and Research World. Summer1985. Vol. 9, No. 4.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Radford, et al., 1983. ``Drug and Alcohol Abuse: The Bases for EmployeeAssistance Programs in the Nuclear Utility Industry.'' NUREG/CR-3196, PNL4679, BHARC 400/83/003.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ross, L.E., Ross, S.M., 1985. ``Alcohol and Drug Use in Aviation.''Alcohol Health and Research World. Summer 1985. Vol. 9, No. 4.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Schwartz, R.H., Hawks, R.L., 1985, August 9. ``Laboratory Detectionof Marijuana Use.'' <T3>Journal of American Medical Association.</T3> Vol. 254, No. 6.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Siegel, R., 1987. ``Cocaine Use and Driving Behavior.'' Alcohol, Drugs,and Driving. Vol. 3, No. 1. January-March, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Smiley, A., 1986. ``Marijuana: On Road and Driving Simulator Studies.''Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 2, No. 3-4. July-December, 1986.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Smiley, A.M., Moskowits, H., Ziedman, K. ``Driving Simulator Studiesof Marijuana Alone and in Combination with Alcohol. In: Proceedings ofthe 25th Conference of the American Association for Automotive Medicine,San Francisco, CA, 1981. pp. 107-116.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Stitzer, M.L. ``Social Stimulus Factors in Drug Effects in Human Subjects.''Thompson, T., Johanson, C.E., ed. 1981. NIDA. Research Monograph 37. ``BehavioralPharmacology of Human Drug Dependence.'' Department of Health and HumanServices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Stone, N., Fromme, M., Kagan, D., 1984. Cocaine. Seduction and Solution.New York: Clarkson N. Potter.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Sutton, L.R., 1983. ``The Effects of Alcohol, Marijuana, and theirCombination on Driving Ability.'' Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 44:438-445,1983.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Walsh, J.M., 1987. ``Drug Effects on Human Performance: NIDA ResearchPrograms.'' Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. Vol. 3, No. 1. January-March,1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Walsh, J.M., Yohay, S.C., 1987. ``Drug and Alcohol Abuse in the Workplace:A Guide to the Issues.'' National Foundation for the Study of Equal EmploymentPolicy. Washington, DC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Washton, A.M., Gold, M.S., ed. 1987. <T3>Cocaine: A Clinician's Handbook.</T3> Guilford Press. New York/London.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Woolf, D.S., 1983. ``Opioids.'' In: Bennett, G., Vourakis, C., Wolf,D.S., eds. 1983. Substance Abuse: Pharmacological Developmental, and ClinicalPerspectives. New York: John Wily andamp; Sons.</ITAG>II. Alternatives to Urinalysis<ITAG tagnum="25">Anonymous. 1985, Nov. 8. ``Consensus Report: Drug Concentrations andDriving Impairment.'' <T3>Journal of the American Medical Association.</T3> Vol. 254, No. 13.p. 2618.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Balster, R.L., ``Clinical Implications of Behavioral PharmacologyResearch on Phencyclidine.'' See Clouet, D.H., ed. 1986. NIDA. ResearchMonograph 64. ``Phencyclidine: An Update.'' Department of Health and HumanServices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Balster R.L., Wessinger, W.D., 1983. ``Central Nervous System DepressantEffects of Phencyclidine.'' In: Kamenka, J.M., Domino, E.F., and Geneste,P., eds. <T3>Phencyclidine and Related Arylcyclohexylamines:</T3> Present and FutureApplications: NPP Books, 1983.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Baumgartner, W.A.; Black, C.T.; Jones, P.E.; Blahs, W.H., 1982. ``Radioimmunoassayof Cocaine in Hair: Concise Communication.'' <T3>Journal of Nuclear Medicine.</T3> Vol. 23. pp. 790-792.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Caddy, B., 1984. ``Saliva as a Specimen for Drug Analysis.''<T3> Advances in Forensic Toxicoloty.</T3> Biomedical Publication. pp.198-254.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Caldwell, J., 1980. ``Amphetamines and Related Stimulants: Some IntroductoryRemarks.'' In: Calwell, J., ed. 1980. Amphetamines and Related Stimulants:Chemical, Biological, Clinical, and Sociological Aspects''. CRC Press.Boca Raton, Florida.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Dogoloff, L.I.; Angarola, R.T.; Price, S.C., (eds.). 1985. <T3>Urine Testing in the Workplace.</T3> Rockville: The American Councilfor Drug Education.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ellinwood, E.J., 1971. ``Assault and Homicide Associated with AmphetamineAbuse.'' <T3>American Journal of Psychiatry,</T3> 127, 1170-1175.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ellinwood, E.H., Nikaido, A.M., 1987. ``Stimulant Induced Impairment:A Perspective Across Dose and Duration of Use.'' Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving.Vol. 3, No. 1. January-March, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hawks, R.L., (ed.) 1982. ``The Analysis of Cannabinoids in BiologicalFluids.'' NIDA. Research Monograph 42. DHHS Pub No. (ADM)82-1212. Washington,DC: U.S. Printing Office.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hurst, P., 1987. ``Amphetamines and Driving.'' Alcohol, Drugs, andDriving. Vol. 3, No. 1. January-March, 1987.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Jain, N.C., Budd, R.D., Budd, B., 1977. ``Growing Abuse of Phencyclidine:California Angel Dust.'' <T3>New England Journal of Medicine.</T3> 297: 673, 1977.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lerner, S.E., Burns, R.S., ``Legal Issues Associated with PCP Abuse_TheRole of the Forensic Expert.'' See Clouet, D.H., ed. 1986. NIDA. ResearchMonograph 64. ``Phencyclidine: An Update.'' Department of Health and HumanServices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Nelson and Moffat, 1980. ``Detection and Identification of Amphetamineand Related Stimulants.'' In: Calwell, ed. 1980. Amphetamines and RelatedStimulants: Chemical, Biological, Clinical, and Sociological Aspects.''CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Puschel, K.; Thomasch, P.; Arnold, W.; 1983. ``Opiate Levels in Hair.''<T3>Forensic Science International.</T3> Vol. 2, pp. 181-186.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Walsh, J.M.; Yohay, S.C., 1987. <T3>Drug and Alcohol Abuse in the Workplace: A Guide to the Issues.</T3>Washington, DC: National Foundation for the Study of Equal Employment Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Washton, A.; Gold, M. (Eds.). 1987. <T3>Cocaine: A Clinicians Handbook.</T3> New York: Guilford Press.</ITAG>III. Alternatives to Random Testing<ITAG tagnum="25">Anonymous. 1986, September 27. ``Drugs at Work.'' <T3>The Economist.</T3> Vol. 7465. p. 27.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Anonymous. 1987, June 1. ``Clinical Chemists Group Surveys Drug Testing.''<T3>Chemical Engineering News. </T3>Vol. 65, No. 22. p. 6.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Baloh, R.B., Sharma, S., Moskowitz, H., andamp; Griffith, R., (1979,January). Effect of Alcohol and Marijuana on Eye Movements. <T3>Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine</T3>, 18-23.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., Daily Labor Report. 1987, June 17:a-13.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Burns, M. (1987). Sobriety Tests for the Presence of Drugs. <T3>Alcohol, Drugs and Driving</T3>, <T3>3</T3>(1), 25-29.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Castro, J., 1986, March 17. ``Battling the Enemy Within.'' <T3>Time</T3>. Vol. 127, No. 11. pp. 40-46.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Council on Scientific Affairs. 1987. ``Issues in Employee Drug Testing.''<T3>Journal of the American Medical Association</T3>. Vol. 258, No. 15.pp. 2089-2096.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Englund, et al., (Unpublished) <T3>United Tri-Service Performance Assessment Battery (UTC-PAB)</T3>. ReportNo. 87-10, supported by the Joint Working Group on Drug Dependent Degredationin Military Performance (JWGD3 MILPERF) under Army work Unit No. 63764A3M463764B995. AB-087 and Naval Medical Research and Development Command,Bethesda, MD.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gaeta, E., 1982, May/June. ``ATandamp;T Looks at Program Evaluation.''<T3>EAP Digest</T3>. pp. 23-31.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gam, J.; Sauser, W.I.; Evans, K.L.; and Lair, C.V., 1983, September.``The Evaluation of an Employee Assistance Program.'' <T3>Journal of Employment Counseling</T3>. Vol. 20, No. 3. pp. 99-106.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gates, D.F. (1985). Drugs on the Road: Zeroing in on Highway Terror.<T3>Police Chief</T3>, <T3>52</T3>(7), 67-69.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Good, G.W., andamp; Augsburger, A.R. (1986). Use of Hgaze Nystagmusas a Part of Roadside Sobriety Testing. <T3>American Journal of Optometry andamp; Physiological Optics, 63</T3>(6),467-471.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Goodwin, Donald W., 1988. ``Alcoholism: Who Gets Better and Who DoesNot.'' In Rose, Robert M., and James E. Barret (Eds.), <T3>Alcoholism: Orgins and Outcome</T3>. New York: Raven Press.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gregoire, K.C., 1979, January. ``An Evaluation of Several Aspectsof a Consortium Employee Assistance Program.'' <T3>Dissertation Abstracts International</T3>: U Nebraska, Lincoln. Vol.39 (7-B) 3567.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hanson, D.J., 1987. ``Drug Abuse Testing Programs Gaining Acceptancein Workplace.'' <T3>Chemical and Engineering News</T3>. Vol. 64, No. 22. pp. 7-14.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hawks, R.L.; Chaing, C.N., 1986. ``Urine Testing for Drugs of Abuse,''Research Monograph 73; National Institute of Drug Abuse.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hoffman, E.; Roman, P.M., 1984, May. ``Effects of Supervisory Styleand Experimentally Based Frames of Reference on Organizational AlcoholismPrograms.'' <T3>Tulane U, Newcomb Coll Journal of Studies on Alcohol</T3>. Vol. 45,No. 3. pp. 260-267.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hoffman, N.G., Harrison, P.A., 1987, March. ``Patient Variations inAlcohol Treatment Utilization.'' Business andamp; Health. Vol. 4, No. 5.pp. 16-18.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hubbard, Robert L., S.G. Craddock, and Elizabeth Cavanaugh, 1984.``Treatment Outcome Prospective Study (TOPS): Client Characteristics andBehaviors Before, During, and After Treatment.'' <T3>NIDA MONOGRAPH andplusmin;51</T3>.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kennedy, R.S., Turnage, J.T. and Lane, N.E. (1988). <T3>Application of a Portable Microcomputer Mental Acuity Battery for Fitness-for-DutyAssessment in Power Plant Operations</T3>. Essex Corporation report presentedat 1988 IEEE Fourth Conference on Human Factors and Power Plants, Monterey,CA: June 5-9, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Masi, D., 1987, March. ``Company Responses to Drug Abuse from AMA'sNationwide Survey.'' <T3>Personnel</T3>. Vol. 40. pp. 40-46.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">McClellan, K. 1984, October-December. ``Work-Based Drug Programs.Tri-County Employee Assistance Program, Akron.'' <T3>Ohio Journal of Psychoactive Drugs</T3>. Vol. 16, No. 4. pp. 285-303.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Martin, D.W.; Heckel, V.M.; Long, R., 1984, November-December. ``ComprehensiveProgram Increases Supervisors' Knowledge of Drug Abuse.'' <T3>Occupational Health and Safety</T3>. Vol. 53, No. 10. pp. 48-53.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Murray, J.B. (1986). Marijuana's Effects on Human Cognitive Functions,Psychomotor Functions, and Personality. <T3>The Journal of General Psychology, 113</T3>(1), 23-55.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Nelson, P.E., Moffat, A.C., 1980. ``Detection and Identification ofAmphetamine and Related Stimulants.'' In: Caldwell, ed. 1980. Amphetaminesand Related Stimulants: Chemical, Biological, Clinical, and SociologicalAspects.'' CRC Press, Inc. Boca Raton, Florida.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Neuner, R.P., 1985. <T3>Drugs in the Workplace Everyone's Business_Everyone's Problem</T3>.Center City: Hazelden.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Peterson, D.J., 1987. ``The Ins and Outs of Implementing a SuccessfulDrug Testing Program.'' <T3>Personnel</T3>. Vol. 14, No. 10. pp. 52-55.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Raezer, T.A., 1987, Spring. ``Needed Weapons in the Army's War onDrugs: Electronic Surveillance and Informants.: 116 <T3>Military Law Review</T3> 1.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Reed, T.E., (1985). The Myth of the ``Average Alcohol Response.''<T3>Alcohol, 2</T3>, 515-519.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Shore, H., 1984, Spring. ``Employee Assistance Programs_Reaping theBenefits.'' <T3>Connecticut, Univ. of Sloan Management Review</T3>. Vol. 25, No. 3.pp. 69-73.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Stapleton, J.M., Guthrei, S., andamp; Linnoila, M. (1986). Effects ofAlcohol and other Psychotropic Drugs on Eye Movement: Relevance to TrafficSafety. <T3>Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 47</T3>(5), 426-432.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Starr, A.; Byram, G., 1985, August. ``Cost/Benefit Analysis for EmployeeAssistance Programs.'' <T3>Personnel Administrator</T3>. Vol. 30, No. 8. pp. 55-62.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Tims, Frank M., and Sherry Holland, 1984. ``A Treatment EvaluationAgenda: Discussions and Recommendation.'' <T3>NIDA MONOGRAPH andplusmin;5.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Trice, H.M.; Beyer, J.M., 1984, September. ``Work-Related Outcomesof the Constructive-Confrontation Strategy in a Job-Based Alcoholism Program.''<T3>Cornell U., New York State School of Industrial andamp; Labor RelationsJournal of Studies on Alcohol</T3>. Vol. 45, No. 5. pp. 393-404.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">United States Senate Commission on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,Washington, DC 20510. 1987, April. <T3>Transportation Employee Safety and Rehabilitation Act of 1987. ReportTogether with Additional and Minority Views</T3>. Calendar No. 97; 100-143.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Westerman, S.T., Gilbert, L.M., andamp; Shrewsbury, N.J. (1981, September).A Non-invasive Method of Qualitative and Quantitative Measurement of Drugs.<T3>The Larynogoscope</T3>, 91, 1536-1547.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Westhiemer, G. (1963). Amphetamine, Barbiturates, and Accommodation-convergence.<T3>Archives of Ophthalmology</T3>, 132-138.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wilkinson, I.M.S. (1986, July). The influence of Drugs and AlcoholUpon Human Eye Movement. <T3>Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 69</T3>, 479-480.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Willette, R.E., 1986. Drug Testing Programs. In Hawks, R.L. and Chiang,C.N., Eds., <T3>Urine Testing for Drugs of Abuse</T3>. NIDA Research Monograph 73.</ITAG>IV. Cutoff Levels<ITAG tagnum="25">Chiang, C.N., Hawks, R.L., 1986. ``Implications of Drug Levels inBody Fluids: Basic Concepts.'' In: Hawks, R.L., Chiang, C.N., 1986. NIDA.Research Monograph 73. Urine Testing for Drugs of Abuse. Department ofHealth and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Clayton, A.V., 1980. ``Effects of Alcohol on Driving Skills,'' Sandler,M., editor, <T3>The Psychopharmacology of Alcohol, </T3>Raven Press, NY.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cone, E.J., Johnson, R.E., Darwin, W.D., Yousefnejad, D., Mell, L.B.,Paul, B.D., Mitchell, J., 1987. ``Passive Inhalation of Marijuana Smoke;Urinalysis at Room Air Levels of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol,'' <T3>Journal of Analytical Toxicology, </T3>Vol. 11, No. 3.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">COSA, 1986, ``Alcohol and the Driver,'' <T3>Journal of the American Medical Association, </T3>1986, 255, Pages522-527.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Flom, M.C., Brown, B., Adams, A.J., Jones, R.T., 1976. ``Alcohol andMarijuana Effects on Ocular Tracking.'' <T3>American Journal Optom. Physio. Opt., </T3>53, 764.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hawks, R.L.; Chiang, C.N., 1986. ``Urine Testing For Drugs of Abuse,''Research Monograph 73, NIDA. Washington, DC: U.S. Govt. Printing Office.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hawks, R.L. (ed.) 1982. ``The Analyst of Cannabinoids in BiologicalFluids,'' NIDA Research Monograph 42. KHHS Pub No. (ADM)82-1212. Washington,DC: U.S. Govt Printing Office.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kogan, M.J.; Razi, J.A.; Pierson, D.J.; Willson, N.J., 1986, April.``Confirmation of Syva Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique (EMIT) d.a.u.and Roche Abuscreen Radioimmunoassay (RIA) (1251) Urine Cannabinoid Immunoassaysby Gas Chromotagraphic/Mass Spectrometric (GG/MS) and Bonded-Phase Absorption/ThinLayer Chromatographic (BPA-TLC) Methods.'' <T3>Journal of Forensic Sciences, JFSCA. </T3>Vol. 31, No. 2. pp: 494-500.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Linnoila, M., Guthrie, S., Lister, R., 1986. ``Mechanisms of Drug-InducedImpairment of Driving.'' In: Drugs and Driving. O'Hanlon, J.F., deGier,J.J., eds. Taylor andamp; Francis, 1986. 29-49. Manno, J.E., 1986. ``SpecimenCollection and Handling.'' In: Hawks, R.L., Chiang, C.N., NIDA. ResearchMonograph 73. Urine Testing for Drugs of Abuse. Department of Health andHuman Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Manno, J.E., 1986. ``Interpretation of Urinalysis Results.'' In: Hawks,R.L., Chiang, C.N. 1986. NIDA. Research Monograph 73. Urine Testing ForDrugs of Abuse. Department of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">McBurney, L.J.; Bobbie, B.A.; Sepp, L.A., 1986 ``GC/MC and Emit Analysisfor Analyses for Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Metabolites in Plasma andUrine of Human Subjects,'' <T3>Journal of Analytical Toxicology. </T3>Vol. 10.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Moscowitz, H., 1985. ``Skills Performance at Low Blood Alcohol Levels,''<T3>Journal of Studies on Alcohol, </T3>Volume 46, No. 6, Pages 11-15.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">O'Hanlon, J.F., Brookhuis, K.A., Louwerens, J.W., Volkerts, E.R.,1986. ``Performance Testing as Part of Drug Registration.'' In: Drugs andDriving. O'Hanlon, J.F., deGier, J.J., eds. Taylor andamp; Francis, 1986.311-330.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Peat, M.A., Finkle, B.S., Deyman, M.E., 1982. In: Hawks, R.L., ed.1982. NIDA. Research Monograph 42. ``The Analysis of Cannabinoids in BiologicalFluids.'' Department of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Radlow, R., Hurst, P.M. 1985. ``Temporal Relations Between Blood AlcoholConcentration and Alcohol Effect: An Experiment with Human Subjects.''Psychopharmacology. Vol. 85, 260-266.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ross, L.E. and Ross, S.M., 1985. ``Alcohol and Drug Use in Aviation,''<T3>Alcohol Health and Research World, </T3>Summer, 1985, Vol. 9, No. 4,pages 34-41.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Verebey, K., 1987. ``Cocaine Abuse Detection by Laboratory Methods.''In: Washton, A.M., Gold, M.S., eds. 1987. <T3>Cocaine: A Clinician's Handbook. </T3>Guilford Press. New York/London.</ITAG>V. Reinstitution of Unescorted Access<ITAG tagnum="25">Babor, Thomas, F., Ned L. Codney, and Richard J. Lauerman. 1986. ``TheDrug Dependence Syndrome Concept as an Organizing Principle in the Explanationand Prediction of Relapse.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph 72.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cole, S., E. Cole, W. Lehman, and W. Jones. 1981. ``The Combined Treatmentof Drug and Alcohol Abusers: An Overview.'' <T3>Journal of Drug Issues, </T3>11.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hubbard, Robert L., and Mary E. Marsden. 1986. ``Relapse to Use ofHeroin, Cocaine, and Other Drugs in the First Year After Treatment.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;72.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Jaffe, Jerome H., 1984. ``Evaluating Drug Abuse Treatment: A Commenton the State of the Art.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;51.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Maddux, James F., and David P. Desmond. 1986. ``Relapse and Recoveryin Substance Abuse Careers.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;72.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">McClellan, K., 1984. ``Work-Based Drug Programs.'' <T3>Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, </T3>16.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Rounsaville, Bruce J., 1986. ``Clinical Implications of Relapse Research.''<T3>NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;72.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Senay, Edward C., 1984. ``Clinical Implications of Drug Abuse TreatmentOutcome Research.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;51.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Simpson, D., 1984. ``National Treatment System Evaluation Based onthe Drug Abuse Reporting Program (DARP) Following Research.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph andplusmin;51.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Simpson, D. and Kerry Marsh. 1986. ``Relapse and Recovery Among OpiodsAddicts 12 Years After Treatment.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph </T3>andplusmin;<T3>72.</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Simpson, D., and S. Sell. 1982. ``Effectiveness of Treatment for DrugAbuse: An Overview of the DART Research Program.'' <T3>Advance Studies for Alcohol and Substance Abuse,</T3> 2.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Tims, Frank M., and Carl G. Luekefeld. 1986. ``Relapse and Recoveryin Drug Abuse: An Introduction.'' <T3>NIDA Research Monograph </T3>andplusmin;<T3>72. </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Vaillant, G. 1983. <T3>The Natural History of Alcoholism.</T3> Harvard University Press.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Waldorf, D., and P. Biernacki. 1981. ``The Natural Recovery from OpiateAddiction.'' <T3>Journal of Drug Issues,</T3> 11.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wesson, Donald R., Barbara E. Havassy, and David E. Smith. 1986. ``Theoriesof Relapse and Recovery and Their Implications for Drug Abuse Treatment.''<T3>NIDA Research Monograph </T3>andplusmin;<T3>72. </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Backfit Analysis</ITAG>Because this rulemaking modifies a prior Commission position by addinga new rule, a draft backfit analysis has been prepared pursuant to 10 CFR50.109 in which a preliminary finding is made that the rule will providea substantial increase in the overall protection of public health and safetyand that the direct and indirect costs of implementation are justifiedin view of the increased protection. As noted, the finding is preliminaryand the Commission requests comments on application of the backfit ruleto this rulemaking as presented in the draft analysis.Under the backfit rule the Commission has two options with respect to backfitsit believes are needed. The Commission can make the required finding ofsubstantial increase in overall protection of public health and safety,or it can decide that the rule in question is necessary to provide adequateprotection to the health and safety of the public and thus not subjectto backfit analysis. Although the draft backfit analysis adopts the firstoption, the Commission also desires comment on which of these two optionsis the more appropriate for this rulemaking.The draft backfit analysis is available for inspection and copying fora fee at the NRC Public Document Room at 2120 L Street NW. (lower level),Washington, DC. Single copies may be obtained by writing to the U.S. NuclearRegulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555.<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act Statement</ITAG>This proposed rule amends information collection requirements that aresubject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.).This rule has been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget forreview and approval of the paperwork requirements.Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimatedto average 8 hours per response, including time for reviewing instructions,searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed,and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send commentsregarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection ofinformation, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to the Recordsand Reports Management Branch, Mail Stop P-530, Division of InformationSupport Services, Office of Administration and Resources Management, U.S.Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555; and to the Officeof Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget,Washington, DC 20503.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Analysis</ITAG>An analysis of the costs and benefits of the proposed rule is includedin the draft backfit analysis described above.<ITAG tagnum="85">Environmental Assessment and Finding of No Significant EnvironmentalImpact</ITAG>Identification of Proposed Action: The proposed rule would require licenseesauthorized to operate nuclear power reactors to implement a fitness-for-dutyprogram whose general objective is to provide reasonable assurance thatactivities associated with nuclear power plant operations are carried outin an environment which is free of the effects of drugs. Under the proposedrule, testing for impermissible drug use would be conducted prior to authorizingunescorted access to protected areas or assignment to other activitieswithin the scope of the proposed rule, randomly for such licensee and contractorpersonnel, after certain operational events, based on reasonable cause,and to verify continued abstention. In addition, the proposed rule providesfor other basic fitness-for-duty program elements such as the developmentof written policy and procedures, provisions for the training of supervisorsand employees, standards for drug testing, management actions, and requirementsfor employee assistance programs and appeal procedures.The Need for the Proposed Action: The Nuclar Regulatory Commission recognizesdrug abuse problems to be a social, medical, and safety problem affectingevery segment of our society. Given the pervasiveness of the problem, prudenceindicates that the Commission consider measures that would continue toreasonably assure that the effects of drugs do not adversely affect thepublic health and safety.The Commission recognizes and appreciates the significant efforts alreadyundertaken by the Nuclear Utility Management and Resources Council (NUMARC),the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations (INPO), and the Edison ElectricInstitute (EEI), and each nuclear power reactor licensee in developingand implementing fitness-for-duty programs for nuclear power plant personnel.Nevertheless, the Commission's evaluation of experience gained since itspolicy statement was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on August 4, 1986, indicates that rulemakingis now appropriate to achieve further improvements.Environmental Impacts of the Proposed Action: The proposed rule would requirecertain management actions and procedures intended to minimize the probabilityof human error that could endanger the public health and safety. Althoughthese activities would have a social and economic impact, the impact onthe environment would be positive in that there would be some reductionin the probability of a radioactive release due to human error by a personimpaired from the effects of drugs.Alternatives to the Proposed Action: The principal alternative would beto take no action and continue to use the Commission's policy statementof August 4, 1986 (51 FR 27921). Since the Commission has concluded thatno adverse environmental effects are associated with this proposed action,any alternatives with equal or greater environmental impact need not beevaluated.Alternative Use of Resources: This action involves the use of health careprofessionals and facilities not previously considered in connection withthe Final Environmental Statements related to any licensed facilities.Agencies and Persons Consulted: The NRC staff considered numerous documentswhich are listed in the above bibliography, and has met with representativesfrom NUMARC and four unions (The International Brotherhood of ElectricalWorkers, the International Union of Operational Engineers, the Oil, Chemicaland Atomic Workers Union, and the Building and Construction Trades Departmentof the AFL-CIO), the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Instituteon Drug Abuse, and Battelle Human Affairs Research Center.Findings of No Significant Impact: The Commission has determined underthe National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended, and the Commission'sregulations in Subpart A of 10 CFR Part 51, that this rule, if adopted,would not be a major Federal action significantly affecting the qualityof the human environment and therefore an environmental impact statementis not required.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act Certification  </ITAG>In accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, 5 U.S.C. 605(b),the Commission hereby certifies that this rule will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. The proposednew 10 CFR Part 26 applies to certain owners and operators of civiliannuclear power reactors and their contactors. The companies that own thesefacilities do not fall within the scope of ``small entities'' set forthin the Regulatory Flexibility Act or the small business size standardsset out in regulations issued by the Small Business Administration in 13CFR Part 121. Any costs to the minor number of small entities affected,i.e., contractors, will apply only to those contractor employees workingat the nuclear power reactors, and would probably be reimbursed throughthe contract.  <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 10 CFR Part 26  </ITAG>Fitness for duty, Chemical testing, Drug abuse, Drug testing, EmployeeAssistance Program, Management actions, Sanctions, Appeals, Protectionof information, Reporting and Recordkeeping requirements, Nuclear powerreactors.  For the reasons set out on the preamble and under the authority of theAtomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, the Energy Reorganization Act of1974, as amended, and 5 U.S.C. 553, the NRC is proposing to adopt a new10 CFR Part 26.  1. Part 26 is added to 10 CFR Chapter I to read as follows:  <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 26_FITNESS FOR DUTY PROGRAMS  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">General Provisions  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.1 Purpose.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.2 Scope.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.3 Definitions.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.4 Interpretations.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.6 Exemptions.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.7 Information collection requirements: OMB approval.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">General Performance Objectives   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.10 General performance objectives   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Program Elements and Procedures    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.20 Written policy and procedures.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.21 Policy communication and awareness training.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.22 Training of supervisors and escorts.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.23 Contractors.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.24 Chemical testing.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.25 Employee Assistance Programs (EAP)   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.27 Management actions and sanctions to be imposed.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.28 Appeals.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.29 Protection of information.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Inspections, Records and Reports   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.70 Inspections.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.71 Recordkeeping requirements.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.73 Reporting requirements.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Audits   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.80 Audits.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Enforcement   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">26.90 Violations.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 53, 81, 103, 104, 107, 161, 68 Stat. 930, 935,936, 937, 939, 948, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2073, 2111, 2112, 2133, 2134,2137, 2201); secs. 201, 202, 206, 88 Stat. 1242, 1244, 1246, as amended(42 U.S.C. 5841, 5842, 5846).  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the puroses of sec. 223, 68 Stat. 958, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2273)andSection;andSection;26.20, 26.21, 26.22, 26.23, 26.24, 26.25, 26.27, 26.28,26.29 and 26.80 are issued under secs. 161b and i, 68 Stat. 948, and 949as amended [42 U.S.C. 2201(b) and (i)]; andSection;andSection;26.70, 26.71,and 26.73 are issued under sec. 161o, 68 Stat. 950, as amended [42 U.S.C.2201(o)].  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">General Provisions  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.1  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose.  </ITAG>This part prescribes requirements and standards for the establishment andmaintenance of certain aspects of fitness-for-duty programs and proceduresby the licensed nuclear industry.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.2  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope.   </ITAG>(a) The regulations in this part apply to licensees authorized to operatea nuclear power reactor. Each licensee shall implement a fitness-for-dutyprogram which complies with all sections of this part. The provisions ofthe fitness-for-duty program must apply to all persons granted unescortedaccess to protected areas, and to licensee or contractor personnel requiredto respond to a licensee's Technical Support Center (TSC) or EmergencyOperations Facility (EOP) in accordance with licensee emergency plans andprocedures. The regulations in this part do not apply to NRC representatives,law enforcement personnel, and offsite emergency fire and medical responsepersonnel while on official duty.  (b) The requirements in this part must be implemented by each licenseeauthorized to operate a nuclear power reactor no later than (insert date90 days after publication of final rule), except for the requirements toimplement random drug testing contained in andSection;26.24, which must beimplemented no later than (insert date 180 days after publication of finalrule).  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.3  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.  </ITAG>``Aliquot'' means a portion of a specimen used for testing.  ``Commission'' means the Nuclear Regulatory Commission or its duly authorizedrepresentatives.  ``Confirmatory test'' means a second analytical procedure to identify thepresence of a specific drug or metabolite which is independent of the initialtest and which uses a different technique and chemical principle from thatof the initial test in order to ensure reliability and accuracy.  ``Confirmed positive test'' means the result of a confirmatory test hasconfirmed the presence of concentrations of drugs or metabolites in a specimenabove the ``cutoff level.''  ``Cutoff level'' mean the value set for designating a test result as positive. ``Drug abuse'' means the use of a psychoactive substance for other thanmedical purposes which impairs the physical, mental, emotional or socialwell-being of the user.  ``Follow-up testing'' means chemical testing at unannounced intervals,during or as follow-up to treatment, to ensure that an employee is maintainingabstinence from the previously identified abuse of drugs.  ``For-cause testing'' means chemical testing at the request of a supervisor,or other responsible management official, based upon reasonable suspicionthat a person is impaired or may have used drugs.  ``Illegal drugs'' means a controlled substance included in Schedule I orII of the Controlled substances Act, as amended, 21 U.S.C. 801, et seq.The term ``illegal drugs''does not mean the use of a controlled substancepursuant to a valid prescription or other uses authorized by law.  ``Impairment ''means deficient or diminishing on-the-job performance resultingfrom physical or psychological stressors, that may include abuse of drugsor other substances.  ``Initial screening test'' means an immunossay screen to eliminate ``negative''urine specimens from further consideration.  ``Protected area'' has the same meaning as in andSection;73.2(g) of thischapter, an area encompassed by physical barriers and to which access iscontrolled.     ``Random test'' means a system of unannounced drug testing imposed in astatistically random manner to a group so that all persons within thatgroup have an equal probability of selection.``Suitable inquiry'' means verification of employment history for a minimumof the past five years, obtained through contacts with previous employersto determine if a person was, in the past, tested positive for illegaldrugs, subject to a plan for treating drug abuse, removed from, or madeineligible for activities within the scope of 10 CFR Part 26, or deniedunescorted access at any other nuclear power plant or other employmentin accordance with a fitness-for-duty policy.``Unannounced testing'' means unannounced random tests.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Intepretations.</ITAG>Except as specifically authorized by the Commission in writing, no interpretationof the meaning of the regulations in this part by any officer or employeeof the Commission other than a written interpretation by the General Counselwill be recognized to be binding upon the Commission.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Exemptions.</ITAG>The Committee may, upon application of any interested person or upon itsown initiative, grant such exemptions from the requirements of the regulationsin this part as it determines are authorized by law and will not endangerlife or property or the common defense and security and are otherwise inthe public interest.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Information collection requirements: OMB approval.</ITAG>The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has submitted the information collectionrequirements contained in this part of the Office of Management and Budget(OMB) for approval as required by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). OMB has approved the information collection requirementscontained in this part under control number<T2>XXX</T2>.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ [<T4>Editorial Note:</T4> Control number will appear in final regulation.](b) The approved information collection requirements contained in thispart appear in andSection;andSection;26.20, 26.21, 26.22, 26.23, 26.29, 26.71,26.73, and 26.80.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Performance Objectives</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.10</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General performance objectives.</ITAG>Fitness-for-duty programs shall:(a) Provide reasonable assurance that nuclear power plant personnel arenot under the influence of any substance, legal or illegal, or mentallyor physically impaired from any cause, which in any way adversely affectstheir ability to safely and competently perform their duties;(b) Provide reasonable measures for the early detection of persons whoare not fit to perform activities within the scope of this part; and(c) Have a goal of achieving a drug-free workplace and a workplace freeof the effects of such substances.<ITAG tagnum="84">Program Elements and Procedures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.20</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Written policy and procedures.</ITAG>Each license subject to this part shall establish and implement writtenpolicies and procedures designed to meet the general performance objectivesand specific requirements of this part. Each licensee shall retain a copyof the current written policy and procedures as a record until the Commissionterminates each license for which the policy and procedures were developedand, if any portion of the policies and procedures are superseded, retainthe superseded material for three years after each change. As a minimum,written policies and procedures shall address fitness for duty throughthe following:(a) An overall description of licensee policy on fitness for duty. Thepolicy shall address abuse of illegal drugs and legal drugs (e.g., alcohol,prescription and over-the-counter drugs). Licensee policy shall also addressother factors that could affect fitness for duty such as mental stress,fatigue and illness. Written policy documents shall be in sufficient detailto provide affected individuals with information on what is expected ofthem, and what consequences may result from lack of adherence to the policy.(b) A description of programs which are available to personnel desiringassistance in dealing with drug or other problems that could adverselyaffect the performance of activities within the scope of this part.(c) Procedures to be utilized in testing for drugs, including proceduresfor protecting the employee and the integrity of the specimen, and thequality controls used to ensure the test results are valid and attributableto the correct individual.(d) A description of immediate and follow-on actions which will be taken,and the procedures to be utilized, in those cases where employees or contractorsassigned to duties within the scope of this part are determined to havebeen involved in the use, sale, or possession of illegal drugs.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.21</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Policy communications and awareness training</ITAG>(a) Persons assigned to activities within the scope of this part shallbe provided with appropriate training to ensure they understand_(1) Licensee policy and procedures, including the methods that will beused to implement the policy;(2) The personal and public health and safety hazards associated with abuseof drugs;(3) The effect of prescription and over-the-counter drugs and dietary conditionson drug test results, and the role of the Medical Review Officer;(4) Employee assistance programs provided by the licensee; and(5) What is expected of them and what consequences may result from lackof adherence to the policy,(b) Initial training must be completed prior to assigment to activitieswithin the scope of this part. Refresher training must be completed onan annual basis, or more frequently where the need is indicated. A recordof the training shall be retained for a period of at least three years.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.22</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Training of supervisors and escorts.</ITAG>(a) Managers and supervisors of activities within the scope of this partshall be provided appropriate training to ensure they understand_(1) Their role and responsibilities in implementing the program;(2) The roles and responsibilities of others, such as the personnel, medical,and Employee Assistance Program (EAP) staffs;(3) Techniques for recognizing drugs and indications of the use, sale,or possession of drugs;(4) Behavioral observation techniques for detecting degradation in performance,impairment, or changes in employee behavior (in the case of escorts, thebehavioral observation techniques shall cover detection of impairment);and(5) Procedures for initiating appropriate corrective action, to includereferral of employees for counseling or treatment (in the case of escorts,this shall cover reporting to appropriate management).(b) Persons assigned to escort duties shall be provided appropriate trainingto ensure they understand the matters contained in andSection;26.22(a)(3),(4), and (5).(c) Initial training must be completed prior to assignment of duties withinthe scope of this part and within 3 months of initial supervisory assignment,as applicable. Refresher training must be completed on an annual basis,or more frequently where the need is indicated. A record of the trainingshall be retained for a period of at least three years.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contractors.</ITAG>All contractor personnel performing activities within the scope of thispart for a licensee must be subject to either the licensee's program relatingto fitness for duty, or to a program, formally reviewed and approved bythe licensee, which meets the standards of this part. Written agreementsbetween licensees and contractors for activities within the scope of thispart shall be retained for the life of the contract and will clearly showthat_(a) The contractor is responsible to the licensee for adhereing to thelicensee's fitness-for-duty policy, or maintaining and adhereing to aneffective fitness-for-duty program which meets the standards of this part;and(b) Personnel having been denied access or removed from nuclear safetyactivities at any nuclear power plant for violations of fitness-for-dutypolicy will not be assigned to contracted work without the knowledge andconsent of the licensee.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.24</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Chemical testing.</ITAG>(a) To provide a means to deter and detect drug abuse, the licensee shallimplement the following chemical testing programs for persons subject tothis part:(1) Testing immediately before the initial granting of unescorted accessto protected areas or assignment to activities within the scope of thispart.(2) Unannounced tests imposed in a random manner. The tests must be administeredso that a person completing a test is immediately eligible for anotherunannounced test.(i) Alternative A: The tests must be conducted in a manner that assuresthat at least 90 percent of the individuals within the scope of the ruleare tested each year, that testing is performed throughout the year andthat testing rates for individuals already tested with negative resultsnot be lower than 30 percent per year (2\1/2\ percent per month) for theremainder of the testing year.(ii) Alternative B: The tests must be administered throughout the yearat an annual rate equivalent to 300 percent of the population subject tosuch testing.(3) Testing for-cause, i.e., immediately following any observed behaviorindicating possible drug abuse; after accidents involving a failure inindividual performance resulting in personal injury, in a radiation exposureor release of radioactivity in excess of regulatory limits, or actual orpotential substantial degradations of the level of safety of the plant;or after receiving credible information that an individual is abusing drugs.(4) Follow-up testing on a random basis to verify continued abstentionfrom the use of drugs.(b) Testing for drugs shall, at a minimum, conform to the ``Mandatory Guidelinesfor Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs'' issued by the Alcohol, DrugAbuse, and Mental Health Administration of the Department of Health andHuman Services [these guidelines are available for review at the PublicDocument Room, 2120 L St., NW., Washington, DC 20555, and will be publishedwith the final regulations], hereinafter referred to as the HHS Guidelines.Licensees, at their discretion, may implement programs with more stringentstandards (e.g., lower cutoff levels). Management actions with respectto persons who fail a more stringent standard, but do not test positiveunder the HHS Guidelines incorporated in this rule, would also be at thediscretion of the licensee.(c) Licensees shall test for all five drugs or classes of drugs describedin paragraph 2.1(a) (1) and (2) of the HHS Guidelines. In addition, licenseesshall consult with local law enforcement authorities and drug counselingservices to determine whether other drugs are being used in the geographicallocale of the facility and the local workforce. Where appropriate, otherdrugs so identified must be added to the list of drugs being tested. Conservativecutoff limits must be established by the licensee for these drugs.(d) Licensees may conduct preliminary tests of an aliquot prior to forwardingselected specimens to a contract laboratory meeting the requirements ofparagraph (e) of this section, provided the licensee's staff possessesthe necessary training and skills for the tasks assigned, their qualificationsare documented, and adequate quality controls are implemented. Qualitycontrol procedures for preliminary tests shall include the processing ofblind performance test specimens and the submission to the contract laboratoryof a sampling of specimens initially tested as negative.(e) Quality controls and procedures for contract laboratories shall beconsistent with the HHS standards for ``Certification of Laboratories Engagedin Urine Drug Testing for Federal Agenices.'' [these guidelines are availablefor review at the Public Document Room, 2120 L. St., NW., Washington, DC20555, and will be published with the final regulations]. Contract laboratoriesshall conduct initial screening tests and confirmatory tests on all specimensforwarded for testing. Licensees shall submit blind performance test specimensto contract laboratories in accordance with paragraph 2.5(d) (2) and (3)of the HHS Guidelines.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.25</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Employee Assistance Programs (EAP).</ITAG>Each licensee subject to this part shall maintain an Employee AssistanceProgram to strengthen fitness-for-duty programs by offering assessment,short-term counseling, referral services, and treatment monitoring to employeeswith problems that could adversely affect the performance of activitieswithin the scope of this part. EAPs should be designed to achieve earlyintervention and provide for confidential assistance (except where safetyconsiderations must prevail). EAP staff shall inform licensee managementwhen a determination has been made that a self-referring individual's conditionconstitutes a hazard to himself or herself or others.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.27 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Management actions and sanctions to be imposed.</ITAG>(a) Prior to the initial granting of unescorted access to a protected areaor the assignment to activities within the scope of this part to any person,the licensee shall obtain a written statement from the individual as towhether activities within the scope of this part were ever denied the individualand shall complete a suitable inquiry to determine if that person was,in the past, tested positive for illegal drugs, subject to a plan for treatingdrug abuse, or removed from activities within the scope of this part, ordenied unescorted access at any other nuclear power plant in accordancewith a fitness-for-duty policy. If such a record is established, the newassignment to activities within the scope of this part or granting of unescortedaccess must be based upon a management and medical determination of fitnessfor duty and the establishment of an appropriate follow-up testing program,provided the restrictions of paragraph (b) of this section is observed.To meet this requirement, the identity of persons denied unescorted accessor removed under the provisions of this part and the circumstances forsuch denial or removal, including test results, will be made availablein response to an inquiry by any company or its contractor falling underthe scope of this part. Failure to list all previous employers and reasonsfor removal or revocation of unescorted access shall be cause for denialof unescorted access.(b) Each licensee subject to this part shall, as a minimum, take the followingactions. Nothing herein shall prohibit the licensee from taking more stringentaction.(1) Lacking any other evidence to indicate the use, sale, or possessionof illegal drugs onsite, a confirmed positive test result shall be presumedto be an indication of offsite drug use. The first confirmed positive testshall, as a minimum, result in immediate removal from activities withinthe scope of this part for at least 14 days and referral to the EAP forassessment and counseling during any suspension period. Plans for treatment,follow-up, and future employment, shall be developed, and any rehabilitationprogram deemed appropriate must be initiated as appropriate, during suchsuspension period. Satisfactory management and medical assurance of theindividual's fitness to adequately perform activities within the scopeof this part shall be obtained before permitting the individual to be returnedto these activities. Any subsequent confirmed positive test shall resultin removal from unescorted access to protected areas and activities withinthe scope of this part for a minimum of three years from the date of removal.(2) Any individual determined to have been involved in the sale, use, orpossession of illegal drugs while within a protected area of any nuclearpower plant shall be removed from activities within the scope of this Part.The individual may not be granted unescorted access to protected areasor assigned to activities within the scope of this part for a minimum offive years from the date of removal.(3) Persons removed for periods of three years or more under the provisionsof the above paragraphs for the illegal sale, use or possession of drugsand who would have been removed under the current standards of a hiringlicensee, may be granted unescorted access and assigned duties within thescope of this part by a licensee subject to this Part only when the hiringlicensee receives satisfactory medical assurance that the person has abstainedfrom drugs for at least three years. Satisfactory management and medicalassurance of the individual's fitness to adequately perform activitieswithin the scope of this part shall be obtained before permitting the individualto peform activities within the scope of this part. Any person grantedunescorted access or whose access is reinstated under these provisions,shall be given unannounced follow-up tests at least once every three monthsfor three years after reemployment to verify continued abstinence fromdrugs. Any confirmed use of drugs through this process or any other determinationof subsequent involvement in the sale, use or possession of illegal drugsshall result in permanent denial of unescorted access.(c) Refusal to provide a specimen for testing and resignation prior toremoval for violation of company policy concerning drugs shall be recordedas a removal for cause. Such records shall be retained for the purposeof meeting the requirements of andSection;26.27(a).(d) If a license has reasonable belief that an NRC employee may be underthe influence of any substance, or otherwise unfit for duty, the licenseemay not deny access but may escort the individual. In any instance of thisoccurrence, the appropriate Regional Administrator shall be notified immediatelyby telephone. During other than normal working hours, the NRC OperationsCenter shall be notified.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;26.28 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Appeals.</ITAG>Each licensee subject to this part shall establish a procedure for employeesand contractor/vendor employees to appeal fitness for duty determinationsthat could have an adverse effect on the individual's employment. The proceduremust provide notice and an opportunity to respond and be consonant withfundamental principles of due process. Where applicable, grievance reviewprocedures contained in collective bargaining agreements covering the bargainingunit of which the employee is a member will normallly meet this requirement,and they may be used for this purpose whether or not the administrativeaction taken is a grievable action under the contract.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 26.29</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Protection of information. </ITAG>(a) Each licensee subject to this part, who collects personal informationon an employee for the purpose of complying with this part, shall establishand maintain a system of files and procedures for the protection of thepersonal information. Such system shall be maintained until the Commissionterminates each license for which the system was developed. (b) The licensee shall not disclose the personal information collectedand maintained to persons other than assigned medical review officials,other licensees legitimately seeking the information as required by thispart for employment decisions and who have obtained a release from currentor prospective employees or contractor personnel, NRC representatives,appropriate law enforcement officials, the subject individual or his orher representative, or to those licensee personnel who have a need to haveaccess to the information in performing assigned duties. <ITAG tagnum="84">Inspections, Records and Reports </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 26.70</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Inspections. </ITAG>(a) Each licensee subject to this part shall permit duly authorized representativesof the Commission to inspect its records, premises, activities, and personnelas may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this part. (b) Written agreements between licensees and their contractors will clearlyshow that the_ (1) Licensee is responsible to the Commission for maintaining an effectivefitness-for-duty program in accordance with this part; and (2) NRC may inspect, copy, or take away copies of any licensee or contractordocuments, records, and reports related to implementation of the licensee'sor contractor's fitness-for-duty program under the scope of the contractedactivities. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 26.71</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Recordkeeping requirements. </ITAG>Each licensee subject to this part shall_ (a) Retain records of inquiries conducted in accordance with andSection;26.27(a), that result in the granting of unescorted access to protectedareas, until three years following termination of such access authorizations;(b) Retain records of confirmed positive test results which are concurredin by the Medical Review Officer, and the subsequent personnel actionsfor a period of at least three years; and (c) Retain records of persons made ineligible for three years or longerfor assignment to activities within the scope of this part under the provisionsof andSection; 26.27(b)(1), (2), (3) or (c), until the Commission terminateseach license under which the records were created. (d) Collect and compile fitness-for-duty program performance data as describedin NRC Form <T2>XXX</T2>.\1\<NOTE/> The data shall be analyzed and appropriate actions takento correct program weaknesses. Such data and analysis shall be retainedfor three years and made available for inspection by the NRC. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ [Editorial note: NRC Form number will be published inthe final regulation] <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 26.73</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reporting requirements. </ITAG>(a)(1) Each licensee subject to this part shall inform the Commission ofsignificant fitness-for-duty events including: (i) Sale, use, or possession of illegal drugs within the protected areaand, (ii) Any acts involving the illegal sale, use or possession of a controlledsubstance by any person licensed under 10 CFR Part 55 to operate a powerreactor or by any supervisory personnel assigned to perform duties withinthe scope of this part. This includes the results of confirmed positivetests on such persons. (2) Such notifications shall be made to the NRC Operations Center by telephonewithin 24 hours of the discovery of the event. (3) Written reports documenting such notifications and specifying actionstaken shall be submitted within 30 days to the U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Document Control Desk, Washington, DC 20555. The licensee shallalso submit one copy to the appropriate NRC Regional Office. Written reportsshall not include the names of the individuals. (b) Fitness-for-duty events shall be reported under this section ratherthan reported under the provisions of andSection; 73.71. <ITAG tagnum="84">Audits </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 26.80</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Audits. </ITAG>(a) Each licensee subject to this part shall cause the fitness-for-dutyprogram to be audited at least once every 13 months. In addition, auditsshall be conducted, at least once every 13 months, of those portions offitness-for-duty programs implemented by contractors. Licensees may acceptaudits of contractors conducted by other licensees and need not re-auditthe same contractor for the same period of time. A copy of the audit report,to include findings, recommendations and corrective action must be providedto each sharing utility and made available on site for NRC inspection.Licensees retain responsibility for the effectiveness of contractor programsand the implementation of appropriate corrective action. (b) Audits shall focus on the effectiveness of the program and be conductedby individuals qualified in the subject(s) being audited, and independentof both program management and personnel directly responsible for implementationof the fitness-for-duty program. (c) The result of the audit, along with recommendations, if any, shallbe documented and reported to senior corporate and site management. Theresolution of the audit findings and corrective actions shall be documented.These documents shall be retained for three years and made available forNRC inspection. <ITAG tagnum="84">Enforcement </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 26.90</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Violations. </ITAG>(a) An injunction or other court order may be obtained to prohibit a violationof any provision of_ (1) The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended; (2) Title II of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974; or (3) Any regulation or order issued under these Acts.(b) A court order may be obtained for the payment of a civil penalty imposedunder section 234 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, for violations of_ (1) Section 53, 57, 62, 63, 81, 82, 101, 103, 104, 107, or 109 of the Act; (2) Section 206 of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974;  (3) Any rule, regulation, or order issued under these sections, or undersection 161 of the Act;  (4) Any term, condition, or limitation of any license issued under thesesections; or  (5) Any provisions for which a license may be revoked under section 186of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.  (c) Any person who willfully violates any provision of the Atomic EnergyAct of 1954, as amended, or any regulation or order issued under the requirementsof the Act, include regulations under this part, may be guilty of a crimeand, upon conviction, may be punished by fine or imprisonment or both,as provided by law.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 15th day of September, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Samuel J. Chilk,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">[<T4>Editorial note:</T4> This appendix will not appear in the Code of FederalRegulations]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix to the Document</ITAG>Fitness-for-Duty Program Elements Not Included in the Proposed 10 CFR Part26The Commission has decided not to include several matters in the proposedfitness-fot-duty rule, but seeks comments as to whether these matters shouldbe added to the rule or included as recommendations in implementing guidance.1. Expand the scope of the rule to include other activities directly relatedto nuclear safety by licensee and contractor personnel. This could includeengineering and quality assurance activities performed outside a protectedarea and activities performed by escorted licensee or contractor personnelwithin a protected area which, if not properly performed, could contributeto facility conditions adverse to public or worker safety.2. Require that licensees take specific measures to deter onsite sale,possession, or use of alcohol and drugs and to achieve early detectionshould these problems exist. These measures could include:(a) Searches of the workplace, which would be unannounced and random, (b) Investigations designed to determine whether there is an existing orpotential problem,(c) A mechanism for discreet expressions of concern regarding the conditionof an employees' fitness for duty in a manner that can facilitate unrestrictedflow of information, and(d) Information collection from law enforcement authorities and drug counselingservices concerning drug activity in the local community.3. The NRC developed a list of data that appear to be appropriate basedupon informed reviews by appropriate professionals in other organizations.To ensure consistency of data and to facilitate analysis, the draft formbelow could be utilized. The Commission seeks specific comments as to whetherthe data listed form a relevant basis for the evaluation of program performance,and whether there are any other data which would be important in this regard.<ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M002</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 88-21415 Filed 9-21-88; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-C</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>