<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89426-0080 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-26-89.f2.A1079</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-395]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">South Carolina Electric andamp; Gas Co. and South Carolina Public ServiceAuthority; Consideration of Issuance of Amendment to Facility OperatingLicense and Proposed No Significant Hazards; Consideration Determinationand Opportunity for Hearing  </ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. NPF-12, issuedto South Carolina Electric andamp; Gas Company and South Carolina PublicService Authority (the licensees) for operation of the Virgil C. SummerNuclear Station, Unit 1, located in Fairfield County, South Carolina. The proposed amendment to the Virgil C. Summer Nuclear Station TechnicalSpecifications (TS) would reduce the number and severity of starts of theemergency diesel generators, thereby decreasing engine wear and increasingreliability. This proposed change was originally noticed as a proposedno significant hazards consideration on July 17, 1985 at 50 FR 29016 andrenoticed on June 4, 1986 at 50 FR 20373, and August 24, 1988 at 53 FR32295.  By letter dated November 9, 1987, the NRC requested additional informationon the proposed changes. The licensee responded with a submittal datedMay 16, 1988 that was modified in a July 14, 1988 submittal. These twosubmittals were referenced in the August 24, 1988 proposed no significanthazards consideration.  The November 18, 1988 submittal modified the note to Table 4.8-1 to indicatethat loading the diesel generator was part of the ten tests identifiedin the note. Therefore, Surveillance Requirement 4.8.1.1.2.a.4 was addedto the note. Surveillance Requirement 4.8.1.2 was also modified to indicatethat loading the diesel generator (4.8.1.1.2.a.4) was unnecessary in thedemonstration of the operability of the A.C. electrical power sources.Finally, Surveillance Requirement 4.8.1.1.3 was modified to indicate thata Special Report is required to be filed with the Nuclear Regulatory Commissionfor all failures of the diesel generators, valid or non-valid.  The April 5, 1989 submittal modified Surveillance Requirement 4.8.1.2 todelete the term ``or verification'' from it. In addiiton, the note to TS3.8.1.2.b was modified to indicate that the ESF Load Sequencer may be deenergizedin Modes 5 and 6 provided that the loss of voltage and the degraded voltagerelays are disabled.  Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act), and the Commission's regulations.  The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The basis for this proposed determination is providedbelow.      The licensee has determined the proposed amendment involves no significanthazards consideration as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21">(1) The proposed amendment does not involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluatedbecause a reduction in frequency and severity of diesel generator teststarts will result in less wear and stress on engine parts. This will decreasethe probability of an accident due to failure of engine parts, and theconsequences of an accident will not change.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The present Technical Specifications do not require the various sequenceractuation signals to be operable in Modes 5 and 6. The defeat of the lossof voltage and degraded voltage relays in conjunction with the sequencerbeing inoperable will prevent a potential inadvertent overload of the unitand require the operator to manually control loading of the unit. A conservativeengineering evaluation has shown that there is adequate time for manualoperator action. This change will decrease probability of a diesel failureand enhance the operators' capability to respond to a loss of power inModes 5 and 6.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) The proposed amendment does not create the possibility of a newor different kind of accident from any accident previously evaluated becausethe design and function of the diesel generator will not change. Startingand loading of the diesel generator will be manually controlled to reducethe possibility of overloading the unit.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(3) The proposed amendment does not involve a significant reductionin the margin of safety because there will be no change in response timesor emergency loads assumed in the accident analysis for Modes 5 and 6.</ITAG>The NRC Staff has made a preliminary review of the licensee's no significanthazards consideration determination and agrees with the licensee's analysis.Accordingly, the Commission proposes to determine that the requested amendmentdoes not involve a significant hazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555 and should cite the publication date and page numberof the <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Room P-216, Bethesda, Maryland, from 7:30 a.m.to 4:15 p.m.Copies of written comments received may be examined at the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC. Thefiling of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to intervene isdiscussed below.By May 26, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Requests for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reason why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceedign, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW. Washington,DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during the last ten (10)days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitioner promptlyso inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to Western Unionat 1 (800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1 (800) 342-6700). The Western Union operatorshould be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the following messageaddressed to Elinor G. Adensam: petitioner's name and telephone number;date petition was mailed; plant name; and publication date and page numberof this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Randolph R. Mahan, South Carolina Electricandamp; Gas Company, P.O. Box 764, Columbia, South Carolina 29218, attorneyfor the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board designated to rule on the petition and/orrequest, that the petitioner has made a substantial showing of good causefor the granting of a late petition and/or request. That determinationwill be based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated June 10, 1985, as supplemented December 6, 1985 and May16, July 14, July 28, and November 18, 1988 and April 5, 1989, which isavailable for public inspection at the Commission's Public Document Room,2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at the Fairfield County Library,Garden and Washington Streets, Winnsboro, South Carolina 29180.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 20th day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Elinor G. Adensam, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate II-1, Division of Reactor Projects I/II,Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-9996 Filed 4-25-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>