<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89406-0006 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-06-89.f2.A1005</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 226</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Regulation Z; Docket No. R-0654]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Truth in Lending; Credit and Charge Card Disclosures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Board is revising Regulation Z (Truth in Lending)to implement the Fair Credit and Charge Card Disclosure Act amendmentsto the Truth in Lending Act. The law, enacted on November 3, 1988, requirescredit and charge card issuers to provide credit disclosures in certaindirect mail, telephone and other applications and solicitations to opencredit and charge card accounts. Card issuers will also be required togive cardholders written notice regarding the renewal of their credit andcharge card accounts before a cardholder has to pay a fee to renew theaccount. In addition, the law requires credit card issuers to provide cardholderswith written notice of a change in the company providing credit insuranceon credit card accounts.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATES: </T2>April 3, 1989, but compliance is optional untilAugust 31, 1989 (November 29, 1989, for applications and solicitationssubject to andSection; 226.5a(e) of the regulation).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>The following attorneys in theDivision of Consumer and Community Affairs, at (202) 452-2412 or (202)452-3667: Michael S. Bylsma or Adrienne D. Hurt, Senior Attorneys, or JaneE. Ahrens, Staff Attorney; for the hearing impaired <T3>only, </T3>contact Earnetine Hill or Dorothea Thompson, TelecommunicationsDevice for the Deaf at (202) 452-3544, Board of Governors of the FederalReserve, Washington, DC 20551.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">(1) General</ITAG>On November 3, 1988, the Fair Credit and Charge Card Disclosure Act (FCCCDA),Pub. L. No. 100-583, 102 Stat. 2960, was enacted into law. The law amendssections 111 (state law preemption), 122 (form of disclosure), 127 (open-endcredit disclosures), 130 (civil liability), and 136 (information collectionby Board) of the Truth in Lending Act (TILA). The purpose of the law isto provide for more detailed and uniform disclosure of rates and othercost information in applications and solicitations to open credit and chargecard accounts. Consumers will be given basic cost information about creditand charge cards at an earlier time than under the current provisions ofthe TILA in order to enhance credit shopping. Under the current provisionsof the TILA, card issuers are required to give consumers credit disclosurestatements before the first transaction on an account.The new law requires credit and charge card issuers to provide disclosuresto consumers in three situations involving applications and solicitationsto open credit or charge card accounts: (1) Direct mail applications andsolicitations; (2) telephone solicitations; and (3) applications and solicitationsthat are made available to the general public (such as applications commonlyreferred to as ``take-ones'' or those contained in catalogs, magazines,or other generally available publications). Most of the required disclosuresmust be provided in the form of a table prescribed by the Board.In addition to the disclosures required with applications and solicitations,the law requires disclosures in two other circumstances. First, card issuersthat impose fees to renew credit and charge card accounts must providecardholders with renewal notices (including a new set of credit disclosures)before a renewal fee is payable. Second, credit card issuers must providedisclosures if they offer credit insurance and decide to change insuranceproviders. As part of the disclosures, credit card issuers are requiredto disclose any increase in rate or substantial decrease in coverage asa result of the change.The law amends section 130 of the TILA, the civil liability provision,to provide that a card issuer shall have liability under the new provisionson credit and charge card applications, solicitations and renewal notices(section 127 (c) and (d)) only to cardholder who pays an annual or otherperiodic fee or a membership fee, or who uses a credit or charge card.The law also requires the Board to collect credit card price and availabilityinformation from a sampling of financial institutions and make it availableto the public on request.The law amends section 111 of the TILA, the provision on the effect ofthe act on other laws. State laws relating to the disclosure of creditinformation in credit or charge card applications and solicitations subjectto the requirements of new section 127(c) of the TILA, or any renewal noticesubject to the requirements of new section 127(d), are preempted as ofNovember 3, 1988, the date of enactment of the FCCCDA (since the delayedeffective date in section 7 of the FCCCDA refers only to the regulationsimplementing the disclosure provisions and is silent as to the state lawprovisions).On December 23, 1988, the Board published a proposed rule to amend RegulationZ to implement the new law (53 FR 51785). The Board received approximately120 comments on the proposal. Many of the commenters stated their supportfor the manner in which the Board proposed to implement the statutory amendments.There was, however, some concern about the possible scope of coverage ofthe proposed rule, the requirement of mandated terminology for certaindisclosures, and operational problems associated with certain timing rulesand disclosure requirements. These specific concerns and others have beenaddressed in the final rule.Based on a review of the comments and further analysis of the law, theBoard is now adopting a final rule implementing the FCCCDA. The rule iseffective April 3, 1989. Mandatory compliance by card issuers with therequirements of the rule is effective as of August 31, 1989, except withregard to applications and solicitations made available to the generalpublic that are subject to andSection; 226.5a(e) of the regulation, for whichmandatory compliance is effective as of November 29, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="84">(2) The Amendments to Regulation Z</ITAG>The Board is adding new andSection; 226.5a to Regulation Z to implement mostof the provisions of the FCCCDA. The new section has been added betweenandSection; 226.5 (general open-end disclosure requirements) and andSection;226.6 (initial open-end disclosure statement) because of the early timingfor providing the disclosures. The disclosures required when renewing acredit or charge card account or changing an insurance provider on a creditcard account are contained in andSection; 226.9 (subsequent disclosure requirements)of the regulation. The disclosure requirements for credit and charge cardshave been combined to avoid unnecessary duplication.The structure of the final rule differs from the proposal to improve readability.For example, rules regarding coverage and the format of disclosure arecontained in paragraph (a) of new andSection; 226.5a. The items of creditcost information required to be disclosed in applications and solicitationsare all contained in paragraph (b). Paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) addressthe three circumstances in which the disclosures must be given: Directmailings; telephone applications and solicitations; and ``take-ones'' andother applications and solicitations made available to the general public.Unless otherwise noted, citations in the discussion of the final rule areto the amended sections of the TILA. This notice provides guidance on anumber of questions asked by commenters. Much of this guidance will beincorporated into the Board's official staff commentary to the regulation.General CoverageThe disclosure requirements of andSection; 226.5a apply generally to applicationsand solicitations to open ``traditional'' credit or charge card accountsthat are used primarily to purchase goods and services. Therefore, forexample, applications or solicitations to open overdraft lines of credittied to asset accounts accessible by use of a debit card are not subjectto the disclosure requirements of andSection; 226.5a. Similarly, open-endlines of credit accessed solely by account numbers are not subject to therequirements of andSection; 226.5a. In addition, home equity lines of creditthat may be accessed by the use of a credit or charge card and are subjectto the Home Equity Loan Consumer Protection Act of 1988 amendments to theTILA are not subject to andSection; 226.5a.Applications and solicitations to add a credit or charge card to an existingopen-end plan are not subject to the requirements of andSection; 226.5a.This is the case both for plans in existence before the effective dateof the FCCCDA and those opened after the effective date.Disclosures under andSection; 226.5a. are generally required in applicationsand solicitations to open credit and charge card accounts that are initiatedby the card issuer. Applications provided at the consumer's request arenot covered by andSection; 226.5a, even if the request is made in responseto the card issuer's invitation to request the application. To illustrate,if a card issuer invites consumers to call a toll-free number or to returna response card to obtain an application, the application sent to the consumerneed not contain any disclosures under andSection; 226.5a. Similarly, ifthe consumer is invited to call and make an oral application on the telephone,andSection; 226.5a does not apply. If, however, the card issuer initiatesthe discussion about opening an account and at that time takes an oralapplication, that is subject to andSection; 226.5a (specifically, to andSection;226.5a(d)).The requirements of andSection; 226.5a do not apply to a general purposeapplication unless the application, or materials accompanying it, specificallyrefer to its capability of being used to open a credit or charge card account.Section 226.5a also does not apply to general media advertising that doesnot include an application or solicitation to open a card account. Furtherdetail of the types of accounts and applications and solicitations thatare subject to the requirements of andSection; 226.5a is contained in thesection by section discussion below of the final rule implementing theFCCCDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Section 226.1_Authority, Purpose, Coverage, Organization, Enforcementand Liability</T3><ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (a)_Authority</ITAG>Instead of adding to the authority section each law that amends the TILA,this paragraph merely refers to the TILA as amended, thus incorporatingall such laws. As a result, specific references to laws amending the acthave been removed as unnecessary.Section 226.2_Definitions and Rules of Construction<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (a)_Definitions</ITAG>Section 226.2(a)(15) of the regulation is revised to include a definitionof ``charge card'' within the definition of ``credit card.'' This termis used in andSection; 226.5a and is also applicable in andSection;andSection;226.9(e) and 226.28(d). Generally, these are credit cards used in connectionwith accounts on which outstanding balances cannot be rolled over fromone billing cycle to another and are payable when a periodic statementis received. Section 127(c)(4)(E) of the act defines a charge card as acredit card (as defined in Regulation Z, andSection; 226.2(a)(15)) whichis not subject to a finance charge. The act's disclosure provisions applicableto charge cards require the issuer to disclose transaction charges forboth purchases and cash advances. Since, under Regulation Z, these chargesare finance charges, it is clear that charge card accounts can involvefinance charges despite the act's definition. The regulation modifies theact's charge card definition for clarity, so that the term charge cardis defined to mean a credit card on an account for which no periodic rateis used to compute a finance charge. Consequently, card issuers who offercards that may be subject to finance charges such as cash advance fees_butfor which no periodic rate is used to compute the finance charge on anoutstanding balance_are characterized as charge card issuers for purposesof andSection; 226.5a and would give the applicable charge card disclosures.Under andSection; 226.2(a)(17)(iv) of the regulation, card issuers extendingclosed-end credit are subject to certain of the open-end credit disclosureprovisions. This section, which also sets forth the provisions that arenot applicable to such card issuers, has been revised to except these cardissuers from the disclosure requirements of andSection;andSection; 226.5a and226.9 (e) and (f).Section 226.5_General Disclosure Requirements<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (a)_Form of Disclosures</ITAG><T3>Paragraph (a) (1) and (2). </T3>The Board has revised footnotes 8 and9 to andSection; 226.5. Footnote 8 is revised to indicate that the terms``annual percentage rate'' (APR) and ``finance charge,'' when used in thedisclosures required under andSection;andSection; 226.5a and 226.9(e), neednot be more conspicuous than other terms. Footnote 9 is revised to indicatethat the disclosures given under andSection;andSection; 226.5a and 226.9(e)need not be in a form that the consumer can keep. Nevertheless, when thedisclosures under andSection; 226.9(e) are provided on a periodic statement,and are interspersed among or are part of the disclosures required by andSection;226.7, the regulation's requirements for disclosures on periodic statementsapply.<T3>Paragraph (a)(3). </T3>Paragraph (3) is added to explain that the standardfor certain disclosures required under andSection; 226.5a differs from thegeneral clear and conspicuous standard for TILA disclosures (although thegeneral standards for TILA disclosures for open-end credit remain applicablein andSection; 226.5a). Certain disclosures under andSection; 226.5a must begiven in the form of a table or in a prominent location on or with an applicationor solicitation.<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (b)_Time of Disclosures</ITAG><T3>Paragraph (b)(3). </T3>Paragraph (3) is added to provide a generalcross reference to andSection; 226.5a for the timing requirements for disclosuresin credit and charge card applications and solicitations.Section 226.5a_Credit and Charge Card Applications and Solicitations<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (a)_General Rules</ITAG>Paragraph (a) contains general rules applicable to this section. This paragraphhas rules on format, coverage, and disclosure of certain fees. The introductorylanguage provides that disclosures are to be given on or with an applicationor solicitation to open a credit or charge card account; the specific disclosurerequirements in paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) merely refer to an ``applicationor solicitation,'' since the limitation to opening a credit or charge cardaccount is set forth here.<T3>Paragraph (a)(1). </T3>Paragraph (a)(1) has been added to the finalrule to provide guidance on the type of solicitation subject to andSection;226.5a. For purposes of this section, a solicitation is defined as an offerby a card issuer to a consumer to open a credit or charge card accountthat does not require the consumer to complete an application. (Generally,these solicitations are referred to as ``preapproved'' solicitations.)Thus, for example, if a card issuer contacts a consumer (whether by directmail, telephone, or other means) about opening an account but requiresthe consumer to complete an application, that contact does not meet thedefinition of ``solicitation.'' Accordingly, it is not covered by thissection, unless the contact itself includes an application (for example,a written application form in a direct mailing or ``take-one,'' or an oralapplication in a telephone contact initiated by the card issuer).<T3>Paragraph (a)(2). </T3>Paragraph (a)(2) describes the form to be usedin disclosing the credit information set forth in paragraph (b). The informationon APRs (including variable rate information), fees for the issuance oravailability of a card, minimum and transaction charges, grace periods,balance computation methods and charge card repayment, to the extent applicable,must be provided in the form of a table with headings.The table and certain disclosures under andSection; 226.5a(e) (for example,the disclosure of a toll-free telephone number) must be prominently locatedon or with the application or solicitation. There are, however, no requirementsthat the disclosures be in any particular place on or with the applicationor solicitation, or that the disclosures be in any particular type sizeor typeface. The disclosure of fees for cash advances, late payments orexceeding a credit limit may be provided either in the table or clearlyand conspicuously elsewhere on or with the application or solicitation.A card issuer has the option of disclosing some of these fees in the requiredtable and some outside of the table.The final rule provides more flexibility than the proposal did with regardto the tabular format disclosures. Several model disclosure forms are providedin Appendix G to the regulation, any of which will comply with the tabularformat requirement if used properly. Tables designed by card issuers tocomply with andSection; 226.5a need not be identical but must be substantiallysimilar to those found in Appendix G of the regulation; this standard appliesto the headings as well as the content and format of the tables (exceptthat the term ``grace period'' must be used in making that disclosure).To promote continued uniformity of credit disclosures under the TILA, theterminology in the tables must be consistent with (that is, close in meaning,though not necessarily identical to) the terminology used in TILA disclosuresunder andSection;andSection; 226.6 and 226.7 of the regulation.Card issuers offering several types of card accounts may disclose the variousterms for the accounts in a single table or provide a separate table foreach account. Similarly, where rates or other terms vary from state tostate, card issuers may list the states and the various disclosures ina single table or provide separate tables.In general, the table containing the disclosures required by andSection;226.5ashould not contain additional information. Additional information may bepresented outside the required table. Further detail about the tabularformat disclosures is provided in the discussion of Appendix G below.<T3>Paragraph (a)(3). </T3>A number of commenters raised issues concerningcoverage of the proposed rule given the broad definition of the term ``creditcard'' in the regulation. Among other things, the commenters argued thatcongressional intent was to require disclosures only for ``traditional''credit card accounts used primarily to purchase goods and services, andnot for other types of accounts that do not fall within such a categoryor for which the use of a credit or charge card as an access device ismerely incidental to the product being offered.Section 226.5a does not apply to overdraft lines of credit tied to assetaccounts that are accessed by check guarantee or debit cards, nor doesthe section apply to lines of credit accessed by check guarantee or automatedteller machine (ATM) cards. Of course, if a traditional credit card isalso used to access such lines, the account would be covered by this section.With regard to home equity lines, commenters pointed out that such planswould be fully regulated under the Home Equity Loan Consumer ProtectionAct of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-709) and that to some extent the timing and contentof disclosures common to both the FCCCDA and the home equity law may beduplicative. Therefore, paragraph (a)(3) excepts from the requirementsof andSection;226.5a home equity plans subject to the new home equity law.<T3>Paragraph (a)(4). </T3>Paragraph (a)(4) (paragraph (a)(1) in the proposedrule) implements section 127(e)(1) of the act and provides that if theamount of any fee required to be disclosed is determined on the basis ofa percentage of another amount_for example, if a card issuer imposes anannual fee based on a percentage of the credit line_the card issuer maystate the percentage and what it is applied to rather than the dollar amountof the fee. If a card issuer is able to determine the dollar amount ofthe fee, the card issuer would, of course, be permitted to disclose thatamount.<T3>Pargraph (a)(5). </T3>Paragraph (a)(5) (paragraph (a)(2) of the proposedrule) implements section 127(f) of the act. It provides that if any cashadvance, late payment or over-the-credit-limit fee required to be disclosedvaries from state to state, the card issuer may disclose the range of thefee instead of disclosing the amount of the fee. If a range is disclosed,the card issuer must include a statement that the amount of the fee variesfrom state to state. The range may be stated as zero (for states whereno fee applies) to the amount of the highest authorized fee. The optionis limited to the three types of fees mentioned above.<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (b)_Required Disclosures</ITAG>Paragraph (b) sets forth all the items concerning credit costs and termsrequired to be disclosed in credit and charge card applications and solicitationssubject to this section. The disclosure requirements for credit card accountsdiffer from those for charge card accounts. Credit card issuers would haveto provide all the applicable disclosures in paragraph (b), except forthe disclosure in paragraph (b)(7). Charge card issuers would have to providethe applicable disclosures in paragraphs (b)(2), (4), and (7) through (10)only.<T3>Paragraph (b)(1)_APR disclosure. </T3>Paragraph (b)(1) (paragraph (b)(1)(i)in the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(1)(A)(i) of the act. Creditcard issuers are required to disclose each periodic rate that may be usedto compute the finance charge on an outstanding balance, expressed as acorresponding APR. Card issuers may, but need not, also disclose the periodicrate itself in the table. This provision applies to rates applied to purchasebalances only (and not to cash advance balances as previously proposed).Whenever more than one rate applies to an outstanding balance, the cardissuer is required to disclose the range of balances to which each rateapplies.<T3>Introductory rates_</T3>Some card issuers offer introductory (discountor premium) rates. Under paragraph (b)(1), card issuers are required todisclose the ``regular'' rate that would apply to the card account. Forexample, if the rate on a card is tied to an index, the card issuer wouldbe required to disclose in the table a fully-indexed rate that complieswith the timing requirements of paragraphs (c), (d) or (e). Similarly,if an introductory rate is offered on an account with a fixed rate, therate that will apply after the introductory rate expires must be disclosedin the table. The card issuer may, but need not, also disclose the introductoryrate. If such a rate is disclosed in the required table, the card issuermust also disclose the time period the rate will remain in effect. Thisrule applies only where rates are in effect for a limited or specifiedperiod of time rather than to situations where a card issuer offers alternativepricing structures in which different rates apply to different accounts(or multiple rates apply to one account). In the latter situation, thecard issuer must disclose all such rates in the table required by andSection;226.5a.(See discussion under paragraph (b)(2) for treatment of introductory feesand fee waivers.)<T3>Variable-rate disclosure_</T3>If an account is subject to a variablerate, the credit card issuer is also required to disclose the fact thatthe rate is variable and how the rate is determined. The card issuer needonly identify the index or formula and the margin or spread above the indexto satisfy the requirement of disclosing how the rate is determined. Theamount of the margin must be given, although the card issuer may disclosethe margin as a range. The card issuer may, but need not, also disclosein the required table a maximum and minimum APR (that is, caps and floors).Paragraph (b)(1)(ii) sets forth the rules on what will be considered anaccurate APR for an account with a variable rate. The proposed rule statedthat an APR in effect at any time within 30 days before mailing would beconsidered to be accurate for purposes of the variable rate APR disclosure.Many commenters suggested that 30 days would not provide sufficient timeto prepare and mail solicitation material, especially in view of the factthat large mailings may be involved and that the timing may depend in parton third party vendors such as printers over whom a card issuer may nothave complete control. In light of these problems, the Board has providedin the final rule that in direct mail applications and solicitations subjectto andSection; 226.5a, an APR in effect at any time within 60 days beforethe mailing will be deemed accurate for an account with a variable rate.Thus, a change in an index resulting in a change in the APR within 60 daysbefore the mailing would not invalidate the disclosure.In an application or solicitation subject to andSection; 226.5a(e)_thosemade available to the general public_an APR in effect at any time within30 days before the date of printing will be deemed to be an accurate ratein effect at the time of printing for a card account with a variable rate.<T3>Paragraph (b)(2)</T3>_Fees for the issuance or availability of a card.Paragraph (b)(2) (paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of the proposed rule) implementssection 127(c)(1)(A)(ii)(I) and (4)(A)(i) of the act. Credit and chargecard issuers are required to disclose any annual or other periodic feeor any one-time fee imposed for the issuance or availability of a creditor charge card (such as a membership fee), including fees based on accountactivity or inactivity. To promote easy comparison of disclosures, periodicfees must be expressed as an annualized account. Therefore, for example,if a card issuer imposed a quarterly fee, the issuer must disclose howmuch the fee would be on an annual basis.With regard to one-time fees for the issuance or availability of a card,the Board requested comment on whether fees such as application fees andfees associated with a home equity line of credit should be interpretedto fall within such category of fees. The final rule exempts home equitylines of credit from the requirements of andSection; 226.5a for the reasonspreviously discussed under paragraph (a)(3). Application fees, as describedunder andSection; 226.4(c)(1) of the regulation, are generally consideredadministrative fees for processing applications for credit rather thanfees for the issuance or availability of credit and are not required tobe disclosed under andSection; 226.5a.The disclosure of one-time fees for the issuance or availability of a cardunder andSection; 226.5a is limited to fees related to opening the account,such as one-time membership fees. Therefore, fees to reissue a lost card,statement reproduction fees and the like are not required to be disclosedunder andSection; 226.5a(b)(2) as fees for the issuance or availability ofa card.Some commenters asked whether a membership fee to join an organizationthat provides a credit card is deemed to be a fee for the issuance or availabilityof a card subject to andSection; 226.5a. If an application or solicitationto become a member of an organization results in the automatic issuanceof a credit or charge card, the application or solicitation for membershipwould be considered one to open a credit card account requiring disclosuresunder andSection; 226.5a. The membership fee would be disclosed as a feefor the issuance or availability of a credit or charge card. If, however,membership in the group merely confers eligibility to apply for a creditor charge card, an application or solicitation to join the group is notcovered by andSection; 226.5a and the membership fee is not a fee for theissuance of a card. Other commenters asked whether fees for credit or charge card ``enhancements''(such as travel insurance or card registration services for protectionagainst loss) would be required to be disclosed as fees for the issuanceor availability of a credit or charge card. Whether credit or charge cardenhancement fees are required to be disclosed as fees for the issuanceor availability of a card depends on whether such fees are payable at thecardholder's discretion. For example, a card issuer may offer a creditcard account on which a $20 fee is imposed for the issuance of the cardwith optional enhancements available for an additional $10 fee. Only the$20 fee is required to be disclosed under andSection; 226.5a(b)(2). If onthe other hand, a card issuer offers a credit card account with a fee of$30 and with enhancements automatically included, the full $30 must bedisclosed under andSection; 226.5a(b)(2). Some card issuers have a variety of pricing structures for fees for theissuance or availability of a credit or charge card. All such fees mustbe disclosed under paragraph (b)(2) unless the fees are introductory (orare otherwise offered on a limited basis). In the latter instance, thefees may but need not be disclosed. Similarly, some card issuers permitwaivers of such fees for various reasons; fee waivers may but need notbe disclosed as part of the paragraph (b)(2) disclosure. If introductoryfees or fee waiver disclosures are provided in the required table, a cardissuer must also disclose the time period the fees or waivers will remainin effect. <T3>Paragraph (b)(3)_Minimum finance charge.</T3> Paragraph (b)(3) (paragraph(b)(1)(iii) of the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(1)(A)(ii)(II)of the act and requires credit card issuers to disclose any minimum orfixed finance charge that could be imposed for any period during whichany extension of credit that is subject to a finance charge is outstanding.This would occur where the amount of such finance charge is greater thanthe finance charge that would otherwise be imposed for such period underthe applicable APR. <T3>Paragraph (b)(4)_Transaction charge for purchases. </T3>Paragraph (b)(4)(paragraph (b)(1)(iv) of the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(1)(A)(ii)(III)and (4)(A)(ii) of the act. Credit and charge card issuers must discloseany transaction charge imposed in connection with the use of the card topurchase goods and services. This provision does not cover fees for cashadvances, although such fees are required to be disclosed under andSection;226.5a(b)(8) of the regulation. A few commenters pointed out that this provision could be interpreted torequire card issuers to disclose transaction charges imposed by a personother than the card issuer, such as a seller of goods honoring a creditor charge card. To avoid any confusion, andSection; 226.9(d)(2) of the regulation_financecharges imposed at the time of transaction_has been amended to providethat card issuers providing disclosures under andSection; 226.5a have noresponsibility with regard to disclosure of such transaction charges. <T3>Paragraph (b)(5)_Grace period for purchases. </T3>Paragraph (b)(5)(paragraph (b)(1)(v) of the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(1)(A)(iii)of the act. Credit card issuers must disclose the date by which or theperiod within which any credit extended under credit card accounts forthe purchase of goods or services must be repaid to avoid incurring a financecharge. The term ``grace period'' must be used either in the heading ofthe required table, or in the body of the table. If a card issuer doesnot offer a grace period, the card issuer must disclose that fact. If thelength of the grace period varies, a card issuer may disclose the range,the minimum or the average number of days in the grace period, if the disclosureis identified as a range, minimum or average, respectively. No disclosureabout grace periods for cash advances is required. <T3>Paragraph (b)(6)_Balance computation method for purchases_</T3>Paragraph(b)(6) (paragraph (b)(1)(vi) in the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(1)(A)(iv)of the act. Credit card issuers are required to disclose the method ofcomputing the balance on which finance charges will be calculated for thepurchase of goods and services. (No disclosure of the method of computingthe balance for cash advances is required). In making this disclosure,card issuers are required to identify the balance of computation methodused on the account by the name provided in the regulation's definitionsof the most common balance computation methods in paragraph (g) of andSection;226.5a. Credit card issuers are required to provide an explanation of thebalance computation method used if it is not one of the methods describedin the regulation. The level of detail of the explanation need not be asgreat as that required for the initial disclosures under andSection; 226.6(a)(3)of the regulation (contrary to the statement in the discussion accompanyingthe proposed rule). Rather, the description need not be more detailed thanthe descriptions contained in andSection; 226.5a(g). A card issuer is permittedto provide the explanation outside of the table if a reference to it isincluded in the table. Several commenters requested additional guidance to assist them in determiningthe appropriate balance method to be disclosed. For example, some commentersstated that their average daily balance method might include new purchasesor cover two billing cycles if the consumer carries a purchase balance,but would be different if no balance is carried over or if the purchasebalance was paid within a grace period. To enable card issuers to moreeasily determine the appropriate balance method for purchases to be disclosed,andSection; 226.5a(b)(6) explains that card issuers should assume a purchasebalance will exist at the end of the grace period, if any. (See paragraph(g) for a detailed discussion of the names and definitions of balance calculationmethods identified as the most common.)<T3>Paragraph (b)(7)_Due and payable statement. </T3>Paragraph (b)(7) (paragraph(b)(1)(vii) in the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(4)(A)(iii)of the act which applies only to charge card issuers. Charge card issuersmust disclose that charges incurred by use of a charge card are payablewhen the periodic statement reflecting those charges is received by thecardholder. The disclosure should be substantially similar to that setforth in this paragraph; it does not have to be identical. Language inthe disclosure may be modified to more accurately reflect the circumstancesof repayment under the charge card account. <T3>Paragraphs (b)(8) through (10)_Additional fee disclosures. </T3>Paragraphs(b)(8) through (10) (paragraph (b)(2) in the proposed rule) implement section127(c)(1)(B) and (c)(4)(B) of the act which requires credit and chargecard issuers to disclose fees for cash advances, late payments or exceedinga credit limit. These disclosures may be provided in the required tablealong with the disclosures mentioned in paragraph (b)(1) through (7) above,or may be provided elsewhere clearly and conspicuously on or with an applicationor solicitation.Several commenters asked for guidance on whether specific types of feesare covered or not covered by paragraph (b)(8), the cash advance fee disclosure,and paragraph (b)(10), the over-the-limit fee disclosure. Paragraph (b)(8)requires only the disclosure of cash advance fees that are finance chargesunder andSection; 226.4 of the regulation. For example, a charge imposedto obtain a cash advance at an ATM is not a required disclosure under thissection if the same charge is imposed for all transactions at an ATM whetheror not they involve an extension of credit (see the Official Staff Commentaryto Regulation Z, 12 CFR 226.4(a)-5 (Supp. I) for guidance). The disclosurein paragraph (b)(10) of fees for exceeding a credit limit does not includeother types of default or service fees such as a fee for reinstating creditprivileges or a fee for the dishonor of a check drawn on a check-accessiblecredit line that, if paid, would have caused the credit limit to be exceeded(see the Staff Commentary, 12 CFR 226.4(c)(2)-2 (Supp. I) for guidance).<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (c)_Direct Mail Applications and Solicitations</ITAG>Paragraph (c) (part of paragraph (b) in the proposed rule) implements thedisclosure requirements for direct mail applications and solicitationsto open a credit or charge card account provided in section 127(c)(1) and(c)(4)(A) and (B) of the act. In general, disclosures must be accurateas of the time of mailing, although special rules are contained in paragraph(b) concerning the APR disclosure on a card account with a variable rate.Applications and solicitations mailed to consumers through the mailingof catalogs, magazines, or other generally available publications are subjectto the requirements of paragraph (e), rather than paragraph (c).<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (d)_Telephone Applications and Solicitations</ITAG>Paragraph (d) (paragraph (c) in the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(2)and (c)(4) (A) and (B) of the act and contains the disclosure requirementsfor telephone solicitations and certain telephone applications to opena credit or charge card account.Several commenters asked for clarification about the type of telephonesolicitation subject to this paragraph. The addition of the definitionof a solicitation subject to andSection; 226.5a in paragraph (a)(1) of thissection provides clarification on this point. Paragraph (d) applies ifa telephone conversation between a card issuer and consumer may resultin the issuance of a card as a result of a card issuer-initiated offerto open a credit or charge card account for which the card issuer doesnot require any application (that is, a ``preapproved'' telephone solicitation).It also applies where the card issuer initiates the contact and at thesame time takes application information over the telephone. Telephone applicationsinitiated by the consumer, however, would not be subject to this paragraph.Mere telephone inquiries by a card issuer as to a consumer's interest inapplying for a credit or charge card also would not constitute a telephone``solicitation'' subject to this paragraph.Finally, paragraph (d) does not apply where no card will be issued_because,for example, the consumer indicates that he or she does not want the card,or the card issuer decides either during the telephone conversation orlater not to issue the card.<T3>Paragraph (d)(1). </T3>Paragraph (d)(1) implements section 127(c)(2)(A)of the act, and requires card issuers generally to orally disclose thoseitems in paragraph (b) that would normally be disclosed in tabular format;cash advance, late payment and over-the-limit fees do not have to be disclosed.Card issuers are not required to record conversations to evidence compliancewith this paragraph; written procedures indicating how disclosures aremade under this paragraph would be sufficient evidence of compliance.<T3>Paragraph (d)(2). </T3>Paragraph (d)(2) implements section 127(c)(2)(B)of the act which permits an alternative disclosure for telephone solicitationsand applications. The regulation makes this alternative disclosure availableto both credit and charge card issuers.If a card issuer does not impose a periodic or one-time fee for the issuanceor availability of a card or does not impose such a fee unless the consumersignifies acceptance by using the card, the card issuer need not give theoral disclosures at the time of the solicitation or application. The cardissuer, however, is required to disclose in writing all of the applicableterms required in paragraph (b) (in tabular format, to the extent requiredgenerally) within 30 days after the consumer requests the card, but inno event later than the delivery of the card. Therefore, if a consumerrequests a card during the solicitation and the card is sent to the consumer10 days later, for example, the disclosures have to be provided at thattime.The card issuer must also explain in the written disclosure notice thatthe consumer is not obligated to accept the card and that the consumerwill not be obligated to pay any fee or charge disclosed unless the consumerelects to accept the card by using it.<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (e)_Applications and Solicitations Made Available to GeneralPublic</ITAG>Paragraphs (e) (paragraph (d) in the proposed rule) implements the disclousrerequirements for applications and solicitations to open credit and chargecard accounts that are made available to the general public, including``take-ones'' and those contained in catalogs, magazines and other generallyavailable publications, as provided in section 127(c)(3) and (c)(4)(C)of the act. (In the case of credit unions, this paragraph applies to applicationsand solicitations to open credit or charge card accounts made availableto those in the general field of membership.) Applications available onlyat the consumer's request are not considered to be made available to thegeneral public; thus, for example, an application to open a card accountgiven to a consumer at the consumer's request at a retail store or in abank would not be covered.Some commenters asked for guidance on the duty of a card issuer with regardto old applications distributed to the public prior to the effective date,as some of these applications may be in locations that are not within thecontrol of the card issuer. It is expected that card issuers will takesteps to see that applications with the required disclosures are substitutedfor old ones by November 29, 1989, the effective date for mandatory compliancewith this provision. It should be noted that this effective date is 90days later than the effective date for mandatory compliance for the restof the rule, which should allow sufficient time to accomplish this. Ifan application or solicitation distributed prior to the effective dateis received by the card issuer after the effective date for mandatory compliance,the card issuer will not be deemed to be in violation of the FCCCDA solong as the card issuer, in processing the application, provides disclosuresto the consumer in accordance with paragraph (e) within 30 days of receiptof the application, but in no event later than the delivery of the card.Card issuers may satisfy the requirements of paragraph (e) in any of threeways. The regulation makes the options available to both credit and chargecard issuers.<T3>Paragraph (e)(1). </T3>Under the option in paragraph (e)(1), the cardissuer must provide all the required credit disclosures, as applicable,in the requisite format on the application or solicitation, and indicate:(1) That the disclosures are accurate as of the date they were printed;(2) the date of printing (disclosure of the month and year is sufficientto fulfill this requirement); (3) that the terms are subject to changeafter such date; and (4) that the consumer should contact the creditorfor any changes in the information disclosed. (If a rate is variable, andSection;226.5a(b)(1)(ii) provides that any rate in effect 30 days before the dateof printing is deemed accurate.) The card issuer must also provide a mailingaddress, or a toll-free telephone number (for nonlocal calls made froman area code other than that used in the card issuer's dialing area), forconsumers to obtain information about changes in the disclosures. If thecard issuer elects to provide an address rather than a toll-free telephonenumber, the card issuer may also provide a local telephone number, ratherthan a toll-free number. All of the disclosures under paragraph (e)(1)must be displayed in a prominent location on the application or solicitation.<T3>Paragraph (e)(2). </T3>Under the option in paragraph (e)(2), the cardissuer may include on or with an application or solicitation the disclosuresrequired under andSection; 226.6 (a) through (c) of the regulation. It shouldbe noted that the disclosure of this information alone would not satisfythe initial disclosure requirements under the TILA. If, however, the cardissuer in complying with this section provides all the disclosures requiredunder andSection; 226.6, in a form that the consumer may keep, and in accordancewith the other requirements under andSection; 226.6, the card issuer willhave satisfied the initial disclosure requirements under andSection; 226.6as well as the disclosure requirements for andSection; 226.5a.Some commenters suggested that the requirements in paragraph (e)(1)(ii)(disclosure of the printing date and related information) be incorporatedinto (e)(2). This suggestion has not been taken because the timing requirementsfor the disclosure options differ. The disclosures under paragraph (e)(2)(i)must, in general, be current as of the time that they are made availableto the public (mailed or delivered), whereas the disclosures in paragraph(e)(1)(i) need only be current as of the time of printing.Paragraph (e)(2) also requires the card issuer to disclose a toll-freetelephone number or a mailing address for use in asking about changes inthe information disclosed.<T3>Paragraph (e)(3). </T3>Under the option in paragraph (e)(3), a cardissuer may provide a statement on the application or solicitation thatthere are costs associated with the use of the credit or charge card andthat the applicant can contact the card issuer to request specific informationabout those costs by calling a toll-free telephone number or by writingto an address specified on the application or solicitation. The card issuerwould have to provide <T3>both </T3>a toll-free telephone number (for nonlocal calls made froman area code other than that used in the card issuer's dialing area) anda mailing address at which the consumer could contact the card issuer toobtain the required information. A card issuer may not use this optionif the card issuer includes on or with the application or solicitationany of the credit disclosures required by the act.<T3>Paragraph (e)(4). </T3>Regardless of the option used, the act providesthat, upon receiving a request by a consumer for any of the credit informationrequired to be disclosed under the act, card issuers must promptly discloseall of the required credit disclosures. Information is promptly disclosedif it is given within 30 days of a consumer's request for information butin no event later than delivery of the credit or charge card.Card issuers need not provide all the required credit disclosures in allinstances. For example, if disclosures have been provided in accordancewith paragraph (e) (1) or (2), and a consumer calls or writes a card issuerto obtain information about changes in the disclosures, the card issuermay provide only the items of information that have changed; the card issuermay, but would not be required to, provide information about disclosuresfor which there are no changes from those previously provided on or withthe application or solicitation. Furthermore, if a consumer requested onlyone particular item, the card issuer could supply just that requested itemrather than the entire list of disclosures. If, however, the card issuerhas made disclosures in accordance with the option in paragraph (e)(3),and a consumer calls or writes the card issuer requesting information aboutcosts, all the required disclosure information would have to be given.A response to an information request may be provided orally or in writing,at the card issuer's option, regardless of whether the consumer's requestis oral or written. Further, if the card issuer chooses to respond to aninformation request in writing, it may do so using the general contentand format for either paragraph (e) (1) or (2). Information provided inwriting need not be in a tabular format.<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (f)_Special Charge Card Rule_Card Issuer and Person ExtendingCredit Not the Same Person</ITAG>Paragraph (f) (paragraph (e) of the proposed rule) implements section 127(c)(4)(D)of the act. Where the charge card issuer and the person maintaining anopen-end credit plan that the card accesses are different persons, thisprovision permits the charge card issuer to disclose only the informationrequired for the charge card, and no information about the underlying open-endcredit plan, if the card issuer also discloses to the consumer that: (1)The card issuer will make an independent decision whether to issue thecard; (2) the card may arrive before the decision is made on the open-endplan; and (3) approval by the card issuer does not constitute approvalof the plan.The regulation does not impose additional disclosure requirements for acreditor that maintains the underlying open-end credit plan beyond providingthe initial disclosures in accordance with andSection; 226.6 of the regulation.This is the case even though the creditor offering the open-end creditplan may be considered an agent of the charge card issuer (see the OfficialStaff Commentary to Regulation Z, 12 CFR 226.2(a)(7)-1 (Supp. I)).<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (g)_Balance Computation Methods Defined</ITAG>This paragraph sets forth the names and definitions of balance computationmethods.Based on comments received, the Board has identified four of the most commonmethods for determining the balance for purchases upon which the financecharge will be computed. In two of the four general methods identified,the Board has determined that the name of the method must be modified bya parenthetical indicating whether new purchases are included in, or excludedfrom, the balance. (References to ``transactions'' have been changed to``purchases'' to more clearly indicate that the balance method disclosedis that for purchases of goods and services and not for other transactionssuch as cash advances.) The four methods which are to be disclosed by namepursuant to the requirements of paragraph (b)(6) are: (1) Average dailybalance (including new purchases) or (excluding new purchases); (2) Two-cycleaverage daily balance (including new purchases) or (excluding new purchases);(3) Adjusted balance; and (4) Previous balance.In its proposal, the Board requested comment about whether a separate ``retroactive''average daily balance method exists which excludes new transactions. Severalcommenters responded that they used such a method and it has been addedas a variant of the general retroactive average daily balance method (renamed``two-cycle average daily balance'' for greater precision). Another averagedaily balance method, frequently called ``true'' or ``actuarial'' averagedaily balance, has not been identified as a specific balance computationmethod because the Board believes that it is the average daily balance(including new purchases) method without a grace period, and thereforemay be disclosed using the name ``average daily balance (including newpurchases).'' In addition, based on public comment, the Board has determinedthat the daily balance method, which takes account of the balance on eachday of a billing cycle, may be disclosed as ``average daily balance (includingnew purchases)'' or ``average daily balance (excluding new purchases),''as appropriate, because of the insignificant differences in the impacton a consumer's finance charge between the daily and the average dailybalance methods.The ending balance method, in contrast to the two-cycle average daily balancemethod, does not appear to be a common method among card issuers and hasnot been named. To enable any cards issuers who may use the ending balancemethod to describe the method concisely, however, a brief description ofthe ending balance method has been added as a model clause in AppendixG-1. The descriptions of the balance computation methods disregard variationsin the methods resulting from differences in the allocation of payments,in using the posting date as compared to the transaction date, the graceperiod, and whether the balance includes unpaid finance charges and chargessuch as late fees and annual fees. Such variations in the methods describeddo not constitute different balance computation methods.Section 226.9_Subsequent Disclosure Requirements<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (d)_Finance Charge Imposed at Time of Transaction</ITAG>Paragraph (d)(2) has been revised to add a reference to andSection;226.5ato make it clear that under andSection;226.5a(b)(4) a card issuer is notrequired to disclose transaction charges that may be imposed by a thirdparty at the time of honoring a credit or charge card. Such charges mustbe disclosed by the third party under andSection;226.9(d)(1).<ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (e)_Disclosures Upon Renewal of Credit or Charge Card</ITAG>Paragraph (e) implements the disclosure requirements for credit and chargecard renewals provided in section 127(d) of the act. Paragraph (e)(1) containsthe general rule on providing notice of renewal. Paragraph (e)(2) allowsthe notice in paragraph (e)(1) to be given at a later time if certain otherdisclosures are provided. The final rule differes somewhat from the proposedrule in order to further clarify the requirements for renewal notices andto ease compliance.Paragraph (e)(1). If a card issuer imposes any annual or other periodicfee to renew a credit or charge card account (including a fee based onaccount activity or inactivity), the act requires the card issuer to providecardholders with written notice of the renewal before the scheduled renewaldate of the credit or charge card account. The regulation deems the ``scheduledrenewal date'' to be the mailing or delivery date of the periodic statementon which the fee is first billed to the account. The renewal notice mustbe provided at least 30 days or one billing cycle before the ``scheduledrenewal date,'' whichever is less. The alternative of using a billing cyclehas been added to accommodate cases where a cycle is less than 30 days.The renewal notice must provide disclosure of the applicable items underandSection; 226.5a(b) (1) through (7) that would apply if the account wererenewed. (Card issuers need disclose only that which would be requiredunder andSection; 226.5a; therefore, for example, charge card issuers wouldonly disclose the applicable items under paragraph (b) (2), (4) and (7)of andSection; 226.5a.) Card issuers would also have to disclose how andwhen the cardholders may terminate continued credit availability underthe account to avoid paying the renewal fee. A number of commenters pointed out the inapplicability of, or the difficultyin ascertaining, the date a card account ``expires'' if a renewal fee isnot paid, a disclosure required by the act and the proposed rule. Theypointed out that accounts typically do not expire merely because the feeis not paid by a particular date. Instead, the fee is simply added to theoutstanding balance and treated the same as any other outstanding amount.In light of these comments, the statutory requirement to disclose whenthe account will expire if not renewed has been made part of the disclosurein paragraph (e)(1)(ii) by adding to it a disclosure of when the cardholdermay terminate credit availability to avoid paying the renewal fee. (Thisdoes not require disclosure of a specific date; rather, the time periodcan be described.)The disclosures under this paragraph are subject to the general clear andconspicuous standard under the TILA. The tabular format requirement isnot applicable (in contrast to the proposed rule). Also, as provided infootnotes 8 and 9 to andSection;226.5(a), the disclosures need not be ina form that the consumer may keep, and the terms ``APR'' and ``financecharge'' need not be more conspicuous than other terms. If, however, thedisclosures are provided on a periodic statement (see discussion of paragraph(e)(3) below) and are interspersed among or are part of the disclosuresrequired by andSection;226.7, then the form of disclosures ordinarily applicableto andSection;226.7 would apply. <T3>Paragraph (e)(2).</T3> Under paragraph (e)(2), a renewal notice maybe delayed until the mailing or delivery date of the periodic statementon which the renewal fee is first billed, if the card issuer also disclosesat that time that the cardholder has at least 30 days from the time thestatement is mailed to avoid paying the fee, or have the fee recreditedto the account, where the cardholder terminates credit availability onthe account (in accordance with the instructions provided by the card issuerunder paragraph (e)(1)(ii)). The card issuer would have to disclose thosefacts, in writing, along with a disclosure that the cardholder may usethe card in the interim (that is, during the 30-day period described inparagraph (e)(2)(i)) without paying the fee. <T3>Paragraph (e)(3).</T3> The renewal notice disclosures in paragraph(e)(1) or (e)(2) may be provided on or with a periodic statement, or ina separate mailing. If the disclosures under this paragraph are providedin whole or in part on the back of a periodic statement, the card issuermust include on the front of the statement a reference to those disclosures,for example, along the lines of ``see reverse side for important information''or ``upon annual renewal of your card see the reverse side for disclosuresabout the cost of your card and the actions you may take.'' Some commenters indicated that they would like to comply with the renewalrequirements by preprinting the required information on all of their periodicstatements. This approach is permissible if the card issuer follows therequirements of paragraph (e)(2) since the renewal fee will appear as atransaction on the periodic statement. If the card issuer follows the requirementsof paragraph (e)(1), the periodic statement must make clear when the renewaldisclosures are applicable, for example, by including a special noticeat the appropriate time that the renewal fee will be billed in the followingbilling cycle, or by showing the renewal date as a regular entry on allperiodic statements. Section 127(d)(3) of the act permits the Board, by regulation, to providefor fewer disclosures where an account is renewable more frequently thanevery six months. The legislative history indicates, however, that theBoard would have to require, at a minimum, the periodic fee disclosureand disclosure of any credit term that had changed since the last disclosure.The Board sought comment on whether an abbreviated disclosure scheme wouldbe necessary or useful to cover this situation but received very littlesupport for it. Therefore, the regulation does not contain any specialrule. <ITAG tagnum="81">Paragraph (f)_Change in Credit Card Account Insurance Provider </ITAG>Paragraph (f) implements section 127(g) of the act. Credit card issuersthat offer credit insurance (typically, life, disability, and unemploymentinsurance) on the outstanding balance on an account are required to makecertain disclosures to their insured consumer cardholders if the card issuerschange insurance providers. Only changes in providers that are initiatedby the card issuer are covered by the notice requirements; therefore, changesresulting from mergers or acquisitions of insurance companies would nottrigger these disclosures. The card issuer is responsible for the disclosures,although they may be given by the insurance provider or another third partyacting as the agent of the card issuer. Credit card issuers who pay forcredit insurance themselves and do not separately charge the cardholderare not covered by the requirements of this paragraph. Two new model formsthat may be used to comply with paragraph (f) are added to the regulation;see the discussion of Appendix G, below, for details. <T3>Paragraph (f)(1).</T3> Paragraph (f)(1) implements section 127(g)(1)of the act which requires that a notice be sent at least 30 days beforea change in insurance providers occurs. The notice may be sent on or witha periodic statement. The notice must inform the cardholder of the upcomingchange in insurance providers, and indicate that the cardholder may discontinuethe credit insurance. (If discontinuing the credit insurance would havesome effect on the credit plan, the notice may also explain that.) In addition,if the change in insurance providers will result in an increased rate forthe cardholder, or if a substantial decrease in coverage will result, thenotice must disclose those items to the cardholder. The requirements applyto changes in coverage terms only and not to changes relating solely toservice. The reference in the proposed rule to ``other costs'' in additionto rate increases and to ``limitations'' in addition to decreases in coveragehave been deleted as unnecessary. <T3>Paragraph (f)(2). </T3>Paragraph (f)(2) incorporates section 127(g)(2)of the act. It requires that a second notice be provided by card issuerswhen the change in insurance providers actually occurs. Card issuers arerequired to send this notice no later than 30 days after the change. Cardissuers are required to provide the name and address of the new insuranceprovider, and to include a statement that the cardholder has the rightto discontinue the insurance. In addition, card issuers must provide acopy of the new policy or group certificate, which must contain the basicterms and conditions and the premium rate. As provided in paragraph (f)(4),this notice may be sent on or with a periodic statement. (The copy of thepolicy or group certificate could be sent along with the periodic statement.)<T3>Paragraph (f)(3).</T3> Paragraph (f)(3) incorporates section 127(g)(5)of the act and provides a two-part test for determining whether a decreasein the coverage terms is considered substantial. First, the card issuermust consider whether the decrease is in a significant term of coverage.A list of examples of significant terms of coverage is provided in therule. If a significant term of coverage is involved, the card issuer thenmust consider, under the second part of the test, whether the decreasemight reasonably be expected to affect a cardholder's decision to continuetaking insurance from the card issuer; if that is the case, the decreasemust be disclosed in the notice. <T3>Paragraph (f)(4).</T3> Paragraph (f)(4) allows card issuers the optionof combining the notice required by paragraph (f)(2) with the notice requiredby paragraph (f)(1) so long as the combined notice is sent within the timelimit required under paragraph (f)(1). Either or both notices may be providedon or with a periodic statement. Section 226.14_Determination of Annual Percentage Rate Paragraph (b) has been revised to add a reference to andSection;226.5a tomake it clear that, for purposes of andSection;226.5a(b)(1), an APR is computedby multiplying each periodic rate by the number of periods in a year. Section 226.16_Advertising A few commenters asked for guidance on the relationship of the generaladvertising rules in andSection;226.16 to the disclosure requirements inandSection;226.5a. They pointed out the legislative history supporting theview that any disclosure made under andSection;226.5a should not be considereda ``triggering'' term for the other requirements of andSection;226.16. Thefinal rule therefore contains a footnote to andSection;226.16(b) to thateffect. Disclosure of any andSection;226.6 terms in complying with andSection;226.5adisclosure requirements does not trigger the disclosure requirements ofandSection;226.16. Section 226.28_Effect on State Laws Paragraph (d) implements the new preemption provision added to section111 of the TILA. Section 127 (c) through (f) generally preempts state creditand charge card disclosure laws. State laws relating to the terms of creditrequired to be disclosed or the manner in which such terms must be disclosedare preempted as to any credit or charge card application or solicitationthat is subject to 127(c) and as to any renewal notice for any accountthat is subject to section 127(d). The preemption of such provisions ofstate law is total, and differs from other provisions of the TILA whichgenerally preempt only inconsistent state laws. State laws relating to disclosures concerning credit and charge cards otherthan in applications, solicitations, or in renewal notices are not preempted.For example, a state law concerning periodic statements in general wouldnot be preempted by the FCCCDA. State laws relating to accounts not coveredby section 127 (c) and (d) (for example, business purpose accounts) generallyare not preempted; however, state laws requiring disclosures for creditor charge card applications that may be used for both consumer and businesspurposes are preempted where the provisions covering disclosures for consumerand nonconsumer purpose accounts are not severable. Of course, a statemay reenact such a law to apply to accounts that are not subject to section127 (c) or (d) (such as business purpose accounts). In addition, state laws regulating the substance of transactions subjectto section 127 (c) or (d) are not preempted, nor are state laws preemptedthat regulate the form or content of the disclosure of information thatis unrelated to the scope and content of information required to be disclosedunder section 127 (c) or (d). Thus, for example, the following types ofstate laws are not preeempted: laws requiring card issuers to offer a graceperiod or prohibiting certain fees in credit or charge card transactions;laws such as retail installment sales acts and plain language laws, unlessthey regulate the disclosure of credit term information in credit and chargecard applications, solicitations or renewal notices; laws requiring noticeof a consumer's rights under antidiscrimination or similar laws; and lawsnotifying consumers about credit information available from state authorities.Finally, state laws regarding the enforcement of the requirements of section127 (c) or (d) or of any prohibitions against unfair and deceptive actsor practices (such as state ``mini-FTC acts'') also are not preempted.Sectin 127(g)(4) of the act contains a different preemption standard withrespect to the insurance disclosures; it provides that state laws regulatinginsurance are not preempted by the FCCCDA. Some commenters raised questionsabout the scope of this provision, some suggesting that the provision beread to mean that the Federal law does not apply at all in states thathave any law on the subject, others suggesting that the Federal law wasintended to apply in all states as a minimum standard. The Board's viewis that under the insurance provision in section 127(g) of the act, cardissuers would, in general, have to comply with the requirements of boththe Federal and any state law in this area. Appendix G_Open-End Model Forms and Clauses In conjunction with the final disclosure rule, several model forms andclauses have been added to Appendix G of the regulation. Model clause G-1(e)contains a description of the ending balance method of computing the balanceon which finance charges are imposed. Model form G-10(a) illustrates the permissible inclusion in the tabularformat of all of the regulated disclosures for credit card applicationsand solicitations. In model form G-10(B), the table includes only thatinformation required to be included in the table, while the three additionalrequired disclosures are illustrated clearly and conspicuously outsideof the table. Form G-10(A) illustrates the permissible vertical arrangementof the disclosures, while form G-10(B) is arranged to display the informationhorizontally. The two forms also illustrate two different levels of detailwhich are permissible in disclosing the grace period. A separate modelfrom G-10(C) has been added to illustrate a disclosure for charge cardapplications and solicitations and it reflects all of the required disclosuresin the table. In providing the disclosures required in tabular format, card issuers aregiven considerable flexibility: The disclosures may be arranged in an orderdifferent from that in the model forms; may be arranged vertically or horizontally;need not be highlighted aside from being included in the table; and arenot required to be in any minimum type size. Various features from differentmodel forms may be combined; for example, the shorter grace period disclosurein model form G-10B may be used in any disclosure. While proper use ofthe model forms will be deemed to comply with the regulation, card issuersare permitted to use headings and disclosures other than those in the formsif they are clear and concise and are substantially similar to the headingsand disclosures contained in the model forms. (Either the heading or thedisclosure about the grace period must use the term ``grace period,'' however.)In designing forms, card issuers are permitted to eliminate inapplicableheadings and their corresponding boxes. For example, if no transactionfee is imposed for purchases, the disclosure form may retain the ``Transactionfee for purchases'' heading and box, indicating ``None'' in the box, orthe heading and box may be deleted from the disclosure entirely. Thereis, however, an exception for the grace period disclosure: even if no graceperiod exists, this disclosure must be retained, stating that fact.Card issuers also may disclose more than one card program in a single table.For example, the table may include multiple columns or rows that containthe information required under andSection; 226.5a applicable to more thanone card program, such as programs that differ in the amount of certainfees, APR, or length or existence of a grace period. Furthermore, a cardissuer that applies a different periodic rate for cards in different statescould include additional columns or rows in the table disclosing the differentrates that apply in different states.Model clauses G-11(a), (b) and (c) are provide to illustrate the additionaldisclosures for applications and solicitations that are made availableto the general public. Model clause G-12 illustrates the disclosures tobe made when a charge card may access an open-end line of credit offeredby someone other than the card issuer.Model forms G-13 (A) and (B) relate to changes in an insurance provider.Form G-13(A) lists several significant terms of coverage that may be affectedby the change in insurance provider. The card issuer may list all of thesepotential changes in coverage and place a check mark by the applicablechanges or may include only statements about the actual change in coverage.Under either approach, the card issuer must either explain the change orrefer to an accompanying copy of the policy or group certificate for detailsof the new terms of coverage. Form G-13(A) illustrates the permissiblecombination of the two notices required by andSection; 226.9(f). Form G-13(A)may be modified for use in providing only the disclosures required beforethe change if the card issuer chooses to send two separate notices, Thus,for example, the references to the attached policy or certificate wouldnot be required in a separate notice prior to a change in the insuranceprovider since the policy or certificate need not be provided at that time.Model form G-13(B) illustrates the disclosures required when the insuranceprovider is changed. Other information may be added to the disclosuresmade under andSection; 226.9(f) including, for example, an explanation ofthe effect the consumer's cancellation of insurance would have on the consumer'scredit plan.<ITAG tagnum="84">(3) Economic Impact Statement</ITAG>The Board's Division of Research and Statistics has prepared an economicimpact statement on the revisions to Regulation Z. A copy of the analysismay be obtained from Publications Services, Board of Governors of the FederalReserve System, Washington, DC 20551, at (202) 452-3245.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR 226</ITAG>Advertising; Banks; Banking; Consumer protection; Credit; Federal ReserveSystem; Finance; Penalties; Rate limitations; Truth in Lending.<ITAG tagnum="84">(4) Text of Revisions</ITAG>Pursuant to authority granted in 15 U.S.C. 1604 and sec. 2, Pub. L. No.100-583, 102 Stat. 2960 (to be codified at 15 U.S.C. 1637(c)(5)) of theTILA, as amended, the Board amends Regulation Z (12 CFR Part 226) as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 226_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 226 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Truth in Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. 1604 and sec. 2, Pub.L. No. 100-583, 102 Stat. 2960; sec. 1204(c), Competitive Equality BankingAct, Pub. L. No. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_General </ITAG>2. Section 226.1 is amended by revising the first sentence of paragraph(a) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 226.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Authority, purpose, coverage, organization, enforcement and liability.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Authority. </T3>This regulation, known as Regulation Z, is issued bythe Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to implement the FederalTruth in Lending Act, which is contained in Title I of the Consumer CreditProtection Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 1601 <T3>et seq.</T3>). * * *<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>3. Section 226.2 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(15) and (a)(17)(iv)to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 226.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions and rules of construction. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Definitions. * * * </T3>(15) <T3>``Credit card'' </T3>means any card, plate, coupon book, or other singlecredit device that may be used from time to time to obtain credit. <T3>``Charge card'' </T3>means a credit card on an account for which noperiodic rate is used to compute a finance charge.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(17) <T3>``Creditor'' </T3>means: * * * (iv) For purposes of Subpart B (except for the credit and charge card disclosurescontained in andSection;andSection; 226.5a and 226.9(e) and (f), the financecharge disclosures contained in andSection;andSection; 226.6(a) and 226.7(d)through (g) and the right of rescission set forth in andSection; 226.15)and Subpart C, any card issuer that extends closed-end credit that is subjectto a finance charge or is payable by written agreement in more than fourinstallments.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart B_Open-End Credit </ITAG>4. Section 226.5 is amended by revising footnotes 8 and 9, adding paragraphs(a)(3) and (b)(3) and republishing paragraph (a)(1) and (a)(2) and footnote7 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 226.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General disclosure requirements. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Form of disclosures. </T3>(1) The creditor shall make the disclosuresrequired by this subpart clearly and conspicuously in writing,\7\<NOTE/> in a form that the consumer may keep.\8\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ The disclosure required by andSection; 226.9(d) when a financecharge is imposed at the time of a transaction need not be written.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ The disclosures required under andSection; 226.5a for creditand charge card applications and solicitations, the alternative summarybilling rights statement provided for in 226.9(a)(2), the credit and chargecard renewal disclosures required under andSection; 226.9(e), and the disclosuresmade under andSection; 226.10(b) about payment requirements need not be ina form that the consumer can keep. (2) The terms ``finance charge'' and ``annual percentage rate,'' when requiredto be disclosed with a corresponding amount or percentage rate, shall bemore conspicuous than any other required disclosure.\9\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\9\ The terms need not be more conspicuous when used underandSection; 226.5a for credit and charge card applications and solicitationsunder andSection; 226.7(d) on periodic statements, under andSection; 226.9(e)in credit and charge card renewal disclosures, and under andSection; 226.16in advertisements. (3) Certain disclosures required under andSection; 226.5a for credit andcharge card applications and solicitations must be provided in a tabularformat or in a prominent location in accordance with the requirements ofthat section. (b) <T3>Time of disclosures. </T3>* * * (3) <T3>Credit and charge card application and solicitation disclosures. </T3>Thecard issuer shall furnish the disclosures for credit and charge card applicationsand solicitations in accordance with the timing requirements of andSection;226.5a.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>5. A new section 226.5a is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 226.5a</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Credit and charge card applications and solicitations.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General rules. </T3>The card issuer shall provide the disclosures requiredunder this section on or with a solicitation or an application to opena credit or charge card account.(1) <T3>Definition of solicitation. </T3>For purposes of this section, theterm ``solicitation'' means an offer by the card issuer to open a creditor charge card account that does not require the consumer to complete anapplication.(2) <T3>Form of disclosures. </T3>(i) The disclosures in paragraph (b) (1)through (7) of this section shall be provided in a prominent location onor with an application or a solicitation, or other applicable document,and in the form of a table with headings, content, and format substantiallysimilar to any of the applicable tables found in Appendix G.(ii) The disclosures in paragraph (b) (8) through (10) of this sectionshall be provided either in the table containing the disclosures in paragraph(b) (1) through (7), or clearly and conspicuously elsewhere on or withthe application or solicitation.(iii) The disclosure required under paragraph (b)(5) of this section shallcontain the term ``grace period.''(iv) The terminology in the disclosures under paragraph (b) of this sectionshall be consistent with that to be used in the disclosures under andSection;andSection;226.6 and 226.7.(3) <T3>Exceptions. </T3>This section does not apply to home equity plans accessibleby a credit or charge card that are subject to the Home Equity Loan ConsumerProtection Act of 1988, Pub. L. No. 100-709; overdraft lines of credittied to asset accounts accessed by check guarantee cards or by debit cards;or lines of credit accessed by check guarantee cards or by debit cardsthat can be used only at automated teller machines.(4) <T3>Fees based on a percentage. </T3>If the amount of any fee requiredto be disclosed under this section is determined on the basis of a percentageof another amount, the percentage used and the identification of the amountagainst which the percentage is applied may be disclosed instead of theamount of the fee.(5) <T3>Certain fees that vary by state. </T3>If the amount of any fee referredto in paragraph (b) (8) through (10) of this section varies from stateto state, the card issuer may disclose the range of the fees instead ofthe amount for each state, if the disclosure includes a statement thatthe amount of the fee varies from state to state.(b) <T3>Required disclosures. </T3>The card issuer shall disclose the itemsin this paragraph on or with an application or a solicitation in accordancewith the requirements of paragraphs (c), (d) or (e) of this section. Acredit card issuer shall disclose all applicable items in this paragraphexcept for paragraph (b)(7) of this section. A charge card issuer shalldisclose the applicable items in paragraph (b) (2), (4), and (7) through(10) of this section.(1) <T3>Annual percentage rate. </T3>Each periodic rate that may be used tocompute the finance charge on an outstanding balance for purchases, expressedas an annual percentage rate (as determined by andSection; 226.14(b)). Whenmore than one rate applies, the range of balances to which each rate isapplicable shall also be disclosed.(i) If the account has a variable rate, the card issuer shall also disclosethe fact that the rate may vary and how the rate is determined.(ii) When variable rate disclosures are provided under paragraph (c) ofthis section, an annual percentage rate disclosure is accurate if the ratewas in effect within 60 days before mailing the disclosures. When variablerate disclosures are provided under paragraph (e) of this section, an annualpercentage rate disclosure is accurate if the rate was in effect within30 days before printing the disclosures.(2) <T3>Fees for issuance or availability. </T3>Any annual or other periodicfee, expressed as an annualized amount, or any other fee that may be imposedfor the issuance or availability of a credit or charge card, includingany fee based on account activity or inactivity.(3) <T3>Minimum finance charge. </T3>Any minimum or fixed finance charge thatcould be imposed during a billing cycle.(4) <T3>Transaction charges. </T3>Any transaction charge imposed for the useof the card for purchases.(5) <T3>Grace period. </T3>The date by which or the period within which anycredit extended for purchases may be repaid without incurring a financecharge. If no grace period is provided, that fact must be disclosed. Ifthe length of the grace period varies, the card issuer may disclose therange of days, the minimum number of days, or the average number of daysin the grace period, if the disclosure is identified as a range, minimum,or average.(6) <T3>Balance computation method. </T3>The name of the balance computationmethod listed in paragraph (g) of this section that is used to determinethe balance for purchases on which the finance charge is computed, or anexplanation of the method used if it is not listed. The explanation mayappear outside the table if the table contains a reference to the explanation.In determining which balance computation method to disclose, the card issuershall assume that credit extended for purchases will not be repaid withinthe grace period, if any.(7) <T3>Statement on charge card payments.</T3> A statement that charges incurredby use of the charge card are due when the periodic statement is received.(8) <T3>Cash advance fee.</T3> Any fee imposed for an extension of credit inthe form of cash.(9) <T3>Late payment fee.</T3> Any fee imposed for a late payment.(10) <T3>Over-the-limit fee.</T3> Any fee imposed for exceeding a credit limit.(c) <T3>Direct mail applications and solicitations.</T3> The card issuer shalldisclose the applicable items in paragraph (b) of this section on or withan application or solicitation that is mailed to consumers.(d) <T3>Telephone applications and solicitations_</T3>(1)<T3> Oral disclosure.</T3> The card issuer shall orally disclose the informationin paragraph (b) (1) through (7) of this section, to the extent applicable,in a telephone application or solicitation initiated by the card issuer.(2) <T3>Alternative disclosure.</T3> The oral disclosure under paragraph (d)(1)of this section does not impose a fee described in paragraph (b)(2) ofthis section or does not impose such a fee unless the consumer uses thecard, and the card issuer discloses in writing within 30 days after theconsumer requests the card (but in no event later than the delivery ofthe card) the following:(i) The applicable information in paragraph (b) of this section; and(ii) The fact that the consumer need not accept the card or pay any feedisclosed unless the consumer uses the card.(e) <T3>Applications and solicitations made available to general public.</T3>The card issuer shall provide disclosures, to the extent applicable, onor with an application or solicitation that is made available to the generalpublic, including one contained in a catalog, magazine, or other generallyavailable publication. The disclosures shall be provided in accordancewith paragraph (e) (1), (2) or (3) of this section.(1) <T3>Disclosure of required credit information.</T3> The card issuer maydisclose in a prominent location on the application or solicitation thefollowing:(i) The applicable information in paragraph (b) of this section;(ii) The date the required information was printed, including a statementthat the required information was accurate as of that date and is subjectto change after that date; and(iii) A statement that the consumer should contact the card issuer forany change in the required information since it was printed, and a toll-freetelephone number or a mailing address for that purpose.(2) <T3>Inclusion of certain initial disclosures.</T3> The card issuer maydisclose on or with the application or solicitation the following:(i) The disclosures required under andSection; 226.6 (a) through (c); and(ii) A statement that the consumer should contact the card issuer for anychange in the required information, and a toll-free telephone number ora mailing address for that purpose.(3) <T3>No disclosure of credit information.</T3> If none of the items in paragraph(b) of this section is provided on or with the application or solicitation,the card issuer may state in a prominent location on the application orsolicitation the following:(i) There are costs associated with the use of the card; and(ii) The consumer may contact the card issuer to request specific informationabout the costs, along with a toll-free telephone number and a mailingaddress for that purpose.(4) <T3>Prompt response to requests for information.</T3> Upon receiving arequest for any of the information referred to in this paragraph, the cardissuer shall promptly and fully disclose the information requested.(f) <T3>Special charge card rule_card issuer and person extending credit notthe same person.</T3> If a cardholder may by use of a charge card accessan open-end credit plan that is not maintained by the charge card issuer,the card issuer need not provide the disclosures in paragraphs (c), (d)or (e) of this section for the open-end credit plan if the card issuerstates on or with an application or a solicitation the following:(1) The card issuer will make an independent decision whether to issuethe card;(2) The charge card may arrive before the decision is made about extendingcredit under the open-end credit plan; and(3) Approval for the charge card does not constitute approval for the open-endcredit plan.(g) <T3>Balance computation methods defined.</T3> The following methods maybe described by name. Methods that differ due to variations such as theallocation of payments, whether the finance charge begins to accrue onthe transaction date or the date of posting the transaction, the existenceor length of a grace period, and whether the balance is adjusted by chargessuch as late fees, annual fees and unpaid finance charges do not constituteseparate balance computation methods.(1)(i) <T3>Average daily balance (including new purchases).</T3> This balanceis figured by adding the outstanding balance (including new purchases anddeducting payments and credits) for each day in the billing cycle, andthen dividing by the number of days in the billing cycle.(ii) <T3>Average daily balance (excluding new purchases).</T3> This balanceis figured by adding the outstanding balance (excluding new purchases anddeducting payments and credits) for each day in the billing cycle, andthen dividing by the number of days in the billing cycle.(2)(i) <T3>Two-cycle average daily balance (including new purchases).</T3> Thisbalance is the sum of the average daily balances for two billing cycles.The first balance is for the current billing cycle, and is figured by addingthe outstanding balance (including new purchases and deducting paymentsand credits) for each day in the billing cycle, and then dividing by thenumber of days in the billing cycle. The second balance is for the precedingbilling cycle and is figured in the same way as the first balance.(ii) <T3>Two-cycle average daily balance (excluding new purchases).</T3> Thisbalance is the sum of the average daily balances for two billing cycles.The first balance is for the current billing cycle, and is figured by addingthe outstanding balance (excluding new purchases and deducting paymentsand credits) for each day in the billing cycle, and then dividing by thenumber of days in the billing cycle. The second balance is for the precedingbilling cycle and is figured in the same way as the first balance.(3) <T3>Adjusted balance.</T3> This balance is figured by deducting paymentsand credits made during the billing cycle from the outstanding balanceat the beginning of the billing cycle.(4) <T3>Previous balance.</T3> This balance is the outstanding balance at thebeginning of the billing cycle.6. Section 226.9 is amended by revising paragraph (d)(2) and adding paragraphs(e) and (f) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 226.9</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Subsequent disclosure requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) <T3>Finance charge imposed at time of transaction.</T3> * * *(2) The card issuer, if other than the person honoring the consumer's creditcard, shall have no responsibility for the disclosure required by paragraph(d)(1) of this section, and shall not consider any such charge for purposesof andSection;andSection; 226.5a, 226.6 and 226.7.(e) <T3>Disclosures upon renewal of credit or charge card.</T3> (1) <T3>Notice prior to renewal.</T3> Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)of this section, a card issuer that imposes any annual or other periodicfee to renew a credit or charge card account subject to andSection; 226.5a,including any fee based on account activity or inactivity, shall mail ordeliver written notice of the renewal to the cardholder. The notice shallbe provided at least 30 days or one billing cycle, whichever is less, beforethe mailing or the delivery of the periodic statement on which the renewalfee is initially charged to the account. The notice shall contain the followinginformation:(i) The disclosures contained in andSection; 226.5a(b) (1) through (7) thatwould apply if the account were renewed; 20a<NOTE/> and<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>20a These disclosures need not be provided in tabular formator in a prominent location.(ii) How and when the cardholder may terminate credit availability underthe account to avoid paying the renewal fee.(2) <T3>Delayed notice.</T3> The disclosures required by paragraph (e)(1) ofthis section may be provided later than the time in paragraph (e)(1) ofthis section, but no later than the mailing or the delivery of the periodicstatement on which the renewal fee is initially charged to the account,if the card issuer also discloses at that time that:(i) The cardholder has 30 days from the time the periodic statement ismailed or delivered to avoid paying the fee or to have the fee recreditedif the cardholder terminates credit availability under the account; and(ii) The cardholder may use the card during the interim period withouthaving to pay the fee.(3) <T3>Notification on periodic statements.</T3> The disclosures requiredby this paragraph may be made on or with a periodic statement. If any ofthe disclosures are provided on the back of a periodic statement, the cardissuer shall include a reference to those disclosures on the front of thestatement.(f) <T3>Change in credit card account insurance provided_</T3>(1)<T3> Notice prior to change.</T3> If a credit card issuer plans to changethe provider of insurance for repayment of all or part of the outstandingbalance of an open-end credit card account subject to andSection; 226.5a,the card issuer shall mail or deliver the cardholder written notice ofthe change not less than 30 days before the change in providers occurs.The notice shall also include the following items, to the extent applicable:(i) Any increase in the rate that will result from the change;(ii) Any substantial decrease in coverage that will result from the change;and(iii) A statement that the cardholder may discontinue the insurance.(2) <T3>Notice when change in provider occurs.</T3> If a change described inparagraph (f)(1) of this section occurs, the card issuer shall providethe cardholder with a written notice no later than 30 days after the change,including the following items, to the extent applicable:(i) The name and address of the new insurance provider;(ii) A copy of the new policy or group certificate containing the basicterms of the insurance, including the rate to be charged; and(iii) A statement that the cardholder may discontinue the insurance.(3) <T3>Substantial decrease in coverage.</T3> For purposes of this paragraph,a substantial decrease in coverage is a decrease in a significant termof coverage that might reasonably be expected to affect the cardholder'sdecision to continue the insurance. Significant terms of coverage include,for example, the following:(i) Type of coverage provided;(ii) Age at which coverage terminates or becomes more restrictive;(iii) Maximum insurable loan balance, maximum periodic benefit payment,maximum number of payments, or other term affecting the dollar amount ofcoverage or benefits provided;(iv) Eligibility requirements and number and identity of persons covered;(v) Definition of a key term of coverage such as disability;(vi) Exclusions from or limitations on coverage; and(vii) Waiting periods and whether coverage is retroactive.(4) <T3>Combined notification.</T3> The notices required by paragraph (f) (1)and (2) of this section may be combined provided the timing requirementof paragraph (f)(1) of this section is met. The notices may be providedon or with a periodic statement.7. Section 226.14 is amended by revising paragraph (b) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;226.14 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Determination of annual percentage rate.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) <T3>Annual percentage rate for andSection;226.5a disclosures, for initialdisclosures and for advertising purposes.</T3> Where one or more periodicrates may be used to compute the finance charge, the annual percentagerate(s) to be disclosed for purposes of andSection;andSection;226.5a, 226.6(a)(2)and 226.16(b) shall be computed by multiplying each periodic rate by thenumber of periods in a year.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>8. Section 226.16 is amended by adding footnote 36a to paragraph (b) toread as follows (paragraph (b) introductory text is republished):<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;226.16 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Advertising.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) <T3>Advertisement of terms that require additional disclosures.</T3> Ifany of the terms required to be disclosed under andSection;226.6 is set forthin an advertisement, the advertisement shall also clearly and conspicuouslyset forth the following:\36\<NOTE/>a * * *<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\36\aThe disclosures given in accordance with andSection;226.5ado not constitute advertising terms for purposes of the requirements ofthis section.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart D_Miscellaneous</ITAG>9. Section 226.28 is amended by revising the first sentence of paragraph(a)(1) and adding paragraph (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;226.28 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Effect on state laws.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Inconsistent disclosure requirements.</T3> (1) Except as provided inparagraph (d) of this section, state law requirements that are inconsistentwith the requirements contained in chapter 1 (General Provisions), chapter2 (Credit Transactions), or chapter 3 (Credit Advertising) of the act andthe implementing provisions of this regulation are preempted to the extentof the consistency.* * *<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) <T3>Special rule for credit and charge cards.</T3> State law requirementsrelating to the disclosure of credit information in any credit or chargecard application or solicitation that is subject to the requirements ofsection 127(c) of chapter 2 of the act (andSection;226.5a of the regulation)or in any renewal notice for a credit or charge card that is subject tothe requirements of section 127(d) of chapter 2 of the act (andSection;226.9(e)of the regulation) are preempted. State laws relating to the enforcementof section 127 (c) and (d) of the act are not preempted.10. Appendix G is amended by adding to the introductory language and byadding model forms and clauses G-1(e) and G-10(A) through G-13(B) to readas follows (G-1(a) through (d) and G-2 are republished):<ITAG tagnum="73">Appendix G_Open-End Model Forms and Clauses</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G-10(a)-(B) Applications and Solicitations Model Forms (Credit Cards)(andSection;226.5a(b))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G-10(C) Applications and Solicitations Model Form (Charge Cards) (andSection;226.5a(b))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G-11 Applications and Solicitations Made Available to General PublicModel Clauses (andSection;226.5a(e))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G-12 Charge Card Model Clause (When Access to Plan Offered by Another)(andSection;226.5a(f))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G-13(A) Change in Insurance Provider Model Form (Combined Notice)(andSection;226.9(f))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G-13(B) Change in Insurance Provider Model Form (andSection;226.9(f)(2))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6210-01-M005</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">INSERT ILLUSTRATION(S) 903_907</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6210-01-C</ITAG>By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April3, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="6">William W. Wiles,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-8225 Filed 4-5-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6210-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>