<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89331-0136 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-31-89.f2.A1135</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-266 and 50-301]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Wisconsin Electric Power Co. Point Beach Nuclear Plant, Unit Nos.1 and 2; Issuance of Amendment to Facility Operating Licenses and ProposedNo Significant Hazards Consideration Determination and Opportunity forHearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of amendments to Facility Operating License Nos. DPR-24 and DPR-27,issued to the Wisconsin Electric Power Company (the licensee), for operationof the Point Beach Nuclear Plant, Unit Nos. 1 and 2, located at the licensee'ssite in Manitowoc County, Wisconsin. The amendments would revise provisions of the Point Beach Nuclear Plant,Unit Nos. 1 and 2, Technical Specifications (TS's) relating to the permissibleenrichments for storage of fuel assemblies in the new fuel storage vaultand spent fuel storage pool. Specifically, the amendments would increasethe U-235 content permitted for OFA fuel assemblies from 39.4 grams peraxial centimeter to 40.0 grams per axial centimeter. In addition, the word``assemblies'' is changed to ``assembly'' in two places in order to clarifythe intent of the TS in that it applies to each fuel assembly and not toan average over more than one assembly. The licensee believes that exigent circumstances exist. On July 6, 1988,the licensee submitted a license amendment application which would permitthe storage of fuel with U-235 content of up to 46.8 grams per axial centimeterof OFA fuel assemblies. The application included discussion of the criticalityanalysis for both the new fuel storage vault and for the spent fuel storagepool showing that adequate margin exists for maintaining the 5 percentshutdown margin stated in TS 15.5.4.2. The licensee also provided an evaluationof the potential effects of the higher enriched fuel and the associatedincrease in discharge burnup in relation to decay heat, radiation effects,and gamma heating on the spent fuel pool. The licensee concluded that theseparameters were generally insensitive to increasing U-235 content becausehigher discharge burnups result in fewer fuel assemblies discharged percycle and that heating and gamma dose considerations were bounded by previousanalysis. In mid-February 1989, the NRC notified the licensee that it was necessaryfor the NRC to engage an outside consultant to review possible environmentaleffects of potential accidents involving the more highly enriched/higherburnup fuel. As a result, it is unlikely that the July 6, 1988 requestfor amendments would be approved before the end of 1989. At that time,the licensee notified the NRC that 16 fuel assemblies had been orderedat a nominal enrichment of 4.0 weight percent U-235 (equivalent to 39.4grams per axial centimeter) and that it was possible that some assembliescould exceed the specification limit of 39.4 grams of U-235 per axial centimeterdue to normal enrichment process tolerances (+/^ 0.05 weight percent).All fuel assemblies have now been fabricated and the final fuel assaysindicate that 9 of the 16 assemblies exceed the 39.4 gram per axial centimeterlimit for U-235 content. The W-235 content in the 16 fuel assemblies variedfrom 39.19 grams per axial centimeter to 39.64 grams per axial centimeterwith an average of 39.415 grams per axial centimeter. On March 20, 1989,the licensee provided this information to the NRC along with their conclusionthat these assemblies satisfied the intent of the TS's based on the regionaverage U-235 content taken to 3 significant digits (as expressed in theTS's). On March 21, 1989, the NRC informed the licensee that the licensee'sinterpretation was contrary to that of the NRC staff and that each of thefuel assemblies must comply with the TS 15.5.4.2 limit on U-235 loading.The licensee believes that exigent circumstances exist in that failureto obtain relief from the NRC TS interpretation could cause a delay inthe resumption of operation of Point Beach Unit 1. Unless TS 15.5.4.2 isrevised, the licensee will be unable to store those fuel assemblies withU-235 content exceeding 39.4 grams per axial centimeter in the spent fuelstorage pool. This will result in significant delay in the sequencing ofthe core load and fuel shuffle, since those fuel assemblies will requireextraordinary measures and special procedures to be moved from the newfuel shipping containers to the reactor vessel. The resulting delays couldextend the refueling outage and delay return to power by 1\1/2\ days. Furthermore,in the event that the licensee had to subsequently unload the core, startupcould be delayed indefinitely, since the licensee would have no storagearea authorized to receive these fuel assemblies. The licensee submitted an application to revise the TS limit concerningU-235 fuel loading 9 months prior to the scheduled refueling shutdown andcould not have foreseen the delay necessary to complete processing of theirapplication. Further, the licensee had no actual knowledge that certainOFA fuel assemblies did in fact exceed the fuel loading limit until fuelfabrication was complete. Finally, wording of the TS (use of the word ``assemblies'')seemed to indicate that an average U-235 content over a region (consistingof two or more fuel assemblies) was implied. The licensee believes thatsuch an interpretation is reasonable and had no prior knowledge that theNRC staff interpretation would be more restrictive. Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards considerations. Under the Commission'sregulations in 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facilityin accordance with the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significantincrease in the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The proposed amendments would not involve a significant increase in theprobability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated since theU-235 loading level is not a parameter that is considered in accident analysesfor operations of the Point Beach Nuclear Plant. Futhermore, the new fuelstorage vaults and the spent fuel pool have already been evaluated forhigher enrichment levels than requested for these amendments. Criticalityanalyses for the new fuel storage vault and the spent fuel pool show that,with a U-235 fuel loading of 40.0 grams per axial centimeter for OFA fuelassemblies, more than adequate margin exists to meet the 5 percent shutdownmargin stated in TS 15.5.4.2. The probability or consequences of a spentfuel accident related to increased decay heat, radiation effects, or gammaheating remain unchanged because there is no associated increase in dischargeburnup. The proposed amendments would not create the possibility of a newor different kind of accident from any accident previously evaluated sincethe amendments do not result in any physical changes either to plant equipment(other than the increased U-235 loading) or procedures. Finally, the proposedamendments would not involve a significant reduction in a margin of safetyfor the same reasons discussed above under the probability or consequencesof an accident previously evaluated. No other safety margins are affected.The Commission has provided guidance concerning the application of thecriteria by providing examples of actions not likely to involve significanthazards considerations (51 FR 7751). One of the examples of actions notlikely to involve significant hazards considerations is ``(i) A purelyadministrative change to technical specifications: for example, a changeto achieve consistency throughout the technical specifications, correctionor an error, or a change in nomenclature.'' The change in the U-235 loadinglimit for OFA fuel assemblies is an administrative change since the limitwould be changed to correct an error in that the TS, as written, did notaccount for the normal enrichment process tolerances for nominal 4.0 weightpercent fuel. Further, to remove the ambiguity in interpretation of theU-235 loading limit the word ``assemblies'' has been changed to ``assembly''for both the standard and OFA fuel loading limits. This is an administrativechange clarifying the intent of the technical specification in that theU-235 loading limit applies to each fuel assembly individually. The proposedamendments match the Commission's example and on this basis, a proposeddetermination of no significant hazards is made. Accordingly, the Commission proposes to determine that this change doesnot involve significant hazards considerations. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 15 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, D.C. 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof the<T4> Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be delivered to Room P-216, Phillips Building,7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copiesof written comments received may be examined at the NRC Public DocumentRoom, the Gelman Building, 2120 L. Street, NW., Washington, DC. The filingof requests for hearing and petitions for leave to intervene is discussedbelow. By May 1, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenrequest for hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requests fora hearing and petitions for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordancewith the Commission's ``Rule of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings''in 10 CFR Part 2. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to interveneis filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard, designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safetyand Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition; andthe Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board willissue a notice of hearing or an appropriate order. As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first pre-hearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above. Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene, which must include a list of the contentions thatare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party. Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.Ifthe amendments are issued before the expiration of 30-days, the Commissionwill make a final determination on the issue of no significant hazardsconsiderations. If a hearing is requested, the final determination willserve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards considerations, the Commission may issue the amendments and makethem effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearingheld would take place after issuance of the amendments.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves significanthazards considerations, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue an amendment until the expirationof the 15-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period, such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendments before the expiration of the 15-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendments involveno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance. The Commission expects thatthe need to take this action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitionsare filed during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1 (800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1 (800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to John N. Hannon: petitioner'sname and telephone number; date petition was mailed; plant name; and publicationdate and page number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, D.C. 20555, and to Gerald Charnoff, Esq., Shaw, Pittman, Pottsand Trowbridge, 2300 N Street, NW., Washington, DC, 20037, attorney forthe licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated March 23, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's Public Document Room, the GelmanBuilding, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at the Local PublicDocument Room, Joseph P. Mann Library, 1516 Sixteenth Street, Two Rivers,Wisconsin.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 28th day of March 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">James R. Hall,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Director, Project Directorate III-3, Division of Reactor Projects- III, IV, V and Special Projects, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7823 Filed 3-30-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>