<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89313-0060 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-13-89.f2.A1059</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Bonneville Power Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Amended Model Conservation Standards Surcharge Policy Extension</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Bonneville Power Administration (Bonneville), DOE.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of Bonneville's amended model Conservation Standards(MCS) Surcharge Policy Extension.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Bonneville is releasing its Amended MCS Surcharge PolicyExtension (Policy). The Policy is a slightly modified version of Bonneville'sPolicy Extension adopted November 9, 1988. When the Policy was adopted,Bonneville requested public comment on two proposed amendments to thatPolicy. One public comment was received. However, it was not related toeither of the two proposed amendments. Bonneville is now releasing an amendedPolicy which contains the two proposed amendments. This amended Policysupersedes all other versions of the Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>The Policy is effective immediately.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mr. Robert Procter at 503-230-3961,or call Bonneville's Public Involvement office. Telephone numbers, voice/TTY,for the Public Involvement office are: 503-230-3478 in Portland; toll-free800-452-8429 for Oregon outside of Portland; 800-547-6048 for Washington,Idaho, Montana, Utah, Nevada, Wyoming, and California. Information mayalso be obtained from:<ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. George Gwinnutt, Lower Columbia Area Manager, Room 243, 1500 PlazaBuilding, 1500 NE. Irving Street, Portland, Oregon 97232, 503-230-4552.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. Robert Rasmussen, Acting Eugene District Manager, Room 206, 211East Seventh Avenue, Eugene, Oregon 97401, 503-687-6952.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. Wayne R. Lee, Upper Columbia Area Manager, Room 561, West 920Riverside Avenue, Spokane, Washington 99201, 509-456-2518.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. George E. Eskridge, Montana District Manager, 800 Kensington,Missoula, Montana 59801, 406-329-3060.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. Ronald K. Rodewald, Wenatchee District Manager, Room 307, 301Yakima Street, Wenatchee, Washington 98801, 509-662-4377.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. Terrence G. Esvelt, Puget Sound Area Manager, 201 Queen Anne AvenueNorth, Suite 400, Seattle, Washington 98109, 206-442-4130.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. Thomas V. Wagenhoffer, Snake River Area Manager, 101 West Popular,Walla Walla, Washington 99362, 509-522-6226.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. Robert N. Laffel, Idaho Falls District Manager, 1527 HolliparkDrive, Idaho Falls, Idaho 83401, 208-523-2706.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Mr. Thomas H. Blankenship, Boise District Manager, Room 376, FederalBuilding, 550 W. Fort Street, Boise, Idaho 83724, 208-34-9137.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="74">Table of Contents</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">I. Background of Policy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">A. Introduction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B. Statutory Direction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">II. Past and Present Surcharge Policy Development Efforts</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">A. Council Activities to Date</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B. Bonneville Activities to Date</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">C. Council's 1987 Surcharge Recommendation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">III. Surcharge Policy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section 1: Definitions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section 2: Application of the Surcharge Policy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section 3: Evaluation of Alternative Utility Plans</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section 4: Calculating a Surcharge</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section 5: Collecting a Surcharge</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix 1: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting the Bonneville/UtilityMCS Support Program</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appensix 2: Achieving Electrical Savings by adopting an AlternativeUtility Program</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix 3: Achieving Electrical Savings by Participating in the EarlyAdopter/Northwest Energy Code Program</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix 4: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting a Codified Versionof the MCS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix 5: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting Alternative orEquivalent Building Codes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix 6: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting a Codified Versionof the MCS as a Utility Service Standard</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix 7: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting an Alternativeor Equivalent Utility Service Standard</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix 8: Submittal and Implementation Schedule for MCS SurchargePolicy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background of Policy</ITAG>A. IntroductionThe Surcharge Policy is a response to recommendations made by the NorthwestPower Planning Council (Council) in its 1986 Northwest Conservation andElectrical Power Plan (Plan) and its Model Conservation Standards (MCS)for New Residential and Commercial Construction of March 26, 1987 (PlanAmendment). The purpose of this Policy is to encourage utilities to achieveadditional electrical savings through improved residential and commercialbuilding construction which can ultimately result in region-wide adoptionof the Council's MCS in buliding codes. There are two additional policyobjectives: (1) To identify the criteria that will be used to evaluatea utility's proposed approach to achieving MCS level electrical savings;and (2) to identify the method for calculating and collecting a surcharge.As the Council states in its Plan Amendment, ``By the end of 1989, theCouncil expects the region to achieve residential sector savings equivalentto at least 85 percent of those that would be achieved with full implementationof the MCS.'' One long-run goal is to achieve MCS level savings throughcode adoption.B. Statutory DirectionSection 4(e)(3) of the Pacific Northwest Electric Power Planning and ConservationAct (Act) provides for the development of MCS as part of the Council'sPlan. The standards, as described in section 4(f)(1) of the Act, are toinclude standards applicable to new and existing structures and to utilityand government conservation programs. Such standards should reflect geographicand climatic differences and produce all power savings that are cost effectivefor the region and economically feasible for consumers.Section 4(f)(2) of the Act provides that the Council may recommend to theBonneville Administrator the imposition of a surcharge on customers ofthe Administrator for those portions of their loads within the region thatare within States or political subdivisions which have not, or on the Administrator'scustomers which have not, implemented the standards or other conservationmeasures that the Administrator determines achieve energy savings comparableto the standards. Finally, section 4(e)(3)(G) of the Act mandates thatthe Council develop a methodology for calculating the surcharge. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Past and Present Surcharge Policy Development Efforts</ITAG>Part A of this section summarizes past MCS and surcharge actions undertakenby the Council. Part B summarizes Bonneville's past surcharge-related activities.Part C describes the Council's 1987 surcharge recommendation as containedin its Plan Amendment of January 30, 1987.A. Council Activities to DateOn April 27, 1983, the Council adopted its first Plan. As required by theAct, the Council's 1983 Plan contained MCS for newly constructed residentialand commercial buildings and for conversion of existing residential andcommercial buildings to electric space heating and conditioning. In the 1983 Two-Year Action Plan (chapter 10 of the 1983 Plan), the Councilidentified tasks to be undertaken by Bonneville, the Council, and otherregional entities. That Plan mandated that Bonneville include in its surchargepolicy a consistent procedure for certifying compliance with MCS and aprocedure for reviewing and evaluating alternative plans. In accordance with the 1983 Plan, State governments, local governments,or utilities were to adopt and enforce the MCS as building codes or utilityservice standards by January 1, 1986. Where such standards were not adopted,an alternative plan to achieve comparable savings should have been in placeby January 1, 1986. Where neither action had occurred, the Council recommendedthat the Administrator impose a surcharge. The Council voted on October 31, 1984, to adopt an amendment which simplifiedthe surcharge calculation. The Council recommended that a 10-percent surchargebe levied on the customer's power bill for that portion of its loads whichwere not complying with the standard. On July 26, 1985, the Council proposed to enter rulemaking to amend theMCS. On December 4, 1985, the Council voted to amend that portion of the1983 Plan dealing with MCS. The amended MCS thermal performance levelsfor both new residential and new commercial buildings were equivalent tothe MCS set forth and amended by the Council in its 1983 Plan. The Councilalso recommended that Bonneville develop a surcharge policy based on MCSimplementation and performance. In the 1986 Action Plan, the Council identified specific actions that Bonnevilleshould take towards region-wide implementation of the MCS. Bonneville wasto: (1) Have utilities submit to Bonneville a plan declaring how they intendedto comply with the MCS, (2) design a process to collect utility-specificdata on the savings that would be achieved if all buildings were constructedto MCS levels, (3) continue development and implementation of a procedureto measure compliance with the MCS, (4) review alternative plans for achievingcompliance with the MCS,and (5) develop a new surcharge policy. On November 20, 1986, the Council proposed to enter further rulemakingto amend part of its 1986 Plan dealing with MCS and the surcharge. Afterpublic comment, the Plan amendment was published on January 30, 1987. Noticeof the Plan Amendment, which included the Council's 1987 MCS, was publishedin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on March 26, 1987 (52 FR 9738). B. Bonneville Activities to Date Bonneville began the development of a surcharge policy in early 1984 througha series of informal meetings with State government, local government,utility, and Council representatives. Bonneville staff informally discussedthe various issues that might surround the development of a policy to implementthe Council recommendation to impose a surcharge. These informal discussionsformed the basis of a <T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice of Intent to Develop a Policy to Implementthe Council Recommended Conservation Surcharge. The notice (49 FR 3489I,September 4, 1984) was mailed to the public on August 28, 1984. Bonneville elected to delay publication of a proposed policy until afterfinal Council action on amendment of the surcharge methodology. Publicreview and comment on the proposed policy took place between March 13,1985, and May 17, 1985. Bonneville suspended action on the surcharge policy when the Council enteredrulemaking to amend the MCS in the summer of 1985. After the Council amendedits MCS recommendation in December 1985, Bonneville developed a revisedproposed policy and received public comment on that proposal during Julyand August 1986. As part of the Administrator's decision on whether to finalize the revisedproposed surcharge policy, Bonneville undertook an analysis of the cost-effectivenessand consumer economic feasibility of the MCS contained in the Council's1986 Plan. Bonneville concluded that some of the recommended measures werenot cost effective, and on December 19, 1986, Bonneville's MCS findingswere published. Based in part on that analysis, the Council entered rulemaking to amendits MCS and surcharge recommendations. In turn, Bonneville suspended thedevelopment of a final surcharge policy. Following publication of the Council'sPlan Amendment on January 30, 1987, Bonneville undertook a second revisionof the proposed surcharge policy. On May 26, 1987, Bonneville released its proposed surcharge policy forpublic comment. The comment period closed on July 15, 1987. During thecomment period there was one public meeting which was held on June 22,1987. A number of changes were made in the proposed version of that policy,based on the public comment received. That policy, entitled ``Model ConservationStandards Surcharge Policy,'' was Bonneville's response to Council recommendationsto develop a surcharge policy. In response to the 1988 Policy, utilities submitted plans for the residentialand commercial sectors within their service areas. Those plans coveredcalendar year 1988. With the adoption of a Policy extension on November10, 1988, Bonneville also announced proposed amendments to the Policy toallow for public comment on several issues which arose during comment onthe Policy extension. Public comment on the proposed amendments closedon December 16, 1988. While one public comment was received, it did notaddress the proposed amendments. Bonneville is now publishing an amendedPolicy which adopts the two proposed amendments. C. Council's 1987 Surcharge Recommendation The Council's Plan Amendment of January 30, 1987, made several major changesto its 1986 Plan. The most significant change in the surcharge recommendationwas a move away from a performance-based surcharge, where utilities couldface a surcharge if their performance was poor relative to the performanceof other utilities. A summary of the Council's 1987 surcharge recommendationappears below. 1. <T3>Residential Surcharge Recommendation.</T3> The Council recommendedthat a 10 percent surcharge be imposed on utilities which do not submit,by a deadline set by Bonneville: (1) An initial plan for implementationof the Bonneville/Utility Residential MCS Program; (2) a plan for implementationof an alternative program which is approved by Bonneville as being equivalent;or (3) a declaration, approved by Bonneville, that the MCS for residentialbuildings will be met by building codes. This surcharge would continuein effect until a utility has filed an initial plan and has obtained thenecessary Bonneville approvals.  2. <T3>Commercial Surcharge Recommendation.</T3> The Council recommended thata 10 percent surcharge be imposed on utilities which do not submit, bya date set by Bonneville: (1) An initial plan for implementation of theBonneville/Utility Commercial MCS Program; (2) a plan for implementationof an alternative program which is approved by Bonneville as equivalentto the Bonneville/utility MCS Program, or (3) a declaration, approved byBonneville, that the MCS for commercial buildings will be met by buildingcodes at the MCS levels. The Council recommended that the surcharge continuein effect until a utility has filed an initial plan and has obtained thenecessary Bonneville approvals. 3. <T3>Conversion Surcharge Recommendation.</T3> The Council's MCS for residentialand commercial buildings converting to electric space heating/conditioningstated that State or local governments or utilities should take actionsthrough codes and/or alternative programs to achieve electric power savingsfrom buildings which convert to electric space heating/conditioning. Thesavings should be comparable to those savings that would be achieved ifeach building converting to electric space heating/conditioning were upgradedto include all cost-effective electricity conservation measures. The Councilrecommended this conversion standard, but did not recommend that a surchargebe imposed for failure to adopt the standard. 4. <T3>Combined Commercial/Residential Code.</T3> One provision of the Planamendment allowed for a combined residential/commercial MCS strategy bya utility. This approach allowed for less than MCS program savings to beachieved in one sector as long as the shortfall is recouped in the othersector. This alternative was to be applicable only to the submission ofalternative codes or utility service standards. 5. <T3>Exemptions.</T3> The Council has determined that no exemptions areneeded at this time. 6. <T3>Federal Loads and Generic MCS.</T3> The council did not make any surchargerecommendation in these areas. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Surcharge Policy </ITAG>Section 1: Definitions A. <T3>Administrator</T3>_Administrator of the Bonneville Power Administrationor the Administrator's designated representative.B. <T3>Alternative Code</T3>_Codes implemented in the residential and commercialsectors which, in aggregate, achieve total electrical savings at leastas large as would have been expected had the Council's illustrative MCSbeen implemented in the residential and commercial sectors. The Council'sillustrative MCS are contained in the Council's Plan Amendment (52 FR 9738,March 26, 1987).C. <T3>Alternative Utility Plan</T3>_Any plan which either partially or whollyrelies on an approach to conservation savings discussed in Appendices 2,4, 5, 6, or 7 of this Policy.D. <T3>Alternative Utility Program</T3>_For the residential sector, a utilityoperated MCS support program designed to achieve at least the same levelof total expected electrical savings, while complying with the Indoor AirQuality (IAQ) and ventilation goals, of Bonneville's Super GOOD CENTS program.For the commercial sector, a utility MCS support program designed to promoteat least the same MCS measures as contained in the Council's commercialMCS of March 26, 1987, and providing comparable design assistance servicesas contained in the Bonneville/Utility MCS support program as of the effectivedate of this Policy.E. <T3>Customer</T3>_For purposes of this policy, a utility existing in thePacific Northwest region which purchases firm power from Bonneville undera utility Metered or Computed Requirements Contract, or a utility whichpurchases firm capacity under a pre-Act contract, or a utility which participatesin the Residential Purchase and Sales Agreement/Exchange Transmission CreditAgreement, as an active exchanger or deemer.F. <T3>Equivalent Code</T3>_In either the residential or commercial sectors,a code which is designed to achieve (within 5 percent) the level of totalelectrical savings that would have been achieved if that jurisdiction hadadopted the Council's MCS for that sector.G. <T3>Jurisdiction</T3>_For purposes of this Policy, any unit of governmentincluding Indian Tribes, State and local governments, and municipal corporations.H. <T3>Region</T3>_The Pacific Northwest Region, region, or regional meansthe area consisting of Orgeon, Washington, and Idaho, the portion of theState of Montana west of the Continental Divide, and such portions of theStates of Nevada, Utah, and Wyoming as are within the Columbia River drainagebasin; and any contiguous areas, not in excess of 75 air miles from thearea referred to above, which are part of the service area of a rural electriccooperative customer, served by the Administrator on the effective dateof the Act, which has a distribution system from which it serves both withinand without such region.I. <T3>Service Area</T3>_The service area of a utility is that portion ofits service territory which is both subject to the Surcharge Policy andto which the utility provides electric power service to the residentialor commercial sectors.J. <T3>Total Retail Load</T3>_The number of firm kilowatt hours (kWh's) soldat retail by a customer during the 12-month period prior to the implementationdate contained in Appendix 8 or during consecutive billing cycles coveringa comparable period of time.K. <T3>Total Residential Load</T3>_The number of firm kWh's sold at retailby the customer during either the most recent 12-month period prior toimplementation data contained in Appendix 8, or during consecutive billingcycles covering a comparable period of time.L. <T3>Total Commercial Load</T3>_The total number of firm kWh's sold at retailby the customer during the 12-month period prior to the implementationdate contained in Appendix 8, or during consecutive billing cycles coveringa comparable period of time.Section 2: Application of the Surcharge PolicyFor the residential sector, by the plan submission date contained in Appendix8, customers must submit either: (a) A letter indicating that the approachbeing used to comply with the Policy in 1988 will be used to comply withthe Policy for the plan coverage period indicated in Appendix 8, (b) aplan to implement the Super GOOD CENTS Program, or (c) an alternative utilityprogram, or utility service standard for Bonneville approval, or (d) aplan indicating that jurisdictions within its service area will implementand enforce the MCS via participation in the Northwest Energy Code Program(NEWCP) or adoption of a Bonneville-approved building code. A utility'sresidential sector plan may contain any combination of these approaches.Except as provided for in section 3(A) of this Policy, the utility's entireservice area must be covered by some combination of the conservation strategiesdescribed in the appendices to this policy.A utility's residential sector plan will be evaluated on the basis of theutility's proposed efforts for the residential sector during the plan coverageperiod indicated in Appendix 8 and its success with the approach(es) currentlybeing used to comply with the Policy.Customers who do not implement a Bonneville approved residential MCS planby the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8, will be subjectto a surcharge as calculated in sector 4 of this Policy. Customers whohave been granted a grace period, as provided for either in section 3 orthe appendix relevant to the utility's conservation strategy, will notface a surcharge until the end of any such period.For the commercial sector, by the plan submission date indicated in Appendix8, customers must submit either (a) a letter indicating that the approachcurrently being used to comply with the Policy will be used to comply withthe Policy for the plan coverage period indicated in Appendix 8, (b) aplan to implement Bonneville's Commercial MCS Program, (c) an alternativeutility commercial program or utility service standard in the commercialsector, or (d) a plan indicating that jurisdictions within its servicearea have met the Council's commercial MCS through codes. A utility's commercialsector plan may contain any combination of these approaches. Except asprovided for in section 3(A), the utility's entire service area must becovered by some combination of the conservation strategies described inthe appendices to this policy.Customers who have not implemented a Bonneville-approved commercial MCSplan by the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8, are subjectto a surcharge, as calculated in section 4 of this Policy. Customers whohave been granted a grace period, as provided for in either section 3 orthe appendix relevant to the utility's conservation strategy, will notface a surcharge until the end of any such period.Customers of Bonneville without service areas as defined in this Policy,need only submit evidence of their lack of such a service area by the plansubmission data indicated in Appendix 8. This provision exists for thosecustomers who have voluntarily adopted a policy not to serve the residentialor commercial sectors, or who are prohibited from serving the residentialor commercial sector. If the customer serves one of these two sectors,then this provision will only apply to the one sector not served.Customers who have neither submitted this information, nor a plan for achievingconservation in these sectors, will be subject to a surcharge after theplan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8 has passed. Each of the appendices to this Policy represents a different approach toachieve electrical savings from improved construction practices. Theseappendices contain more specific submission and evaluation criteria foreach of the MCS plan options and are part of this Policy. It is very importantthat customers carefully review this document including the appendices,to understand fully what actions utilities must take to achieve conservationsavings in ways which also comply with this Policy. Once any plan is approved and implemented, Bonneville will assume thatthe utility and/or jurisdiction(s) within its service areas will carryout that paln in good faith. During the period for which this Policy isin effect, Bonneville reserves the right to revisit any utility's approvedplan if Bonneville has reason to believe that the utility has not implementedits plan in good faith. This same provision applies to utilities who relyon jurisdictional adoption and enforcement of codes to comply with thisPolicy. With their proposed plan, customers are to submit the following load informationto the extent available: (a) Total retail load, and (b) that portion oftheir total retail load in jurisdictions not covered by one or more ofthe conservation strategies contained in the appendices to this Policy.If a customer has retail loads in violation of the Policy for both sectors,the portion of their total load not in compliance with the Policy shouldbe reported by sector for each noncomplying jurisdiction. This Policy is in effect from the date it is signed by the Administratoruntil it is either amended or rescinded. In future years, Bonneville willannounce the submission dates and timeframe which a submittal is to cover.Section 3: Evaluation of Alternative Utility Plans An alternative utility plan is any plan which relies wholly or in parton an approach to conservation savings presented in Appendix 2, 4, 5, 6,or 7 of this Policy. These plans will be evaluated using three criteria:(1) Expected electrical savings, (2) enforcement, and (3) indoor air quality(IAQ) and ventilation. This section applies to all residential sector alternativeplans and those commercial sector alternative plans relying on the adoptionof commercial codes or commercial service standards. If Bonneville concludes that the utility's proposed alternative plan cannotbe accepted because of its failure to comply with any of the evaluationcriteria described below, Bonneville will allow a grace period lastingat least as long as Bonneville took to evaluate the utility's initial proposal.Any subsequent grace period(s) may be allowed on a case-by-case basis.A. <T3>Equivalent Electrical Savings.</T3> For the residential sector, ifa utility is proposing to achieve electrical savings by implementing analternative residential utility program, Bonneville will use the prospectivetotal electrical savings of its Super GOOD CENTS Program to determine whetherthe utility's proposed approach will at least meet the appropriate residentialelectrical savings level for the period of time covered by a utility'splan. Part of the equivalence determination procedure for an alterantiveresidential utility program will involve a comparison between the utility'sproposed marketing program and the marketing program they would have pursuedhad they enrolled in the Super GOOD CENTS program for the period of timecovered by the utility's plan. Utilities which rely on jurisdictional adoption of residential buildingcodes, or which impose a residential service standard, to achieve additionalenergy savings in the residential sector, will have to provide evidencesupporting the claim that the code (or service standard) can be judgedto be an equivalent code, as equivalence is defined in this Policy. Utilities which rely on jurisdictional adoption of residential <T3>and</T3> commercial codes (or which impose residential and commercialservice standards) to achieve additional savings beyond current practice,may ``tradeoff'' savings achieved in one sector towards a deficit in theother sector. The utility would have to present evidence supporting itsclaim that the residential and commercial codes, in aggregate, can be expectedto achieve at least the same total level of electrical savings as wouldhave been achieved had the jurisdiction adopted the Council's full illustrativecommercial and residential MCS for that climate zone. Such sectoral trade-offsare only allowed using enhanced building codes or service standards. In addition, a utility may obtain equivalent savings by allocating savingsachieved by advanced building codes in a jurisdiction (or jurisdictions)within its service area to its entire service area. Such ``jurisdictionaltrade-offs'' are only allowed where the utility shows that the full CouncilMCS level of savings for both sectors are being attained, in aggregate,within the utility's service area. Finally, those utilities relying on commercial code adoption by a jurisdictionwithin or covering their service area, or who will impose a commercialservice standard, will have to provide evidence supporting their claimthat the expected total electrical savings are at least equivalent to whatwould have been expected had the jurisdiction implemented the Council'sillustrative commercial MCS. The only exception to these requirements isfor utilities or jurisdictions who adopt a codified version of the Council'sMCS, as discussed in Appendices 4 and 6, respectively. Submittals in future years may be evaluated using different standards inthe event that code advancement occurs and/or the MCS are changed. Forthe plan coverage period indicated in Appendix 8, Bonneville will analyzeresidential electrical savings from an alternative plan by assuming that,in the absence of MCS, a residence would have been built to one of thefollowing: (a) In Oregon, 1983 energy code; (b) in Washington, 1983 energycode; or (c) in either Idaho or Montana, HUD Minimum Property Standards.Electrical savings in the commercial sector will be evaluated assuming:(a) 1986 code in Oregon and Washington, (b) National Energy code in Montana,and (c) individual jurisdiction codes in Idaho. All thermal performance evaluations will rely on accepted engineering practices.Bonneville will be guided by the assumptions, process, and housing prototypescontained in Bonneville's Code Equivalency Determination Procedures.B. <T3>Enforcement. </T3>A utility will have more discretion in proposingan approach which will meet the second evaluation criterion on enforcement.Bonneville is recommending that any customer contemplating submission ofan alternative utility plan refer to Bonneville's Super GOOD CENTS, NWECPand Commercial MCS Program descriptions for guidance. Alternative utilityplans, excluding an alternative utility commercial program, must containa requirement for site inspection consistent with the effective date ofthe surcharge. Referring to alternative utility programs, a utility will have to provideevidence adequate to assure Bonneville that the energy savings which arebeing claimed are attributable to the utility's program. Part of that evidenceis some enforcement method to assure that the conservation savings theutility is claiming are attributable to the measures they are promotingand inspecting. C. <T3>Indoor Air Quality and Ventilation. </T3>For residential constructionall alternative plans will be examined to determine if the constructionpractices being promoted or required, when combined with the comparablemonitoring, information, and mitigation strategies, are likely to assurethat IAQ and ventilation rates are comparable to what is achieved in homesconstructed to Super GOOD CENTS standards, which are designed to at leastmaintain 1983 levels of IAQ and ventilation. For the commercial sector, IAQ measures designed to at least maintain 1983levels of IAQ and ventilation are required. The IAQ requirements containedin the Council's Plan Amendment of March 1987 were designed to maintainthose levels of IAQ and ventilation. These same standards are containedin Bonneville's Energy Smart Design Program and the codified versions ofthe Council's commercial MCS. Section 4: Calculating a SurchargeA. Not less than 30 days prior to a final decision on the imposition ofa residential surcharge, the Administrator shall provide written noticeto the customer including determination of the amount of a customer's totalretail load in jurisdictions not covered by a Bonneville-approved MCS residentialplan. The amount of the total retail load in jurisdictions not coveredby a Bonneville-approved MCS residential plan shall be based on informationsubmitted by the utility in accordance with the reporting requirementslisted in section 2 of this policy. In the event that a utility has notprovided that information, the Administrator may rely on the best informationavailable to Bonneville. B. Not less than 30 days prior to a final decision on the imposition ofa commercial surcharge, the Administrator shall provide written noticeto the customer including a determination of the amount of a customer'stotal retail load in jurisdictions not covered by a Bonneville-approvedMCS commercial plan. The amount of the total retail load in jurisdictionsnot covered by a Bonneville-approved MCS commercial plan shall be basedon information submitted by the utility in accordance with the reportingrequirements listed in section 2 of this policy. In the event that a utilityhas not provided that information, the Administrator may rely on the bestinformation available to Bonneville. C. The fraction of a customer's total retail load in jurisdictions <T3>not </T3>covered by a Bonneville-approved MCS plan will be determinedby dividing the customer's total retail load in jurisdictions not coveredby a Bonneville-approved MCS plan, as determined in sections 4(A) and 4(B),by the customer's total retail load. D. The level of the surcharge for failure to implement the necessary Bonneville-approvedMCS plans is 10 percent multiplied by the fraction of a customer's totalretail load in jurisdictions <T3>not </T3>covered by a Bonneville-approved MCS plan, as determined insection 4(C). E. At no time will a customer simultaneously be assessed a surcharge forfailure of a jurisdiction to comply with the requirements in the residentialsector and a surcharge for failure of that same jurisdiction to complywith the requirements in the commercial sector. F. The customer and other interested parties shall be afforded an opportunityto provide comments regarding the determinations made in sections 4(A)to 4(D). Such comments may be made in writing or orally at a public meetingconvened by Bonneville at the request of the customer for this purpose.This public meeting will be held between the time of the written Noticeof Intent to Surcharge and the final surcharge decision. Included in theNotice of Intent to Surcharge will be an initial determination of the fractionof a customer's retail load subject to the surcharge, based on sections4(A) to 4(D). Following the receipt and evaluation of comments, the Administratorshall provide written notice to the customer of the final surcharge decision.G. Beginning with the effective date of a surcharge, the Administratorshall review the findings made in sections 4(A) to 4(D) after the customer,or a jurisdiction served by the customer, has taken an action that affectsthose findings. Customers may request such review by providing evidencein accordance with this section that the customer or a jurisdiction servedby that customer has taken actions subsequent to the effective date ofthe surcharge. Section 5: Collecting a Surcharge A. Those customers receiving a final written notice of a load subject toa surcharge shall be billed for the surcharge beginning with the firstfull billing period following issuance of such notice. B. Any power purchases or exchanges made on or after the effective dateof the surcharge, but before receipt of final notice finding the load subjectto a surcharge, may be retroactively billed to the effective date of thesurcharge. Such retroactive billing shall collect the retroactive surchargeover a like number of billing periods as elapsed from the effective dateof the surcharge to the receipt of final written notice of a surcharge.C. The level of surcharge is applied to all power purchases and/or exchangesmade by the customer under the applicable rate schedules and/or exchangespursuant to the residential Purchase and Sales Agreement/Exchange TransmissionCredit Agreement, using the Council's surcharge methodology, and is appliedsubsequent to any other rate adjustment.1. For firm requirements customers purchasing firm power under the rateschedules subject to the surcharge, the surcharge shall be applied monthlyto the billing charges for all power purchased under these rate schedulesduring the billing period.2. For customers participating in the residential exchange program, thesurcharge shall be applied to the charges for determining the cost to thepurchaser of buying firm power from Bonneville under the terms and conditionsof the Residential Purchase and Sale Agreement.3. For those firm requirements customers that both purchase power fromBonneville and participate in the Residential Purchase and Sales Agreementor Exchange Transmission Credit Agreement, the surcharge shall be appliedin the following manner to avoid surcharging the same load twice:a. All power purchases under a utility's Power Sales Contract at ratessubject to the surcharge shall include a surcharge, as calculated in theprevious section, added to the billing charges for the billing period;and,b. The surcharge applied to the utility's total exchange load shall beadjusted by multiplying the surcharge level by the percentage of a utility'sexchange load served by a utility's own resources. The percentage of exchangeload served by a utility's own resources shall be based on the differencebetween the utility's total retail load and firm power purchases from Bonnevilledivided by the total retail load and rounded to the nearest one-tenth ofa percent. The adjustment surcharge level shall be applied to the chargesfor determining the cost to the purchaser of buying firm power from Bonnevilleunder the terms and conditions of the Residential Purchase and Sales Agreementor in conformance with Exhibit E of the Exchange Transmission Credit Agreement.D. If a customer participating in the Residential Exchange is currentlyin a deemer status, the surcharge shall be accumulated in the account establishedfor this purpose as specified in the respective agreement and shall beincluded in the obligation a utility must repay prior to receiving a directpayment from Bonneville. If a customer is not in a deemer status, the surchargeshall be included in the determination of the net payment made by Bonneville.E. The collection of the surcharge shall continue until the Administratordetermines that the surcharge is no longer required under the terms ofthis Policy.F. Surcharges collected on purchases for periods in which loads are subsequentlyfound to be in compliance with this Policy shall be credited to the customerin the first full billing period following final written notice of suchfinding. Surcharges on loads which are subsequently found not to have beenin compliance with terms of this Policy for specified periods shall bebilled to the customer in the first full billing period following finalwritten notice of such findings.Appendix 1: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting the Bonneville/UtilityMCS Support ProgramA. <T3>Residential Sector. </T3>Bonneville customers opting for this pathare assured that enrollment in and subsequent good faith implementationof the Super GOOD CENTS Program throughout their service areas will resultin avoidance of a residential surcharge under the current Surcharge Policy.A customer which is considered a Super GOOD CENTS Program participant,but is only operating that program in a portion of its service area subjectto the Policy, will have to take actions to assure that those portionsof its service territory not covered by Super GOOD CENTS are covered bysome combination of the other conservation strategies presented in theseappendices. Those customers which implement the MCS measures containedin the Super GOOD CENTS Program, implement incentives equal to Bonneville'sSuper GOOD CENTS incentive level, and implement an advertising strategyconsidered by Bonneville to be consistent with the Super GOOD CENTS licensingand grant requirements will be considered a full participant in the SuperGOOD CENTS Program for purposes of Surcharge Policy compliance. A Bonneville-approvedadvertising strategy must include, but is not limited to, use of the SuperGOOD CENTS logo and participation in the regionwide Super GOOD CENTS advertisingcampaign, in a Bonneville-approved manner. Customers which choose to adoptan advertising strategy and/or incentives which Bonneville concludes arenot consistent with Super GOOD CENTS requirements for Policy compliancewill be treated as filing an alternative plan. Those customers should referto Appendix 2 for a discussion of that option.For customers which on average over the last 3 years have had no more than(a) five site-built housing starts, and (b) 2,000 residential accountswill be considered small utilities for purposes of this policy. These utilitieswill have the option of enrolling in Bonneville's Super GOOD CENTS Programfor small utilities, referred to as the Small Utility Program. If a utilitybelieves it qualifies for this option, the utility is encouraged to contactthe nearest Bonneville Area or District Office to obtain more informationon this program option.If a customer is currently relying on Super GOOD CENTS participation tocomply with the Policy, the utility's submittal for the plan coverage periodindicated in Appendix 8 can consist of a letter indicating that the utilityplans to continue participation in Super GOOD CENTS for that period oftime.Otherwise, those customers wishing to enroll in Super GOOD CENTS as a wayof avoiding a surcharge must indicate this to Bonneville by the plan submissiondate indicated in Appendix 8. In addition, the utility shall have signeda Super GOOD CENTS grant agreement by the plan implementation date indicatedin Appendix 8. Bonneville will consider Super GOOD CENTS Program implementationto have occurred when the utility is engaging in activities, particularlymarketing and promotion activities, which can be considered consistentwith the utility's agreement.Bonneville will consider offering a grace period if Bonneville has notcompleted the customer's Super GOOD CENTS grant award by the plan implementationdate indicated in Appendix 8. Any such grace period will be provided inthe event that Bonneville has received a plan by the plan submission dateindicated in Appendix 8, and the approval delay is due solely to Bonnevilleinternal delay.Finally, as is indicated in the Super GOOD CENTS Program, participantsare to submit the following data:1. Total number of new homes (all fuels) constructed in the utility's servicearea during the past calendar year (single-family broken out by site built,modular, and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).2. Total number of new electrically heated homes constructed in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year (single-family broken out bysite built, modular, and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).3. Total number of new electrically heated homes constructed, in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year, to the standard(s) describedin the customer's plan (single-family broken out by site built, modular,and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).To comply with the Policy, customers are to collect and provide that datato Bonneville by January 30 of the following year.B. <T3>Commercial Sector</T3>. Bonneville customers opting for this path areassured that enrollment in, and subsequent good faith implementation ofBonneville's Smart Design Program throughout the utility's service areawill result in avoidance of a commercial surcharge under the current SurchargePolicy. All customers wishing to avoid a surcharge under this path mustagree to comply with the IAQ and data reporting requirements and othertechnical specifications of that program, applicable to the customer.If a customer is currently relying on Smart Design participation to complywith the Policy, the utility's submittal can consist of a letter indicatingthat the utility plans to continue participation in Smart Design for theplan coverage period indicated in Appendix 8.Those new customers electing to participate in Smart Design to comply withthe Policy must agree by the plan submission date indicated in Appendix8 to enroll in the commercial program and must have enrolled in the programno later than the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8. Bonnevillewill consider offering a grace period if Bonneville has not completed thecustomer's grant award, if applicable, by the plan implementation dateindicated in Appendix 8. Any such grace period will be provided in theevent that Bonneville had received a plan by the plan submission date indicatedin Appendix 8 and the approval delay is due solely to Bonneville internaldelay.Appendix 2: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting an Alternative UtilityProgramIf a utility is currently relying on an approved alternative plan to complywith the Policy, for either or both the residential and commercial sectors,the utility can submit a letter indicating its intentions to continue torely on that approach for the plan coverage period indicated in Appendix8.A. <T3>Residential</T3>. An Alternative Utility Residential Program is thecustomer's proposed approach to meeting the standards of Bonneville's SuperGOOD CENTS Program. In order for Bonneville to verify that the proposedprogram will provide equivalent savings, the information listed below mustbe submitted.1. The conservation measures that will be promoted.2. Analysis of the thermal performance of the conservation measures usingBonneville's input assumptions and Bonneville prototypes. These resultswill be compared to the Super GOOD CENTS illustrative path for that climatezone, using a WATTSUN analysis. If alternative assumptions or prototypesare used, acceptance of those alternative assumptions or prototypes willdepend on the general acceptability of the assumptions and whether theprototypes represent typical dwellings certified in the utility's servicearea.3. A list of activities to be undertaken to achieve the targeted penetration,such as: promotion and sales, advertising, incentives (type and level),technical assistance, certification, and any other applicable information.In addition, customers will be required to submit quarterly reports listingthe activities undertaken and resources utilized in the marketing effort.4. A plan showing how the utility will collect and provide the followingdata to Bonneville by January 30 of the following year:a. Total number of new homes (all fuels) constructed in the utility's servicearea during the past calendar year (single-family broken out by site built,modular, and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).b. Total number of new electrically heated homes constructed in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year (single-family broken out bysite built, modular, and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).c. Total number of new electrically heated homes constructed, in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year, to the standard(s) describedin the customer's plan (single-family broken out by site built, modular,and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).5. Information on how the utility and/or jurisdiction plans to achieveIAQ and ventilation rates at least comparable to those achieved in SuperGOOD CENTS homes, which are designed to at least maintain 1983 levels ofIAQ and ventilation.The Alternative Utility Program path is not generally recommended for utilitieswithout prior experience in operating such programs. An established trackrecord with a well-defined package of measures will be extremely helpful,if not essential, in obtaining Bonneville approval for Alternative UtilityPrograms. Nonetheless, Bonneville staff will work with customers interestedin pursuing this path to help explain the data submission requirementsand other complexities involved in this approach.Because of these complexities, utilities intending to use this path forpolicy compliance should submit their proposals to Bonneville at the earliestpossible data after the final adoption of the Surcharge Policy. An approvedprogram shall be implemented by the plan implementation date indicatedin Appendix 8, unless a grace period, as provided for in section 3 of thePolicy, has been granted.B. <T3>Commercial</T3>. An alternative Utility Commercial Program is the customer'sproposed approach to meeting the standards of the Bonneville/Utility CommercialMCS Program. A proposed alternative program will be evaluated relativeto the: (1) Level and type of activities and services to be offered, (2)method of marketing and performing the services, (3) penetration levelsexpected for the proposed program activities, and (4) proposed inspectionmethod. The types of design assistance offered in Bonneville's programwill be used to evaluate the type of design assistance a utility is proposingto offer in its own commercial MCS design assistance progrram. The typesof design assistance which Bonneville's Commercial MCS Program containsare:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Promotion of services to commercial customers;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Screening to determine design assistance needs;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Depending on the size of the utility and the type of commercial construction,provision of building design handbooks, computer energy modeling, clearinghousereferral, or other building design analysis; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Designer recognition for specified levels of energy efficiency</ITAG>To perform the necessary review, Bonneville will require the followinginformation:1. A list of activities and services the customer intends to offer (e.g.,modeling, design assistance, design handbook, information services, andtraining opportunities) to achieve the targeted penetration;2. Management and oversight consistent with Bonneville practices;3. A proposed method to submit to Bonneville quarterly reports listingthe activities undertaken and resources used in the marketing effort;4. A plan showing how the utility will collect and provide the followingdata to Bonneville by January 30 of the following year:a. Total number of new commercial buildings, major remodels, and retrofits(all fuels) constructed in the utility's service area during the past calendaryear, listed by Bonneville prototype;b. Total number of electrically heated newly constructed, major remodels,and retrofit commercial buildings in the utility's service area duringthe past calendar year, listed by Bonneville prototype; andc. Total number of electrically heated newly constructed commercial buildings,major remodels, and retrofits, in the utility's service area during thepast calendar year, to the standard(s) described in the customer's plan,listed by Bonneville prototype.Those customers intending to use this path for Surcharge Policy complianceshall submit their proposed plan by the plan implementation date indicatedin Appendix 8, and shall have implemented the approved program no laterthan the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8, unless a graceperiod, provided for in section 3 of the policy has been granted. Appendix 3: Achieving Electrical Savings by Participating in the NorthwestEnergy Code Program (NWECP)This is a pre-approved path for avoidance of the surcharge if all the jurisdictionswithin the customer's service area, subject to the Surcharge Policy, areNWECP (formerly Early Adopter Program) participants. Except for the oneexception noted below, if there are jurisdictions within a customer's servicearea which are not NWECP participants, then the customer will be subjectto a surcharge unless those jurisdictions have implemented a Bonneville-approvedbuilding code or the utility has implemented a Bonneville-approved utilityprogram or a Bonneville-approved service standard.Customers serving areas containing jurisdictions that have adopted advancedbuilding codes may seek to allocate savings achieved by those jurisdictionalcodes to portions of their service areas not covered by another approvedoption. This will be permitted only if the utility shows that the fullCouncil MCS level of savings for both sectors are being attained, in aggregate,within that utility's service areas. In other words, the utility must achieveat least the same level of total electrical savings as would be achievedhad the Council's full commercial and residential MCS been implementedthroughout the utility's service areas.The essential feature of the NWECP is the adoption by a jurisdiction ofthe MCS contained in the NWECP description. Additional program featuresinclude specific activities to ensure that no degradation in IAQ results,some form of enforcement method to assure MCS construction, and some datareporting requirements.A customer currently relying on jurisdictional participation in the NWECPas at least part of its Policy compliance approach, must submit a letterby the plan implementation date shown in Appendix 8 indicating that itwishes to continue to rely on that program participation to comply withthe Policy for the plan coverage period indicated in Appendix 8.A. <T3>Residential.</T3> 1. Customers with jurisdictions within their servicearea that are currently participating in the NWECP, must submit a letterindicating: (a) The jurisdictions that are NWECP participants, and (b)the award number for each jurisdiction. In addition, customers must indicatewhat fraction of its retail residential load lies within NWECP jurisdictions.This information shall be submitted to Bonneville by the plan submissiondate indicated in Appendix 8.2. Any jurisdiction considering adoption shall adopt and enforce the codeby the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8, for the utilityto avoid a surcharge, if the utility will not be operating an approvedutility MCS program or residential service standard at that time.3. Bonneville will consider offering a grace period if Bonneville has notcompleted the NWECP grant award process by the plan implementation dateindicated in Appendix 8. Any such grace period will be considered in theevent that Bonneville has received a plan by the plan submission date indicatedin Appendix 8, and the approval delay is due to Bonneville internal delayalone.4. Finally, the utility shall collect and provide to Bonneville the followingdata by January 30 of the following year:a. Total number of new homes (all fuels) constructed in the utility's servicearea during the past calendar year (single-family broken out by site built,modular, and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).b. Total number of new electrically heated homes constructed in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year (single-family broken out bysite built, modular, and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).c. Total number of new electrically heated homes constructed, in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year, to the standard(s) describedin the customer's plan (single-family broken out by site built, modular,and HUD-code homes, and total multi-family units).Customers who are operating a utility program and/or a utility servicestandard should take all necessary steps in order to avoid double-countingwhen reporting the above information.B. <T3>Commercial.</T3> 1. To avoid a surcharge, customers with jurisdictionswithin their service area considering enrolling in this program shall notifyBonneville by the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8, ofthe jurisdiction's intent to enroll in the program. The jurisdiction shallhave officially adopted and be able to enforce the MCS by the plan implementationdate indicated in Appendix 8, if the utility is not operating an approvedCommercial MCS Program or commercial service standard.2. Customers with jurisdictions within their service area that are currentlyparticipating in the NWECP, shall provide a copy of Bonneville's letterof approval or grant award number.3. Finally, the utility shall collect and provide to Bonneville by January30 of the following year:a. Total number of new commercial buildings, major remodels, and retrofits(all fuels) constructed in the utility's service area during the past calendaryear.b. Total number of electrically heated newly constructed, major remodels,and retrofits commercial buildings constructed in the utility's servicearea during the past calendar year.c. Total number of newly constructed, major remodels, and retrofit commercialbuildings in the utility's service area during the past calendar year,to the standard(s) described in the customer's plan, broken out by Bonnevilleprototype.Customers who are operating a utility program and/or a utility servicestandard should take all necessary steps in order to avoid double-countingwhen reporting the above information.Those customers wishing to avoid a surcharge under this path shall agreeby the plan submission date indicated in Appendix 8, to enroll in the commercialprogram and shall have enrolled in the program no later than the plan implementationdate indicated in Appendix 8. Bonneville will consider offering a graceperiod if Bonneville has not completed its NWECP grant award process bythe plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8. Any such grace periodwill be considered in the event that Bonneville has received a plan bythe plan submission date indicated in Appendix 8, and the approval delayis due to Bonneville internal delay alone.NWECP application materials can be obtained by contacting your nearestBonneville Area or District Office.Appendix 4: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting a Codified Versionof the MCSA. <T3>Residential. </T3>Several codified versions of the MCS have been developed.These are pre-approved codified versions of the Council's illustrativeMCS paths. The options discussed in this appendix pertain to jurisdictionsconsidering adopting, or who have adopted a codified version of the MCS,but are not participating in the NWECP.Under this alternative, the customer must submit the codified version ofthe MCS which any jurisdiction in its service area is proposing for adoptionor which has been adopted. The enforcement methods should be specified.The statute or ordinance shall have been adopted and enforced by the planimplementation date indicated in Appendix 8, unless a grace period, asprovided for in section 3 of the Policy, has been granted.Finally, the utility shall collect and provide to Bonneville the followingdata by January 30 of the following year:a. Total number of new homes (all fuels) constructed in the utility's servicearea during the past calendar year (broken out by site built, modular,and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).b. Total number of new electrically heated homes constructed in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year (broken out by site built, modular,and HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).c. Total number of new electrically heated buildings constructed in theutility's service area during the past calendar year to the standard(s)described in the customer's plan (broken out by site built, modular, andHUD-code homes, and total multifamily units).Customers who are operating a utility program and/or utility service standardshould take all necessary steps in order to avoid double-counting whenreporting the above information.B. <T3>Commercial. </T3>Under this alternative, the customer must submit thecodified version of the MCS which a jurisdiction in its service area isproposing for adoption or which has been adopted. The enforcement methodsmust be specified. In addition, the customer must indicate what steps thejurisdiction will will take to address IAQ and ventilation requirementsof Bonneville's NWECP.By the plan submission date indicated to Appendix 8, the customer mustsubmit the above information to Bonneville. The statute or ordinance mustbe operative no later than the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix8, unless a grace period, as provided for in Section 3 of the policy, hasbeen granted.Finally, the utility shall collect and provide the following data to Bonnevilleby January 30 of the following year:1. Total number of newly constructed, major remodels, and retrofitted (allfuels) commercial buildings in the utility's service area during the pastcalendar year.2. Total number of electrically heated newly constructed, remodeled, andretrofitted commercial buildings in the utility's service area during thepast calendar year.3. Total number of electrically heated new, remodeled, and retrofittedcommercial buildings in the utility's service area during the past calendaryear, to the standard(s) described in the customer's plan, broken out byBonneville prototype.Appendix 5: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting Alternative or EquivalentBuilding CodesAn alternative code is designed to achieve total electrical savings which,when both sector's savings are combined, are at least as large as the electricalsavings expected had the Council's residential and commercial MCS beenimplemented. A jurisdiction proposing to adopt an alternative code, inwhich one sectors' total electrical savings is expected to exceed the targetelectrical savings level for that sector, can use those excess electricalsavings to offset electrical savings below the target in the other sector.The alternative code path may be pursued by a jurisdiction only when thesum of each sectors' savings at least equals the aggregate electrical savingstarget, which itself is based on the sum of the level of savings for thetwo sectors calculated using the Council's MCS. Section 3 of this policydiscusses how the utility should approach the electrical savings equivalencyanalysis.As compared to alternative codes, equivalent codes examine each sectorindividually. They differ from the pre-approved codified versions mentionedearlier, but provide equivalent savings. For a code to be judged equivalentto the MCS, it must meet the definition of equivalence as used in thisPolicy.A customer must submit a copy of the alternative or equivalent code whicha jurisdiction has proposed. In addition, the customer must indicate howthe jurisdiction plans on maintaining IAQ and ventilation at 1983 levels.Bonneville staff will attempt to assist customers and jurisdictions wishingto formulate improved building codes.If an alternative code path is pursued, customers are encouraged to submittheir alternative codes at the earliest possible date, but no later thanthe plan submission date indicated in Appendix 8. Both codes would haveto be implemented and enforced by the plan implementation date indicatedin Appendix 8.A customer currently relying on jurisdictional participation in the NWECPas at least part of its Policy compliance approach must submit a letterindicating that it intends to continue to rely on that program participationto comply with the Policy for the plan coverage period indicated in Appendix8.For either the equivalent or alternative code approaches, the customermust submit its residential and commercial plans by the plan submissiondate indicated in Appendix 8. The codes must be implemented and enforcedby the plan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8, unless a graceperiod, as provided for in section 3 of the Policy, has been granted. Finally,the utility shall collect and provide to Bonneville by January 30 of thefollowing year:A. Total new homes (broken out by site built, modular, HUD-code homes,and total multifamily units) and commercial buildings, (new, major remodels,and retrofits) (all fuels) constructed in the utility's service area duringthe past calendar year.B. Total new electrically heated homes (broken out by single-family modular,HUD-code homes, site built, and multifamily) and commercial buildings (newconstruction, retrofits, and remodels) in the utility's service area duringthe past calendar year. C. Total new electrically heated homes (broken out by single-family modular,HUD-code homes, site built, and total multifamily) and commercial buildings(broken out by new construction, major remodels, and retrofits by Bonnevilleprototye by square footage) in the utility's service area during the pastcalendar year, to the standard(s) described in the customer's plan. Customers who are operating a utility program and/or a utility servicestandard should take all necessary steps in order to avoid double-countingwhen reporting the above information. For a more complete discussion of the data required to evaluate an alternativeor equivalent code, refer to the latest version of Bonneville's MCS CodeEquivalency Determination Procedures. A copy of these procedures can beobtained by contacting your nearest Bonneville Area or District Office.Appendix 6: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting a Codified Versionof the MCS as a Utility Service Standard\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Many customers have questioned whether they have legalauthority, under State laws to impose such a service requirement. Bonnevillehas examined this question under the State laws of Oregon, Washington,Idaho, and Montana and has reached the tenative conclusion that no clearlegal impediments exists in these States to conservation-oriented utilityservice requirements. While Bonneville does not offer legal advice to customers,particularly on questions of State law, Bonneville legal staff are availableto discuss these preliminary conclusions with customers and their legalcounsel. Any utility considering such a path should obtain independentlegal advice on this question. If a utility is currently relying on a utility service standard as at leastpart of its Policy compliance appraoch, all the utility need do is submita letter indicating that it wishes to continue to rely on that approachto comply with the Policy for the plan coverage period indicated in Appendix8.A. <T3>Residential. </T3>This path essentially involves adoption of a legalenforceable electric utility hook-up standard for new electrically heatedresidential buildings. The customer would simply decline to serve new electricallyheated buildings not built to the standard's specifications. A grace periodwould be allowed for buildings considered by Bonneville to be ``under construction''at the time the standard was adopted. The adoption of a utility servicestandard may qualify the utility for participation in Bonneville's NWECP.Customers wishing to avoid a surcharge with this approach shall submita residential plan by the plan submission date indicated in Appendix 8,and the residential service standard shall be adopted and enforced by theplan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8. A plan must contain:(1) A copy of the standard to be imposed, (2) how the customer plans onmonitoring compliance with the standard, and (3) what IAQ measures andactivities will be pursued to at least achieve IAQ and ventilation levelsof Super GOOD CENTS construction, which is designed to at least maintain1983 levels of IAQ and ventilation. No surcharge will be imposed on any customer relying on such a servicerequirement which is subsequently enjoined or invalidated by a court. Insuch an event, the customer will be given a reasonable period of time tochose and implement another option. Finally, the customer shall submit to Bonneville the following data byJanuary 30 of the following year: 1. Total new homes (all fuels) constructed in the utility's service areaduring the past calendar year (broken out by single-family modular, HUD-codehomes, site built, and multifamily).2. Total new electrically heated homes constructed in the utility's servicearea during the past calendar year (broken out by single-family modular,HUD-code homes, site built, and multifamily).3. Total new electrically heated homes constructed in the utility's servicearea during the past calendar year to the standard(s) described in thecustomer's (broken out by single-family modular, HUD-code homes, site built,and multifamily).B. <T3>Commercial. </T3> This path essentially involves adoption of a legallyenforceable electric utility hook-up standard for new electrically heatedcommercial buildings at least equal to the Council's commercial MCS. Thecustomer would simply decline to serve new electrically heated buildingsnot built to the standard's specifications. A grace period would be allowedfor buildings considered by Bonneville to be ``under construction'' atthe time the standard was adopted. Customers wishing to avoid a surcharge with this approach shall submita commercial plan by the plan submission date indicated in Appendix 8,and the commercial service standard shall be adopted and enforced by theplan implementation date indicated in Appendix 8, unless a grace period,as provided for in section 3 of the policy, has been granted. A plan must:(1) Contain a copy of the standard to be imposed, and (2) indicate howthe customer plans on monitoring compliance with the standard. No surcharge will be imposed on any customer relying on such a servicerequirements which is subsequently enjoined or invalidated by a court.In such an event, the customer will be given a reasonable period of timeto choose and implement another option. Finally, the customer shall submit to Bonneville the following data byJanuary 30 of the following year:1. Total new commercial buildings, major remodels, and retrofits (all fuels)constructed in the utility's service area during the past calendar year.2. Total electrically heated new, remodeled, and retrofitted commercialbuildings constructed in the utility's service area during the past calendaryear (broken out by Bonneville prototype).3. Total electrically heated new, remodeled, and retrofitted commercialbuildings constructed in the utility's service area during the past calendaryear, to the standard(s) described in the customer's plan (broken out byBonneville prototype).Appendix 7: Achieving Electrical Savings by Adopting an Alternative orEquivalent Utility Service StandardThis path is actually two alternative paths. If an equivalent utility servicestandard approach is pursued, a customer may choose to adopt a utilityservice standard which is not one of the codified versions, but which isdetermined to be equivalent to the Council's MCS, as equivalence is definedin this Policy. Alternatively, the customer may choose to adopt utilityservice standards for the residential and commercial sectors which whentaken together, achieves at least the same level of total electrical savingsas would have been achieved had the customer adopted the Council's commercialand residential MCS. This latter option is referred to as an alternativeutility service standard.If a utility is currently relying on a utility service standard as at leastpart of its Policy compliance approach, all the utility need do is submita letter indicating that it wishes to continue to rely on that approachto comply with the Policy for the plan coverage period indicated in Appendix8.If an alternative or equivalent utility service standard approach is pursued,a customer shall submit to Bonneville: (1) A copy of the proposed servicestandard(s); (2) a description of the enforcement method(s); (3) a descriptionof the methods used to at least achieve IAQ and ventilation levels of SuperGOOD CENTS construction, which is designed to at least maintain 1983 levelsof IAQ and ventilation; and (4) a copy of the analysis used to verify thatthe proposed service standard(s) will achieve the required total electricalsavings. This material shall be submitted by the plan submission date indicatedin Appendix 8, and both service standards shall be adopted and enforcedby the plan implentation date indicated in Appendix 8.Finally, the customer shall submit to Bonneville the follwing data by January30 of the following year:A. Total new homes (broken out by site built, modular, HUD-code homes,and total multifamily units) and commercial buildings (all fuels brokenout by new construction, major remodels, and retrofits) in the utility'sservice area during the past calendar year.B. Total new electrically heated homes (for single-family, broken out bysite built, modular, HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units) and commercialbuildings (broken out by new construction, remodel, and retrofits) in theutility's service areas during the past calendar year.C. Total new electrically heated homes (for single-family, broken out bysite built, modular, HUD-code homes, and total multifamily units) and commercialbuildings (new construction, remodels, and retrofits) constructed in theutility's service area during the past calendar year, to the standard(s)described in the customer's plan by Bonneville prototype).For a detailed description of the data required to evaluate an alternativeor equivalent code, and the evaluation criteria, the customer and/or jurisdictionis advised to consult the latest version of Bonneville's MCS Code EquivalencyDetermination Procedures. A copy of these procedures can be obtained bycontacting your local Bonneville Area or District Office.Appendix 8: Submittal and Implementation Schedule for MCS Surcharge Policy.<ITAG tagnum="15">Plan Submission Date: December 16, 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Plan Implementation Date: January 16, 1989</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Plan Coverage Period: Calendar Year 1989</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Portland, Oregon, on February 28, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Steven G. Hickok,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Executive Assistant Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-5746 Filed 3-8-89; 4:56 pm]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6450-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>