<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89927-0048 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-27-89.f2.A1047</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Finding of No Significant Impact; SP-100 GES Test, Hanford Site, Richland,Washington</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Department of Energy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Finding of no significant impact.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Department of Energy (DOE) has prepared an environmentalassessment (EA) for the proposed ground testing of a prototype space nuclearreactor in a modified reactor containment building, Building 309, at theDOE Hanford Site, near Richland, Washington (DOE/EA-0318). The proposedaction, the SP-100 Ground Engineering System (GES) test, is an importantpart of an overall program to develop nuclear reactor power system technologyfor use in space.Based on the analyses in the EA, DOE issued a proposed finding of no significantimpact (FONSI) on December 15, 1988, and distributed the EA and proposedFONSI for a 30-day public review period. The review period was later extendedto 45 days.Twenty-four people provided comments on the proposed FONSI and EA. Theircomments addressed several topics including: DOE's interpretation of theNational Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) requirements (i.e., whetheran EA or environmental impact statement (EIS) was appropriate for the proposedaction); safety and safeguard requirements; potential uses of the SP-100technology; accident analyses; and several specific technical questionsrelating to the operation and testing of the prototype reactor. A summaryof the comments and responses to these comments follow the text of theFONSI as an attachment. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Servicesreviewed the EA sections on readiological implications and found ``* ** the proposed measures in these sections appear to be adequate for protectinghuman health.'' No other Federal agencies responded.DOE has reviewed the comments received and has concluded that no new informationhas been made available which would change the determination that the proposedaction does not constitute a major Federal action significantly affectingthe quality of the human environment within the meaning of NEPA, 42 U.S.C.4321 <T3>et seq. </T3>Therefore, an EIS will not be prepared.<T3>Copies of the EA available from: </T3>John R. Hunter, Director, OperationsDivision, U.S. Department of Energy, Richland Operations Office, P.O. Box550, Richland, WA 99352, (509) 376-7471.<T3>For Further Information About the Proposed Action Contact: </T3>EarlWahlquist, Director, Office of Defense Energy Projects, U.S. Departmentof Energy, 19901 Germantown Road, Germantown, MD 20545, (301) 353-3321.<T3>For Further Information on the NEPA Process Contact: </T3>Carol Borgstrom,Director, Office of NEPA Project Assitance, U.S. Department of Energy,1000 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20585, (202) 586-4600.Description of the Proposed ActionThe DOE, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), andthe Department of Defense (DOD) have entered into an agreement to jointlydevelop nuclear reactor power system technology for use in space. The purposeof the overall SP-100 program is to develop safe, compact, lightweight,durable, space reactor power system technology that can provide electricalpower in the range of 10s to 100s of kilowatts for a broad class of emergingmilitary and civilian space missions in the mid-1990s and beyond. DOE hasprimary responsibility for developing and ground testing the nuclear reactorpower system within the SP-100 GES test element of the total SP-100 program.DOE plans to ground test the nuclear reactor portions of the power systemat the DOE Hanford Site near Richland, Washington. Modification of an existing70 megawatt (MW) thermal reactor containment building (the decommissionedPlutonium Recycle Test Reactor (PRTR) containment building_Building 309)for the test will be required. The total SP-100 GES test duration consistingof facility engineering, construction, testing, and decommissioning isexpected to last 9 years. Building 309 will be modified to support 2 yearsof reactor operations, but it is anticipated that actual reactor operationswould last less than 2 years.The SP-100 reactor, as designed, is a low pressure 2.5 MW fast reactor,fueled with uranium nitride as the heat source and cooled by liquid lithium.The nuclear reactor portions of the power system proposed for testing inBuilding 309 include: the SP-100 nuclear reactor, instrumentation and controls,the primary heat transport loop, and radiation shield subsystems.The SP-100 flight system is being designed to ensure the safety of thegeneral public and mission personnel during normal operation and in theevent of low probability launch vehicle accidents, flight malfunctions,and inadvertent reentry.A ground test of the assembled nuclear reactor power subsystem describedabove will be conducted at the Hanford Site to confirm the ability of thenuclear reactor power system to meet design requirements. The ground testwill verify performance, reliability, and safety parameters of the nuclearreactor power system design. The date acquired during ground testing willassist in assuring safety and performance in the design of future flightsystems.Following the test, it is anticipated that the reactor and associated hardwarewould be disposed of as low-level waste on the Hanford Site and that theenriched fuel material would be reprocessed and reused. Any transuranicwaste material generated from reprocessing will be stored on the HanfordSite and ultimately sent to the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) in NewMexico when it receives final authorization as a disposal facility. Analternative to reprocessing would be final disposal of the spent fuel ata DOE geologic repository constructed pursuant to the Nuclear Waste PolicyAmendments Act. Test facility systems external to the reactor and associatedhardware will be put in a safe condition pending future use or ultimatedecommissioning. Alternatives for post-operation decontamination and decommissioningof Building 309 are still under review.<ITAG tagnum="84">Alternatives</ITAG>Consideration of alternatives to the proposed action, the ground test ofthe prototype SP-100 space reactor in Building 309 at the Hanford Site,included evaluation of alternative power system concepts, ground test sitesother than the Hanford Site, evaluation of other potential test locationson the Hanford Site, and evaluation of the no-action alternative_no groundtesting of the SP-100 reactor.Four power system concepts were evaluated during Phase I of the SP-100program. Design characteristics identified as part of the SP-100 systemselection process included surety, performance, growth (to accommodatevarying mission power requirements), survivability, cost/shcedule, userinterface, and operations criteria. Evaluation objectives of the suretycharacteristic included health, safety, and environmental factors.Four of the seven competing design characteristics (surety, survivability,user interface, and operations criteria) were found to be nondiscriminatorsamong the four alternative system concepts. Therefore, although safetyand environmental considerations were thoroughly considered throughoutthe system concept selection process, the final selection was driven bythe design characteristics relating to performance, growth, and cost/schedule.Five DOE laboratory sites were considered for the ground testing of theprototype SP-100 reactor system. The site evaluation process consideredfacilities and equipment, ability to obtain approval to operate, personneland organization effectiveness, integration with other site and programactivities, and management commitment. The approval-to-operate criterionaddressed site-specific environmental considerations. The evaluation concludedthat environmental considerations were not governing in the selection ofthe site. The evaluation narrowed the choice for the final selection totwo sites, the Hanford Site and the Idaho Nuclear Engineering Laboratoryin southeastern Idaho. The Hanford Site was selected as the preferred testsite based on programmatic considerations.Building 309 was one of ten potential facilities considered at the HanfordSite for the SP-100 GES test. Hanford Site facilities were examined forsuitability based on operational, safety, safeguards, and environmentalcharacteristics. Building 309 was identified as the best Hanford Site facilityfor the proposed action based on the existing containment building, theease with which the facility could be upgraded to meet current environmentaland safety standards, and the overall ability to support program objectives.The no-action alternative would eliminate ground testing of the SP-100reactor and associated systems. Onsite environmental effects describedin the EA would not occur but the impact to the SP-100 program would bedevelopment of a flight system with inadequate ground-based verificationof operational and safety functions. <ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Impacts </ITAG>The proposed SP-100 GES test (maximum rating of 2.5 MW thermal, low pressurecoolant system) will be located at the Hanford Site in existing containmentBuilding 309. Building 309 was designed and built as a high pressure containmentfor the now decommissioned Plutonium Recycle Test Reactor, a pressurizedwater cooled, 70 MW thermal reactor. SP-100 reactor heat will be rejectedby dump heat exchangers that will transfer heat from the secondary sodiumcoolant to air. Building 309 consists of a welded steel containment vessel, three below-gradeprocess cells (A, B, and C), and an attached services and utilities building.The containment vessel is lined by a concrete cylindrical shielding wallup to four feet thick that is in common with each of three process cells.The SP-100 GES nuclear reactor assembly and vacuum vessel will be locatedin cell A. Auxiliary systems will be in cells A, B, and C as well as outsidecontainment and in the basement of the attached services building. ExistingHanford 300 Area utilities are adequate or will require only minor upgradesor extensions to support the SP-100 GES test. The estimated SP-100 GEStest peak work force at the Hanford Site would be less than 100 people;less than 1 percent of current Hanford Site employment (about 12,000) andlocal area employment (about 75,000). No significant construction impactswould occur. The SP-100 GES test program will routinely release small quantities ofgaseous radioactive argon-41 and tritium (hydrogen-3). The projected annualairborne release of argon-41 is 3.7 curies and the projected release oftritium is 0.047 curies. The maximum whole body dose commitment to thenearest resident from these releases is projected to be 0.00045 mrem. the50-year whole body dose commitment for the population within 83 kilometers(50 miles) is projected to be 0.0027 person-rem. The maximum off-site (public)individual whole body dose commitment is significantly smaller than theregulatory (40 CFR 61.92) limit of 25 mrem/year whole body dose commitmentand the annual dose from background radiation of 100 mrem. The SP-100 GEStest in Building 309 is being designed using the latest technology andwith the design objective that no employee would be expected to receivea dose greater than 1 rem/year in normally occupied zones or during anticipatedmaintenance. Actual radiation exposure would be considerately less than1 rem/year as a result of a DOE mandate to maintain radiation exposuresas-low-as-reasonably-achievable (ALARA). The SP-100 GES test activities will result in thermal discharges to theatmosphere. Reactor heat (up to 2.5 MW thermal) will be dissipated to theatmosphere using forced-air dump heat exchangers. In addition, air conditioningwill be provided to remove heat from support areas. The potential effectsof thermal discharges were analyzed by comparing the quantities to thosedischarged by the Fast Flux Test Facility (FFTF) located in the HanfordSite 400 Area. Although the FFTF rejects 160 times as much reactor heatas that projected for the SP-100 test facilities, no significant environmentalconsequences beyond the immediate FFTF area have occurred. Based on thiscomparison, minimal effect is expected within the immediate vicinity ofthe SP-100 GES test area. SP-100 GES test activities will generate hazardous, radioactive, and mixedwaste. The estimated annual radioactive solid waste volume is less than1,000 cubic feet or 7 percent of the total presently generated in the Hanford300 Area. The minimal radioactive liquid waste that will be generated (lessthan 300 gallons per year) will be solidified and disposed of as low-levelsolid radioactive waste (included in the 1,000 cubic feet discussed above).No liquid waste will be disposed of to the soil. Disposal of low-levelradioactive and mixed solid waste will be accomplished by burial in theHanford 200 Area Burial Ground. The amount of low-level radioactive andmixed solid waste projected amounts to less than 1 percent of the totalvolume presently handled by the Hanford 200 Area Burial Ground. Hazardous material use will consist primarily of liquid alkali metals forcooling media and solid beryllium oxide as a reactor reflector. Building309 will be modified to contain liquid metals and to minimize the effectsof any liquid metal leakage. Commonly used hazardous materials, such asethylene glycol, may be selected as the cooling medium in air conditioningsystems. No normal release mechanism resulting in environmental impactwas identified for any of these substances. The SP-100 GES test facility is being designed to preclude routine particulatematerial releases to the environment. Particulate material in the formof liquid metal aerosols, which might result from an accidental sodiumor lithium fire, will be precluded. Design features are being incorporatedto limit leakage of alkali metal and to prevent fire if a leak did occur,thereby precluding the generation and release of particulate material.Analyses show that no risk to the general public would result from particulatematerial. Analyses of accidental radionuclide releases, including extreme cases,show that the modified Building 309 facility meets DOE siting and safetycriteria. Three extremely low probability accident scenarios (10^6 to 10^8probability) were chosen as bounding events for assessing environmentalimpact. One of these accident scenarios was a sodium leak from the secondarycoolant system with a resulting fire. For this scenario, the calculatedoffsite (public) maximum individual whole body dose is 0.021 rem and thecalculated onsite (worker) individual maximum whole body dose is 0.19 rem.The calculated corresponding whole body population dose commitment is 0.53person-rem. A second accident scenario evaluated was an accidental releaseof tritium from the tritium removal system. For this scenario, the calculatedoffsite maximum individual whole body dose is 0.22 rem, and the calculatedonsite individual whole body dose is 2 rem. The calculated correspondingwhole body population dose commitment is 5.6 person-rems. The third accidentscenario evaluated was an irradiated fuel handling accident following extendedoperation and cooldown. For this scenario, the calculated offsite maximumindividual whole body dose is 0.00048 rem and the calculated onsite individualwhole body dose is 0.0042 rem. The calculated corresponding whole bodypopulation dose commitment is 0.17 person-rem. A severe (beyond design basis) accident scenario was considered to permitevaluation of the consequences of an extremely improbable event. The systemfailures assumed to reach severe accident consequences include failureof the primary reactor coolant boundary with substantial loss of coolant,failure of emergency core cooling, failure of the core to maintain structuralintegrity, relocation of the core to provide a high energy recriticality,failure of the vacuum vessel, and a concurrent nonmechanistic failure ofcontainment by malfunction of the hearting and ventilation containmentisolation exhaust valve. For this severe accident scenario, the calculatedmaximum whole-body dose for the Hanford Site boundary individual is 0.75rem and the calculated corresponding whole body population dose commitmentis less than 6 person-rem. Calculated onsite (worker) whole-body doseswould not exceed 3.4 rem. Actual doses would be expected to be lower becauseof operator response and onsite personnel evacuation. These accident scenarios predict that no significant radiological impactson public health and safety or on the environment would result from thetesting of the SP-100 nuclear reactor assembly at the Hanford Site. <ITAG tagnum="84">SP-100 Program</ITAG>The SP-100 program is laid out in three phases: (I) Technology assessment;(II) technology readiness; and (III) flight system production, qualification,and application.Phase I, which ended in Fiscal Year 1985, resulted in the selection of:(1) A system concept for further development that included a uranium-nitridefueled, lithium-cooled reactor with a thermoelectric power conversion system,and (2) the selection of the proposed SP-100 GES test site at the HanfordSite.Phase II was initiated in Fiscal Year 1986 and has four functional elements:(1) GES development, (2) advanced aerospace technology, (3) civilian missionsanalysis and requirements definition, and (4) military missions analysisand requirements definition. Of the four functional elements, GES developmentis the subject of this FONSI and supporting EA and is the only SP-100 elementfor which DOE has primary responsibility.Phase III may be initiated prior to the completion of Phase II activities,depending on mission decisions and funding levels. Initial planning forthe first application of an SP-100 power system in space by other agenciesmay begin in 1989 for a proposed launch in 1996.Potential mission applications for an SP-100 space reactor system are manyand diverse because of the flexibility and scalability in the system design.Missions that may employ the SP-100 power system include deep space probes,manned lunar and Mars bases, electrical propulsion for orbital transferand interplanetary vehicles, space-based radar for surveillance, trackingand air/ocean traffic control, direct broadcasting, and global communications.At this time, a specific mission has not been identified for the SP-100nuclear reactor power system. Therefore, specific flight system designrequirements and mission parameters are not available. However, it wasappropriate in the EA to assess potential accident scenarios for reasonablyforeseeable missions to provide insight into the possible environmentalconsequences of future space deployment of an SP-100 reactor. Accordingly,DOE performed a radiological risk assessment of potential accident scenariosto ensure that the SP-100 technology development efforts will be directedtowards reducing any potential impacts. When a specific mission using anSP-100 nuclear reactor power system is proposed, the potential environmentalimpacts of that mission will require appropriate NEPA documentation byeither NASA or DOD as part of the flight approval process.Three hypothetical mission scenarios representative of the classes of missionsfor which the SP-100 would be applicable were analyzed for potential accidents:(1) Titan-launched high-orbit mission, (2) Shuttle-launched nuclear electricpropulsion (NEP) mission, and (3) Shuttle-launched low-orbit mission. Therisk assessment and analysis was based on the analytical approach usedfor the safety analysis of past and current missions employing nuclearpower sources.Using assumed mission scenarios and the latest SP-100 design information,accident scenarios and associated probabilities were generated and potentialradiological impacts were evaluated in terms of population doses. The resultsof the risk assessment for the three hypothetical missions (expressed asstatistically expected total population dose commitment and the probabilityof occurrence of that population dose) were 0.6 person-rem (probability0.32), 0.5 person-rem (probability 0.01), and 3.0 person-rem (probability0.0041) for the Titan launched high orbit mission, the shuttle launchedNEP and the shuttle launched low orbit mission, respectively. These dosesrepresent the total dose that would be received by the total populationthat would potentially be exposed to radiation. The average individualwould receive a dose many thousands times smaller. Individual doses correspondingto these integrated doses, if detectable at all, would be much smallerthan current regulatory standards for exposure of the general public toradiation.<ITAG tagnum="84">Determination</ITAG>Based on the information and analyses in the EA, the comments receivedon the propoed FONSI, and the DOE responses to those comments, the DOEhas determined that the proposed action does not constitute a major Federalaction significantly affecting the quality of the human environment withinthe meaning of NEPA. Therefore, preparation of an EIS is not required.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued at Washington, DC, September 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Peter N. Brush,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary, Environment, Safety and Health.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Attachment</ITAG>Summary of Comments Received on the Proposed FONSIA total of 24 people submitted comments on the proposed FONSI and supportingEA during the 45-day public review period. Although the comments raisedquestions concerning the proposed action, no significant new informationhaving a bearing on environmental concerns was presented which affectedthe DOE's proposed NEPA determination. Those comments requiring a technicalresponse are summarized below along with the DOE's respones.<T3>Comment: </T3>Why is the SP-100 system (a generic space reactor powersystem) being developed; is there a need for the program; is the StrategicDefense Initiative (SDI) the primary impetus for the program; and why wasn'tcancelling the program considered in the proposed FONSI as a part of theno-action alternative?<T3>Response: </T3>The SP-100 technology is being developed by the DOEunder the authority and direction of Congress to meet the power requirementsof future NASA and DOD missions in space. Both NASA and DOD have identifiedfuture missions which would be enabled or enhanced by use of an SP-100power system.Currently, neither NASA nor DOD has an SP-100 system planned as the primarypower system for any specific mission. However, both agencies have projectedfuture missions that would require greater amounts of electrical powerand the SP-100 is one potential means of meeting these higher power requirements.The SP-100 program is developing nuclear power technology that could bescaled from 10s to 100s of kilowatts to make it adaptable to a varietyof future space missions. The lead time required to validate and demonstratethe readiness of an SP-100 reactor is greater than that of its potentialmissions. SP-100 research, development, and testing must be undertakennow to assure that the technology will be available when required.The EA evaluated the potential environmental impacts of ground testingthe SP-100 reactor at the Hanford Site, As stated in EA section 3.2.3,the no-action alternative would consist of not performing this ground test.Cancelling the entire NASA/DOD sponsored SP-100 program is beyond the scopeof this NEPA process.Since the SP-100 program is sponsored by both NASA and DOD, the developmentprogram must consider both agencies' future needs. At the point eitheragency makes a definite proposal to use the SP-100 technology for a definedmission, a system would be tailored to meet requirements. Potential NASAand DOD missions are outlined in EA section 2.1.<T3>Comment: </T3>Will public scoping meetings be held and an EIS be preparedprior to finalizing a decision to perform a ground test of a prototypeSP-100 space nuclear reactor at the Hanford Site?<T3>Response: </T3>In compliance with NEPA (42 U.S.C. 4321 <T3>et seq.</T3>), the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Regulationsfor Implementing the Procedural Provisions of the NEPA (40 CFR parts 1500-1508),and DOE NEPA guidelines of December 15, 1987 (52 FR 47662), DOE preparedan EA to assist in determining whether an EIS was required for the proposedaction. Based on the analyses in the EA and after consideration of thecomments received during the public review period for the proposed FONSIand supporting EA and the DOE responses to those comments, DOE found theproposed action to modify Building 309 and conduct ground tests of a smallprototype reactor was not a major Federal action significantly affectingthe quality of the human environment. Therefore, neither public scopingmeetings nor an EIS is required.When a specific mission or class of missions using an SP-100 power systemis proposed, the potential environmental impacts of the proposed activitywill be evaluated under NEPA by NASA or DOD as a part of the launch approvalprocess.<T3>Comment: </T3>Did DOE misinterpret NEPA requirements by only examiningthe potential environmental impacts of the proposed ground test?<T3>Response: </T3>As stated in the EA, the goal of the SP-100 programis: ``* * * to develop safe, compact, lightweight, durable, space reactorsystem technology providing electrical power in the range of 10s to 100sof kilowatts to make possible a broad class of emerging military and civilspace missions in the early to mid-1990s and beyond * * * A ground testof a prototype reactor is necessary to demonstrate technology readiness* * *'' The proposed ground test does not irrevocably commit the governmentto using this technology. The actual reactor to be ground tested couldnot be used for a light experiment. The only proposed action under considerationat this tme is the ground testing of a prototype SP-100 space nuclear reactorin a modified reactor containment building, Building 309, at the HanfordSite near Richland Washington, An EA was prepared to assist DOE in itsdetermination of whether an EIS was required for the reactor test. Sincethe EA analyses do not predict significant environmental effects, an EISis not required for the rector test. The potential environmental impactsassociated with a specific NASA or DOD mission or class of missions utilizingan SP-100 power system will be evaluated in a separate NASA or DOD NEPAprocess as a part of the launch approval process when a mission is proposed.<T3>Comment: </T3>Can the environmental impacts of the proposed actionbe adequatley addressed at this time since the detailed design of the prototypeSP-100 reactor has not been completed?<T3>Response: </T3>The intent of NEPA is to assure that timely environmentalinformation is availble and is considered in decisionmaking. Where detaileddesign or data are unavailable, reasonable assumptions may be used to assesspotential environmental impacts. An EA and FONSI are appropriate NEPA documentationfor the proposed action.<T3>Comment: </T3>The 30 day public review period should be extended anadditional 60 days.<T3>Response: </T3>CEQ regulations (40 CFR 1501.4e(2)) specify 30 daysfor public review of a proposed FONSI, Nevertheless, DOE formally extendedthe comment period an additional 15 days and considered all comments received.<T3>Comment: </T3>There are no safety or safeguard requirements to be metbefore an SP-100 system could be launched into space.<T3>Response: </T3>By Presidential Directive to the National Security Council(December 14, 1977), every nuclear power system considered for use in spacemust undergo a formal comprehensive safety review to identify and characterizethe risks posed and the benefits to be derived from its use. At the centerof this review process is the Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel (INSRP),a panel co-chaired by three appointees, one each, from DOD, NASA, and DOE.The panel has its own independent staff of technical experts to verifysafety evaluations. The INSRP issues a Safety Evaluation Report which isforwarded to the President's Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)along with the user agency's request for launch approval. Th final launchdecision is made by either the President or the Director of the OSTP.<T3>Comment: </T3>The level of design information used in the mission riskanalysis, the probabilities used in the risk analysis, the specific missionschosen for analysis, and the analysis of the reentry of an SP-100 reactorfrom space are inadequate.<T3>Response: </T3>The EA's risk analysis for a generic flight system wasdone as a preliminary overview for several different possible ``classes''of future missions. The purpose of the analysis was twofold: (1) To determineif there were any outstanding safety issues which would have to be resolvedduring the ground test and (2) to determine if there were any system requirementswhich would have to be changed before the initiation of the reactor groundtest. The risk analysis shows that the radiological consequences, from the possiblespace mission scenarios that were assessed, would be very low. As notedin the EA, NASA or DOD will have to prepare project specific NEPA documentationbefore an actual mission could be approved. Launch vehicle failure rates for the Shuttle and Titan vehicles were takenfrom the most recent and accepted data sources as described in EA Reference6.1. Failure rate predictions were based on both past performance and projectedpotential failure mechanisms. The three hypothetical missions analyzed are representative of the classesof missions for which SP-100 could be utilized. The purpose of consideringthe missions that were chosen was to test the sensitivity of the resultsto several different orbits and operating conditions. The flight approvalprocess for each space nuclear power system is thorough and the risks associatedwith any proposed mission will be thoroughly reviewed. Analysis of the inadvertent reentry before or after initial reactor operationcan be done using the current level of design, knowledge of performance,and by allowing for uncertainty in the final results. A great deal of informationis available on reentry characteristics based upon the past 30 years ofanalysis of radioisotope thermoelectric generator systems and other spacesystems. Information on the reentry philosophy for the SP-100 is outlined in EAsection 6.3.4. The potential for on-orbit collisions with debris or micrometeoroidshas been considered in EA section 6.3.5 and in Reference 6.1. <T3>Comment: </T3>Were environmental factors considered as a part of theSP-100 system selection process as well as in the test site selection process?<T3>Response: </T3>Environmental considerations were included in the selectioncriteria developed for the reactor power system concept selection process.EA Appendix G, Section G.3 describes the seven criteria that were usedto evaluate the alternative reactor power system concepts. Four of theseven competing design criteria (surety, survivability, user interface,and operations criteria) were found to be essentially nondiscriminatorsamong the four alternative system concepts. Evaluation objectives includedin the definition of the surety design criteria included health, safety,and environmental factors. All four of the alternative system conceptscould meet the surety requirements. The design characteristics of the candidate concepts were evaluated fromthe perspective of prelaunch activities and ultimate use in space. Althoughspecific missions were not identified, the decision process focused onthe ultimate use in space of the reactor power system. Environmental factors were an element in the ground test site selectionprocess (see EA Appendix E). Five evaluation criteria were utilized toassess each of the five candidate sites. One of the evaluation criteria,``Approval to Operate,'' included site specific requirements for environmentaldocumentation or other approvals prior to modification of facilities andtesting as well as an assessment of institutional, political, public safety,and environmental issues. The environmental factors relative to each candidatesite were provided to the site evaluation committee, but were not governingin the final selection of the site. <T3>Comment: </T3>Why was Building 309 selected for the SP-100 GES testconsidering its proximity to the Columbia River and the Hanford Site'smain work force; what is the past operating history of Building 309? <T3>Response: </T3>Environmental factors were considered in evaluatingall Hanford siting alternatives. Population densities and related considerationsfor Building 309 are discussed in detail in EA section 4.1.1. Analysesin EA section 5.0 predict no significant impact on the local population,the Columbia River, or the surrounding agricultural areas. The decisiveelement for the selection of Building 309 was the degree of nuclear safetyprovided by an existing containment structure which would limit the riskto onsite personnel and the general public from a reactor accident. Building309 could be easily upgraded to meet current nuclear safety and environmentalprotection standards and is capable of supporting program objectives. Allother Hanford Site facilities would have required a substantial upgradeto provide a similar degree of containment for the ground test. Discussion of the past operational history for activities previously conductedin Building 309 was not included in the EA because the previous reactoroperated in Building 309, the Plutonium Recycle Test Reactor (PRTR), wassignificantly different in design and performance characteristics includingpower level and coolant pressure. A failure of a test apparatus withinthe PRTR reactor in 1965 did result in fission product release into Building309's containment but the building's containment performed as designedand was not breached. The past operational history of Building 309 is readilyavailable in <T3>Plutonium Recycle Test Reactor (PRTR) Accident, </T3>1984 (NUREG/CR-3669,PNL-5003; Available from the National Technical Information Service, Springfield,VA, 22161). <T3>Comment: </T3>Will DOE's management and monitoring of radioactive effluentsbe sufficient to adequately control the release under both normal and accidentconditions; specifically, will tritium containment be adequate, was theAS-Low-As-Reasonably-Achievable (ALARA) standard used correctly, and wasthe maximum projected dose underestimated? <T3>Response: </T3>Exhaust monitoring will be provided to assure compliancewith current legal standards for radiation emission as described in EAsections 3.1.3.5 and 3.1.3.6.4. The automatic isolation system to providefor isolation of containment building ventilation in the event of abnormalradioactivity levels will be built, tested, and operated to standards currentlyapplied to Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) licensed reactors. Technologiesfor limiting the routine and accidental release of radioactive materialhave been incorporated into the design of the facility. Projections ofemissions in the EA (both normal and accident conditions) were based oncurrently available technology and current industry practices. Methodsdiscussed for control of radioactive materials (including fission productcontrol and tritium containment technology) are commercially availablewithin the nuclear power industry. Assumptions used in the EA analysesare consistent with both NRC licensed reactors and DOE owned reactor guidelines.Operation assumptions, such as a 180-day cool down period prior to defueling,are made consistent with performing a meaningful ground test of the nuclearreactor. In keeping with both DOE and NRC practice, the actual controlsapplied on the test will be based on detailed safety analyses to be documentedin the Preliminary Safety Analysis Report and Final Safety Analysis Report.The EA projections of general public exposure are ALARA and easily meetthe NRC standards given in 10 CFR 50 Appendix I: ``Numerical Guides forDesign Objectives and Limiting Conditions for Operations to Meet the Criterionof ALARA for Radioactive Material in Light Water Cooled Nuclear Power ReactorEffluents.'' One commenter questioned the ALARA discussion and stated that``* * * 1,000 mrem/year is way beyond traditional ALARA standards. 10 CFR50 Appendix I defines ALARA as a few mrem for the public.'' This commenton ALARA practices for radiation workers was taken out of context; 1,000mrem/year is consistent with current ALARA practices for radiation workers.A radiation worker is a facility worker who is qualified to use appropriatemonitoring and protection measures. A number of related radiation protection and release analyses issues werealso raised. Comments suggested that some analyses were unfounded becausetechnology does not exist for tritium control, for determining routineactivation rates, for assuring High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filterperformance, for achieving containment design basis leak rates, or fordetermining fission product release fractions. Tritium control technology,as discussed in the EA section 3.1.3.6.2, is currently being demonstratedin the FFTF at the Hanford Site. Excellent HEPA filter performance, aswell as related protection from fires, has been achieved by the nuclearpower industry and is consistent with the EA References from Appendix C.Containment design basis leak rates are identical to those for the FFTF.Fission product release calculations used conservative release fractionsconsistent with licensed reactor practice. Actual experience shows thatthese assumptions are conservative for releases in the presence of liquidmetals. None of the technologies or methodologies for facility design discussedin the EA are beyond the state of the art. <T3>Comment:</T3> Isn't the generation rate and projected release of radioactiveargon (Ar-41) low as compared to Argonaut-class research reactors usedat universities; wouldn't the use of argon as a cover gas and for firesuppression for the secondary coolant loop increase the releases of radioactiveAr-41?<T3>Response:</T3> The comment specifically referenced the generation andrelease rates of radioactive Ar-41 from the Argonaut-class research reactorsused on college campuses and asserted that the Argonaut-class researchreactor releases much higher levels of Ar-41 than will the SP-100 eventhough its power level is substantially lower than the SP-100. Therefore,the comment asserted that the estimated SP-100 release rate of Ar-41 isincorrect. However, this reasoning fails to consider the design differencesbetween the two reactor systems. Specifically, some Argonaut research reactorshave air filled central cavities and have air trapped within the graphitemoderator. Air contains naturally occurring argon (Ar-40), that when irradiated,produces Ar-41. The production of Ar-41 is dependent upon the system designmore than on the operating power level.The EA estimates of Ar-41 generation and release levels are substantiatedand confirmed by relevant, current reactor experience at the Hanford Site.As shown in EA Table 5.1, the FFTF, also at the Hanford Site, produces160 times more power than will the SP-100 ground reactor and yet the annualAr-41 release for extended power operation in the FFTF was only 20 curies.The EA conservatively estimated that Ar-41 emissions from SP-100 wouldonly be one sixth of that emitted from FFTF. Based on the SP-100 intentto use technology similar to that used in the FFTF, it is likely that actualreleases of Ar-41 would be substantially less than the conservative projectionsused in the EA. Ar-41 generation and release levels are not just directlyreleased to reactor power level, but are dependent on a number of differentvariables.Naturally occurring, nonradioactive argon gas (Ar-40) is being consideredfor two different functions for the reactor ground test. Ar-40 may be usedas a reactor cover gas and for liquid metal fire suppression as describedin EA section 3.1.3.6.5. Specific Ar-40 handling and storage procedureswould be dependent on how the Ar-40 would be used.If Ar-40 is chosen as the cover gas, the resulting Ar-41 would be storeduntil the level of radioactivity had decayed to an acceptable level forrelease as established by DOE Order 5480.1A, Chapter II (and additionalguidance as presented in Appendix F). Ar-41 has a 1.83 hour half-life andadequate decay can be achieved in a relatively short time (e.g., if heldfor 24 hours, the radioactivity would drop by a factor of more than 4,000).Further, as shown by EA Figure 3.8, shielding will be provided to limitthe neutron level in areas where argon is naturally present so that theactual production of Ar-41 would be limited by design.Ar-40 is also being considered for the liquid metal fire suppression systemfor the secondary heat transfer system. This Ar-40 will be stored sufficientlyfar from the reactor core to ensure it will not become radioactive andcould be safely released through the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning(HVAC) system if used for fire suppression.As described in the EA, no single failure would result in radioactive argonbeing released in the containment building. In addition, liquid metal fireswould not result in argon release to the containment building. However,if Ar-41 were released to containment as a result of a severe accident(requiring multiple failures), the exhaust monitoring system (discussedin EA section 3.1.3.6.4) will automatically isolate the containment ifreleases exceeded preset limits.<T3>Comments: </T3>Site accident calculations use probabilities that haveno basis.<T3>Response:</T3> The site accident consequence calculations presentedin the EA were based on postulated failure mechanisms. The accidents weregrouped according to their probability of occurrence as described in EAsection 5.1.4. The accident probabilities were based on standard practicesfor reactor and plant protection systems (ANSI/ANS-51.1-1983, <T3>Nuclear Safety Criteria for the Design of Stationary Pressurized WaterReactor Plants;</T3> ANS-54.6-1979, <T3>LMFBR Safety Classification and Related Requirements</T3>) and willbe confirmed through analysis documented in the Preliminary Safety AnalysisReport (PSAR) and Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR). Loss of both primaryand secondary power will also be covered in the test site PSAR and FSAR.<T3>Comment:</T3> Why aren't noncancerous health effects covered separately?The discussion of health effects should include those of cancer incidenceas well as those of cancer fatalities.<T3>Response:</T3> A report by the National Academy of Sciences Committeeon Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation, commonly called the BEIR IIIreport (EA Reference A.8), identifies the following three categories ofradiation induced human health effects: (1) Cancer, (2) genetic disorders,and (3) somatic effects other than cancer. The BEIR committee judges thatcarcinomas are the most important effects of low dose radiation exposures.Noncancerous health effects were not covered separately in the EA basedon the BEIR III report which shows that low dose exposures do not increasethe risk of genetic disorders or somatic effects other than cancer. Somaticeffects other than cancer include cataract induction and fertility impairment.In the BEIR III report, the term ``low dose'' refers to doses up to a fewrem per person per year such as those doses characteristic of the potentialaccidents discussed in the EA.DOE used the NRC criteria for nuclear accident evaluations in environmentalreports and therefore did not include a discussion on cancer incidencein the EA. These criteria were expressed in terms of the increase in therisk of fatal cancers.<T3>Comment:</T3> Will DOE use facility operators who are not qualifiedbecause they are unlicensed; will the SP-100 facility be licensed and regulatedby an independent agency such as the NRC?<T3>Response:</T3> DOE reactor operators, although not licensed by theNRC, will be trained and certified by DOE to operate the SP-100 GES reactor.The current standards for DOE operator qualifications are documented inDOE Order 5480.6, <T3>Safety of Department of Energy-Owned Nuclear Reactors,</T3> (September23, 1986), which establishes operator certification requirements comparableto NRC licenses. These standards require initial certification and periodicrecertification (including written, oral and operational examinations),experience with reactor operations appropriate for the level of operatorresponsibility (as specified in ANS 3.1), and medical as well as psychologicalexaminations.Under existing law, the NRC does not have licensing authority over DOEtest reactors. The question of whether the law should be changed to subjectDOE owned reactors to oversight by the NRC is beyond the scope of thisNEPA process.<T3>Comment:</T3> Doesn't poor past performance at the Hanford Site illustratewhy the SP-100 system should not be tested there; shouldn't the HanfordSite be cleaned up before any further reactor testing is done; and havepossible cumulative effects at the Hanford Site been considered?<T3>Response:</T3> Past performance at the Hanford Site, although usefulas an indicator, cannot be used as a predictor of future performance especiallywith today's stricter regulatory process. The short term nature of theSP-100 ground testing activity, the limited Hanford Site resources affectedby the testing and the minor impacts that are expected from the test activitiesare all addressed in the EA and lead to the conclusion that no significantcumulative effects would result from the test.Significant progress is being made toward the cleanup of the Hanford Site.The DOE has addressed cleanup concerns and has initiated a cleanup process,as discussed in the <T3>Final Environmental Impact Statement, Disposal of Hanford Defense High-Level,Transuranic and Tank Wastes</T3> (DOE/EIS-0113; available from the NationalTechnical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield,VA, 22161). DOE intent is reflected in a DOE request for increased fundingfor cleanup activities in the Fiscal Year 1990 budget proposal. A significantportion of this money will be directed to funding major Hanford Site cleanupactivities such as the Hanford Waste Vitrification Project.Early defense activities of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the AtomicEnergy Commission (AEC) have been supplanted by today's more conservativeapproaches to reactor operation and radioactive material management. Asshown in EA Table 5.1, operation of the FFTF at the Hanford Site (initialoperation on February 9, 1980) has resulted in routine releases significantlybelow those of commercially licensed reactors, even when scaled for powerrating. Quality assurance standards such as ANSI/ASME NQA-1 have been appliedand the FFTF has been recognized for its technical excellence. Independentreviews, including one by the National Academy of Science (NAS) (<T3>Safety Issues at the DOE Test and Research Reactors,</T3> NationalAcademy Press, Washington, DC, 1988) have not identified any quality issuesat the FFTF. Most of the NAS recommendations dealt with future modificationsbeing considered for FFTF rather than correction of past or present programmaticdeficiencies. This is the Hanford Site operating history which is pertinentto the planned operation of the SP-100 GES Test Site. The DOE and the WestinghouseHanford Company are strongly committed to safe, environmentally sound testoperations applying the best available technology.<T3>Comment:</T3> Will the highly enriched uranium fuel used for the reactorbe safeguarded while at the Hanford Site?<T3>Response:</T3> DOE has established stringent requirements for the handlingand protection of nuclear materials. Hanford Site's security system isin full compliance with current DOE orders for safeguarding nuclear materials.<T3>Comment:</T3> Will funding for decontamination and decommissioningof Building 309 upon completion of the ground test be adequate; is it appropriateto dispose of the fuel at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP)?<T3>Response:</T3> Congress provides funding for DOE activities. The proposalto establish a fund for disposal for the Hanford Site's wastes requiresa legislative action beyond DOE authority and beyond the scope of thisNEPA process.The SP-100 program has established a schedule and has projected costs fordecontamination and decommissioning of the Building 309 facility and fundshave been budgeted for facility restoration at the end of the ground test.However, as discussed in EA section 3.1.2.5, it is possible this facilitycould be useful for later programs and probably would not be fully decommissioneduntil it can no longer serve research needs.Because the SP-100 reactor fuel is highly enriched, it is anticipated thatit would be reprocessed and reused, as discussed in EA Section 5.3. Anytransuranic waste material generated from reprocessing would be storedon the Hanford Site and ultimately sent to the WIPP facility in New Mexicowhen it receives final authorization as a waste disposal facility. An alternativeto reprocessing would be final disposal of the spent fuel at a DOE geologicrepository constructed pursuant to the Nuclear Waste Policy AmendmentsAct.<T3>Comment: </T3>Isn't the use of a ``combustible liquid metal'' coolantduring the ground test dangerous; was the potential for flooding in thearea near Building 309 adequately addressed, especially when consideringthe possibility of liquid metal/water reactions?<T3>Response: </T3>Liquid metals have been successfully used as coollantin a number of research reactors. The DOE has a liquid metal reactor developmentprogram which has included the SEFOR and EBR II research reactors, bothof which have demonstrated the capability to work safely with liquid metalcoolants. The Westinghouse Hanford Company, the DOE Hanford Site operationsand engineering contractor, has been involved in liquid metal researchand development for a number of years, performing extensive liquid metalloop testing and liquid metal fire testing at the Hanford Site (includingboth sodium and lithium). Westinghouse managed the construction, startup, and currently manages the operation of the FFTF, a 400 Megawatt liquid-metal-cooledtest reactor at the Hanford Site which initially went critical in 1980.Although commenters correctly identified early technical obstacles in thedevelopment of liquid-metal-cooled reactors, the industry has matured andthe technology for safe handling of liquid metals exists, as discussedin EA section 5.1.4.4.Although liquid metals at elevated temperatures will burn when exposedto air, they are not volatile. Unlike volatile materials (such as oil),liquid metals will not support a large flame column above the fire. Asa result, an open liquid metal fire is a low lying fire which can be approachedand extinguished by smothering it with an inert material. Facility designfeatures discussed in the EA will assure that such fires are unlikely andthat leak protection is provided. In the highly unlikely event that a liquidmetal fire does develop, it will be contained in a steel lined concreteenclosure and extinguished as the enclosure's oxygen is consumed. The HanfordSite's fire department personnel are trained in extinguishing liquid metalfires.Concern was also expressed about the risk of water reactions with liquidmetal due to the proximity of the site to the Columbia River. This concernwas considered in the siting of the facility. Historical flood informationis included in EA section 4.1.4.2. The site is 11.5 meters (37 feet) abovethe 100 year flood and 3.5andplusmin;1.2 meters (11andplusmin;4 feet) abovethe probable maximum flood. Information for the probable maximum floodis taken from EA Reference 4.1.<T3>Comment: </T3>The impacts of disposing of fire protection water werenot addressed in the EA.<T3>Response: </T3>Water will not be used for fire protection in the areawhere liquid metal will be present. Therefore, water will not be used forfire suppression in or around the reactor system and will not become contaminated.Fire protection water will only be used external to the primary and secondarycontainments structures and will not become contaminated. Therefore, thewater can be disposed of through the existing drainage systems discussedin EA section 3.1.3.11. An inert gas will be used for fire suppressionwithin the containment building where liquid metal is present.<T3>Comment: </T3>Will the use of highly enriched fuel in the reactor causea destructive power excursion like the SNAPTRAN excursion test in the early1960s; is this covered in the EA; and does the reactor have any inherentnegative feedback mechanisms?<T3>Response: </T3>Due to both the design of the reactor and the reactorprotection system, a reactor power excursion is not a credible event. TheSP-100 reactor has redundant and highly reliable shutdown systems as wellas a secondary backup coolant system. The control system is well understoodand the reactor will automatically shut down if it begins operating beyondthe preset conditions. The physical response of the system precludes thepossibility of an explosively destructive power excursion during the reactorground test which would cause a breach in primary containment. However,EA Section 5.1.5 contains a discussion of a postulated severe accidentwhich represents a beyond design basis accident that considers this typeof event.The reactor contains highly enriched uranium and, therefore, has littleor no doppler coefficient. However, it does have several other negativefeedback mechanisms inherent to small reactor systems. As an example, lossof reactor coolant would result in increased neutron streaming from thecore and will cause the reactor to automatically shut down. Therefore,given the inherent nature of the design, there are no physical mechanismswhich would add reactivity sufficiently fast to cause an explosive powerexcursion similar to that of the SNAPTRAN excursion test done in the early1960s. It is even less probable that a destructive power excursion couldoccur in space where gravity is not present.<T3>Comments: </T3>The reactor ``containment'' structure is not adequateto withstand predicted pressures in the event of an accident and is notdesigned to meet current seismic standards.<T3>Response: </T3>The test facility will have both a vacuum vessel anda containment system. An initial containment boundary will be providedby the vacuum vessel (EA section 3.1.3.3) which will meet current seismicstandards and which will be designed to survive any pressures and temperaturesresulting from reactor failure. In the highly unlikely event that the vacuumvessel failed, the existing Building 309 facility will provide secondarycontainment. Since the Building 309 containment was built to earlier standards,the approach to meeting current standards is outlined in EA section 3.1.3.1.As outlined in the EA, these upgrades will be made as part of the facilitymodification prior to conducting test activities.The pressure that a containment is designed to sustain is a function ofthe reactor accidents that it is designed to protect against. As statedin the EA, the accidents which could potentially pressurize the containmentduring the SP-100 reactor test are significantly different from those associatedwith a commercial pressurized water reactor which have large inventoriesof superheated water as the primary coolant. If the water leaks, it flashesto steam and pressurizes the containment. In a reactor which uses liquidmetal for coolant, the coolant is not superheated and would not pressurizecontainment by creating steam. Maximum pressurization of containment wouldresult if a leak occurred and the fire protection system failed resultingin a liquid metal fire. However, maximum pressure is limited by the amountof liquid metal available to burn. In the case of the limited inventoriesof liquid metal associated with the SP-100, the worst possible fire resultsin containment pressures of less than 2 psig. This is substantially belowthe 15 psig design basis pressure for the original Building 309 containmentdesign. Building 309 containment will have substantial margin to withstandthe worst fire pressurization.<T3>Comment: </T3>The EA did not adequately describe or present analysison the transient testing planned for the ground test at the Hanford Site.<T3>Response: </T3>Transient testing will be completed during the initialreactor startup, as described in EA section 3.1.2.3. The planned testingis intended to characterize the performance of the reactor system in space.The testing is limited to operational events and to demonstration of theflight system protective responses such as automatic shutdown systems.None of these transients challenge the design limits of the primary coolantboundary or the fuel cladding. Containment of the fission products withinthe multiple barriers of the fuel matrix, fuel cladding, and primary coolantboundary is assured for the full spectrum of testing. The SP-100 fuel,cladding, and structural materials will have been well characterized throughtesting within the FFTF and EBR-II reactors prior to the SP-100 GES test.<T3>Comment: </T3>The EA analysis of the generic flight system did notadequately address the effectiveness of the heat removal system or thepotential for control logic errors described in EA section 2.3.3.<T3>Response: </T3>The generic flight system is a 100 kilowatt space reactorpower system design that provides the basis for the ground engineeringsystem activities. The design has been adapted as necessary for groundtesting as outlined in EA section 2.2 and 2.3.There are several key differences between the complete generic flight systemand the ground test of the reactor. As an example, the reactor ground testat the Hanford Site will not include the space subsystem described in EAsection 2.3.3.3 (e.g., the test will not include the power conversion systemor the heat pipe radiator system).The EA was prepared specifically for the reactor ground test and not forthe generic flight system. NEPA documentation, including a specific analysisof the flight system, will be prepared by either NASA or DOD at the timeof a proposal to utilize a space reactor in an actual mission. Accordingly,it is not appropriate at this time to address these issues within the EAand FONSI for the SP-100 GES Test.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-22838 Filed 9-26-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6450-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>