<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89523-0065 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-23-89.f2.A1064</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Statement of Policy on Minimum Recommended External AuditingProcedures for State Nonmember Banks </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Request for comments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The FDIC hereby requests comments on a proposed Statementof Policy which identifies the minimum auditing procedures that the FDICrecommends that an independent external auditor perform annually at eachstate nonmember bank. The procedures cover the followng areas: securities;loans; allowance for loan losses; insider transactions; and internal controls.The policy statement also describes the extent of testing that is appropriatewhen carrying out these procedures and the audit reports banks should filewith the FDIC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments on the proposal must be received by July 24, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All comments should be submitted to Hoyle L. Robinson,Executive Secretary, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 550 17th StreetNW., Washington, DC 20429, telephone (202) 898-6903.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Doris L. Marsh, Examination Specialist,Division of Bank Supervision, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 55017th Street NW., Washington, DC 20429, telephone (202) 898-8914.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On November 16, 1988, the Board ofDirectors of the FDIC adopted a Statement of Policy Regarding IndependentExternal Auditing Programs of State Nonmember Banks which became effectiveon December 28, 1988. That statement of policy strongly encourages eachstate nonmember bank to have an annual external auditing program performedby an independent auditor. It defines an external auditing program as aset of procedures designed to test and evaluate high risk areas of a bank'sbusiness which may be performed by an independent auditor who may or maynot be a public accountant. The policy encourages each bank to have anannual audit of its financial statements performed by an independent publicaccountant and states that such an audit would generally be consideredto be a satisfactory external auditing program. Nevertheless, the policy statement also explains acceptable alternativesfor those banks that find the external auditing program that will bestmeet their individual needs will be other than an audit. These alternativesmay include directors' examinations, ``engagement audits,'' specified auditingprocedures, balance sheet audits, and ``operational audits.'' However,no widely accepted national standards exist for the specific proceduresthat must be performed in many of these alternatives. Thus, when notified by a bank that one of these alternative reviews hasbeen performed, the FDIC has no assurance as to the actual procedures whichhave been performed. For that reason, the FDIC staff in conjunction withthe accounting profession has identified a set of minimum auditing proceduresthat represents an alternative external auditing program for banks, TheFDIC staff believes that these procedures will be less costly than an auditand will generally cover the high risk areas of a bank. This, the FDICproposes that, at a minimum, the auditing procedures specified in thisproposed statement of policy be performed annually at all state nonmemberbanks that do not undergo an audit of their financial statements. The text of the proposed statement of policy follows:<ITAG tagnum="85">Statement of Policy on Minimum Recommended External Auditing Proceduresfor State Nonmember Banks </ITAG>In the statement of Policy Regarding Independent Extenal Auditing Programsof State Nonmember Banks, the FDIC strongly encourages each state nonmemberbank to have an annual audit\1\<NOTE/> of its financial statements performed in accordance withgenerally accepted auditing standards by an independent pubic accountant.Nevertheless, the FDIC realizes that the audit committee or board of directorsof certain state nonmember banks may determine not to engage an independentpublic accountant to perform an audit for various reasons. In those instances,the FDIC recommends that each state nonmember bank, at a minimum, havethe following specified auditing procedures performed annually by an independentexternal auditor (who need not be an independent public accountant) aspart of its external auditing program. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\Reference is made to Appendix A to the Statement of PolicyRegarding Independent External Auditing Programs of State Nonmember Banksfor the definition of terms used in this statement of policy. The recommended auditing procedures are intended to address the high riskareas common to all banks. However, each bank must also review the risksinherent in its particular business and determine if additional proceduresmay be needed to cover other high risk areas in which it has activities.For example, if a bank or its subsidiaries has significant real estateinvestments, securities broker-dealer or similar activities (includingthose described in andSection;337.4 of the FDIC Rules and Regulations), ortrust department operations, among others, the FDIC urges the bank to considerexpanding the scope of its external auditing program so that it includesauditing procedures in these other high risk areas. If a bank chooses tohave an audit performed by an independent public accountant, such auditof the bank's financial statements will satisfy these minimum externalauditing guidelines. The independent auditor (or the public accountant) should be informed ofand permitted access to all examination reports, administrative orders,and any additional written communication between the bank and the FDICor state banking authorities. The auditor should obtain bank management'swritten representation that he has been informed of and granted accessto all such documents prior to the completion of his field work. Extent of Testing Where the procedures require testing or determinations to be made, samplingmay be used. Both judgmental and statistical sampling may be acceptablemethods of selecting samples to test. However, the use of statistical samplingis encourages because it provides an objective way to measure and controlthe risk of sampling error. The reliability required in sample resultsmay be specified in advance by the auditor and he may compute a samplesize that provides that degree of reliability. Using the concepts of probability,each item or dollar has an equal probability of being examined under statisticalsampling and the auditor controls the risk in relying on sample results.Either numerical sampling or proportional (monetary) sampling may be used,but proportional sampling gives items with larger dollar amounts a greaterchance of being selected. If proportional (monetary) sampling is utilized,sample sizes should be based on a Monetary Precision of no less than one(1) percent of total assets and a confidence level of at least 90 percent.Unless specified otherwise, minimum recommended judgmental sample sizesare 25 items or ten (10) percent of the items involved, whichever is greater.Reports To Be Filed With the FDIC Each state nonmember bank that undergoes any external auditing work, regardlessof the scope of the work, is requested to furnish a copy of the reportsby the independent public accountant or other external auditor, includingany management letters, to the appropriate FDIC regional office within15 days after their receipt by the bank. In addition, each bank is requestedto promptly notify the appropriate FDIC regional office when any independentpublic accountant or other external auditor is initially engaged to performexternal auditing procedures and when a change in its accountant or auditoroccurs. <ITAG tagnum="81">Securities </ITAG>1. Review the investment policies and procedures established by the bank'sboard of directors (BOD) and the BOD (or Investment Committee) minutesto verify that these policies and procedures are periodically reviewedand approved. The policies and procedures should include, but not be limitedto: a. Investment objectives; b. Permissible types of investments; c. Diversification guidelines to prevent undue concentration; d. Maturity schedules; e. Limitation on quality ratings; f. Hedging activities; other uses of futures, forwards, options, and otherfinancial instruments; and trading activities. g. Handling exceptions to standard policies; h. Valuation procedures and frequency; i. Limitations on the investment authority of officers; and j. Frequency of periodic reports to the BOD on securities holdings. 2. Test compliance with the BOD's investment policies and procedures anddetermine whether information reported to the BOD (or Investment Committee)for securities transactions is accurate by comparing the following to thetrade tickets for selected items (including futures, forwards, and options):a. Descriptions b. Intertest rate c. Maturity d. Par value, or number of shares e. Cost f. Market value on date of transaction. 3. Using the same selected items, analyze the securities register for accuracyand confirm the existence of the selected items by examining securitiesphysically held in the bank and verifying the safekeeping of those securitiesheld by others. 4. Review policies and procedures regarding controls which ensure thatunauthorized transactions do not occur. Test selected control points. Determinethat investment officers and/or appropriate committee members have beenproperly authorized to purchase/sell investments and determine if thereare any limitations or restrictions on delegated responsibilities. 5. Confirm totals in the investment sub-ledger(s) at the audit date. Reviewthe reconciliation of investment sub-ledger(s) to the general ledger. Tracethe general ledger total(s) to the most recent Call Report. 6. Obtain a schedule of book and par values as well as market values andrating classifications of securities. Test the market values and ratingsfor selected securities, including subinvestment quality and out-of-areasecurities. Discuss any subinvestment quality or out-of-area securitieswith the appropriate officer as to their suitability and/or performance.If any permanent declines in value have occurred, examine the allowanceaccount for proper presentation and adequacy. 7. Test securities income and accrued interest by:a. Determining the bank's method of calculating and recording interestaccruals; b. Obtaining trial balances of accrued interest if maintained separatelyfrom trial balances of investment and money market holdings; c. Testing the addition of the trial balances and the reconciliation ofthe trial balances to the general ledger; d. Determining that interest accruals are not made on defaulted issues;e. Selecting items from each type of investment and money market holdingsand: i. Determining the stated interest rate and most recent interest paymentdate of coupon instruments by reference to sources of such informationthat are independent of the bank, ii. Testing timely receipt of interest payments and correctness of entriesto applicable general ledger accounts, iii. Calculating accrued interest and comparing it to the trial balance,iv. Reviewing recorded book value for appropriate accretion of discountand amortization of premium; f. Review yields on each type of investment and money market holdings forreasonableness. 8. Review investment accounts for volume of purchases, sales activity andlength of time securities have been held. Inquire as to the bank's intentand ability to hold securities until maturity. Review high volume activitywith any one broker for propriety of the transactions and competitivenessof any fees. (If there is frequent trading in an investment account, itmay constitute a trading account.) Test gains and losses on disposal ofinvestment securities by sampling investment sales records and: a. Determining sales prices by examining invoices or brokers' advices;b. Checking computation of book value on settlement date; c. Determining that the general ledger has been properly relieved of theinvestment, accrued interest, premium, discount and other related accounts;d. Recomputing the gain or loss and comparing to the amount recorded inthe general ledger; and e. Determining that the sales were approved by the BOD or a designatedcommittee or were in accordance with policies approved by the BOD. <ITAG tagnum="81">Loans</ITAG>1. Determine that the bank has policies that address the lending and collectionfunctions. Read the bank's loan policies to determine whether they addressthe following items:a. General fields of lending in which the bank will engage and the typesof loans within each field; b. Descriptions of the bank's normal trade area and circumstances underwhich the bank may extend credit to borrowers outside of such area; c. Limitations on the maximum volume of each type of loan product in relationto total assets; d. Responsibility of the Board of Directors in reviewing, ratifying orapproving loans; e. Lending authority of the loan or executive committee (if such a committeeexists); f. Adherence to legal lending limits; g. Types of secured and unsecured loans which will be granted; h. Guidelines for rates of interest and terms of repayment for securedand unsecured loans; i. Documentation required by the bank for each type of secured and unsecuredloan; j. Limitations on the amount advanced in relation to the value of varioustypes of collateral; k. Limitations on the extension of credit through overdrafts; l. Level or amount of loans granted in specific industries or specificgeographic locations; m. Guidelines for participations purchased and/or sold; n. Guidelines for documentation of new loans prior to approval and updatingloan files throughout the life of the loan;o. Maintenance and review of complete and current credit files on eachborrower; p. Collection procedures, including, but not limited to, actions to betaken against borrowers who fail to make timely payments; q. Guidelines for nonaccrual loans (i.e., when an asset should be placedon nonaccrual, individuals responsible for identifying non-performing assetsand placing them on nonaccrual, and circumstances under which an assetwill be placed back on accrual.); r. Guidelines for loan charge-offs. 2. Review the Board of Directors' minutes to determine that the loan policieshave been reviewed and approved. Through review of the Board of Directors'minutes and through inquiry of executive officers, determine whether theBoard of Directors revises the policies and procedures periodically asneeded. 3. Obtain Loan Committee (or, if applicable, Board of Directors' minutes)and, through a comparison of loans made throughout the period with lendingpolicies, determine whether loans are being made within the loan authorizationpolicy. 4. Select a sample of borrowers (including loans from each major category)and determine through examination of loan files and other bank reportswhether lending and collection policies are being followed (e.g., typeof loan is in accordance with loan policy, funds were not advanced untilafter loan approval was received from proper loan authorization level,loan is within collateral policies, insurance coverage is adequate, andbank is named as loss payee). 5. Select a sample of borrowers from each major category of secured loansand determine through examination of files and other bank reports whethercollateral policies are being followed (e.g., loan is adequately collateralized,documentation is present and properly prepared, assignments are perfected,and collateral is properly valued, marketable, and has not become susceptibleto deterioration in realizable value). 6. Review policies for checking floor plan merchandise, warehouse inventoryand accounts receivable by responsible bank personnel and test for compliance.7. Determine whether participations purchased and participations sold transactionshave been reported to and authorized by the Board of Directors or LoanCommittee, if applicable, through review of appropriate minutes. 8. On a test basis, review participations purchased to confirm that thebank does its own independent credit analysis. Also review participationdocuments and determine that terms and conditions between the lead bankand participants are specified, including: a. Which party is paid first; b. What happens in the event of default; c. How set-offs received by either bank are to be treated; d. How collection expenses are to be divided; and e. Who is responsible to collect the note in the event of default. 9. Confirm participations purchased and participations sold with participatingbanks to verify that they are legitimate transactions and that they areproperly reflected as being with or without recourse in the bank's records.10. Balance detail ledgers or reconcile computer generated trial balanceswith the general ledger control accounts for each major category of loans,including loans carried as past due or in a nonaccrual status. 11. Confirm a minimum of ten (10) percent of the total number and ten (10)percent of the total dollar amount of all loans within each major category.(Statistical sampling may be used instead of the percentage requirement.)Include past due and nonaccrual loans in the verification process. 12. Review multiple loans to the same borrower or with the same personas guarantor to determine if they were made on consecutive days to circumventthe loan authorization policy and to determine whether policies and proceduresare designed to assure that all related credits are considered in loangranting and administration. Review these loans for relationships to bankinsiders or their related interests. <ITAG tagnum="81">Allowance for Loan Losses </ITAG>1. Test charge-offs and recoveries for proper authorization and/or reportingby reference to the Board of Directors' minutes. Review charged-off loansfor any relationship with bank insiders or their related interests. 2. Review the most recent quarter's determination of the allowance forloan losses through a review of the bank's computation. Documentation shouldinclude consideration of the following matters: a. General, local, national and international (if applicable) economicconditions; b. Trends in loan growth and depth of lending staff with expertise in theseareas; c. Concentrations of loans (e.g. by type, borrower, geographic area, andsector of the economy); d. Trends in the level of delinquent and classified loans; e. Results of regulatory examinations; f. The extent of renewals and extensions to keep loans current; and g. Review of specific loans on the ``watch list'' taking into account borrowerfinancial status, classification, collateral type and value, payment history,and potential permanent impairment. <ITAG tagnum="81">Insider Transactions </ITAG>1. Review the bank's policies and procedures to ensure that extensionsof credit to and other transactions with insiders\2\<NOTE/> are addressed. Ascertain that these policies include specificguidelines defining fair and reasonable transactions between the bank andinsiders and test insider transactions for compliance with these guidelinesand statutory and regulatory requirements. Ascertain that the policiesand procedures on extensions of credit comply with the requirements ofFederal Reserve Regulation O. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\For purposes of this section of the auditing procedures,insiders include all affiliates of the bank (including its parent holdingcompany) and all subsidiaries of the bank, as those terms are defined inSection 23A of the Federal Reserve Act, as well as the bank's executiveofficers, directors, principal shareholders, and their related interests,as those terms are defined in Section 215.2 of Federal Reserve RegulationO. 2. Obtain a bank-prepared list of insiders, including any other businessrelationships they may have other than as a nominal customer. Also obtaina list of extensions of credit to and other transactions that the bank,its affiliates, and its subsidiaries have had with insiders. Compare theselists to those prepared for the prior year's external auditing programto test for completeness. 3. Review the Board of Directors' minutes, loan trial balances, supportingloan documentation, and other appropriate bank records in conjunction withthe list of insiders obtained from the bank to verify that all extensionsof credit to and transactions with insiders were: a. In compliance with bank policy for similar transactions and were atprevailing rates at that time; b. Involved no more than a normal degree of risk or presented no otherunfavorable features; c. Approved by the Board of Directors in advance with the interested partyabstaining from voting; and d. Within the aggregate lending limits imposed by Regulation O or otherlegal limits. 4. Review overdraft reports, suspense items, account statements, and depositledgers to verify that there were no overdrafts on accounts of executiveofficers and directors except in accordance with those exemptions permittedunder section 215.4 of Regulation O. 5. Reconcile total extensions of credit to executive officers, principalshareholders, and their related interests as recorded on the bank recordsto the latest Call Report (Schedule RC-M, item 1). 6. Review the bank's policies and procedures to ensure that expense accountsof individuals who are executive officers, directors, and principal shareholdersare addressed and test the actual expense account records for compliancewith these policies and procedures. 7. Determine through inquiry whether or not securities purchases and salesare being made through related parties (as defined in Financial AccountingStandards Board Statement No. 57, ``Related Party Disclosures''). If so,determine and test through inquiry and observation the Board of Directors'procedures to ensure that appropriate prices and commissions are beingpaid. 8. Determine through inquiry whether or not the bank has leased, purchased,or otherwise acquired property and/or equipment from, has purchased othergoods or services from, or has had other transactions with related parties.If so, review and verify through inquiry and observation that the procedureslisted in items 3 a, b, and c above were followed by the Board of Directorsand ensure that appropriate levels of payment are being made. 9. Determine through inquiry whether or not bank employees serving as financialoffers (treasurer, financial manager, etc.) of civic or charitable organizations.Ascertain, through inquiry, whether or not the banking duties and civicor charitable duties present any potential confilct of interest or areotherwise incompatible. <ITAG tagnum="81">Internal Controls </ITAG>1. Review the Board of Directors' minutes to verify that account reconciliationpolicies have been approved and are reviewed periodically by the BOD anddetermine that management has established appropriate procedures to ensurethe timely completion of reconciliations of accounting records and thetimely resolution of reconciling items. 2. Determine whether the bank's policies regarding segregation of dutiesand required vacations for employees (including those involved in the EDPfunction) have been approved by the BOD, and verify that these policiesand the implementing procedures established by management are periodicallyreviewed, are adequate, and are followed. 3. Verify selected deposits in the various types of deposit accounts maintainedby the bank. Test that reconciliations are prepared for all major accountssignificant to the bank and their related accrued interest accounts, ifany, such as ``due from'' accounts; commercial loans; installment loans;demand deposits; NOW accounts; money market deposit accounts; other savingsdeposits; certificates of deposit; and other time deposits. Test controlsover dormant deposit accounts. 4. Review reconciliations for: a. Timeliness and frequency; b. Accuracy and completeness; and c. Review by appropriate personnel with no conflicting duties. Verify thatthe preparer and reviewer initial reconciliations to insure responsibilityand lack of conflict. 5. Examine detail and aging of reconciling items and items in suspense,clearing, and work-in-process accounts by: a. Testing aging; b. Determining whether items are followed up on and appropriately resolvedon a timely basis; c. Reviewing any charged-off items for proper authorization; and d. Discussing items remaining on reconciliations and in the suspense accountwith appropriate personnel to ascertain whether any should be written off.6. Verify balances per reconciliations to the general ledger and supportingtrial balance. Trace general ledger balances to the Call Report. 7. Verify that the bank maintains adequate records of its off-balance sheetactivities, including, but not limited to, its outstanding letters of creditand its loan commitments, and trace the totals to the most recent CallReport. 8. Review the BOD's minutes to determine whether the BOD has reviewed andapproved the bank's EDP policies (including those regarding outside servicers,if any, and the in-house use of individual personal computers and personalizedprograms for official bank records) at least annually, confirm that managementhas established appropriate implementing procedures, and verify the bank'scompliance with these policies and procedures. a. The policies and procedures for either in-house-processing or use ofan outside service center should address: i. A contingency plan (including a review of any outside servicer's plans)for continuance of operations and recovery when threats such as power outagesor natural disaster could cause disruption and/or major damage to the institution'sdata processing support; ii. Requirements for EDP-related insurance coverage (or verification ofadequate coverage by any service bureau) which include the following provisions:(1) Extended blanket bond fidelity coverage to employees of the servicer;(2) Insurance on documents in transit, including cash letters; and (3) Verification of the insurance coverage of the service bureau and thecourier service; iii. Review of exception reports and adjusting entries by supervisors and/orofficers; iv. Controls for input preparation and control and output verificationand distribution; v. ``Back-up'' of all systems; vi. Security to ensure integrity of data and system modifications; andvii. necessary detail to ensure an audit trail. b. When an outside service center is employed, the policies and proceduresshould address the following additional items: i. Each automated application should be covered by a written contract detailingownership and confidentiality of files and programs, fee structure, terminationagreement, and liability for documents in transit. ii. Each contract should be reviewed by legal counsel. iii. The financial statement of the outside servicer should be reviewedat least annually to detect deteriorating financial trends that may jeopardizedata processing support. iv. Each third party review of the service bureau should be reviewed. 9. Test EDP controls by using one of the following methods: a. Identify and review edit or error lists produced by the control proceduresso as to become satisfied that the edit routines were in use during theperiod; or b. Process deliberately erroneous transactions through an application todetermine whether the errors will be detected.<ITAG tagnum="21">By order of the Board of Directors. Dated at Washington, DC, this16th day of May, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert E. Feldman, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Executive Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-12318 Filed 5-22-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6714-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>