<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89428-0091 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-28-89.f2.A1090</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-206]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Southern California Edison Co. et al.; San Onofre Nuclear GeneratingStation, Unit No. 1; Consideration of Issuance of Amendment to ProvisionalOperating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards, Consideration Determinationand Opportunity for Hearing </ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Provisional Operating License No. DPR-13 issuedto Southern California Edison Company and San Diego Gas and Electric Company(the licensees), for operation of San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station,Unit No. 1, located in San Diego County, California. The request for amendmentswas submitted April 11, 1989. The proposed amendment would revise Technical Specification 3.5.1, ``ReactorTrip System Instrumentation.'' The revision, if approved, would reviseTable 3.5.1-1 to include a footnote relating to Mode 2 of the ApplicableModes column for Item 4, the Intermediate Range, Neutron Flux. The footnotewill indicate the startup rate circuit for the intermediate range channelswill be enabled at 10^4% of full reactor power instead at 10^7% of fullreactor power as presently implied but not specified in the Technical Specifications.Prior to issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration, Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. As required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysisabout the issue of no significant hazards consideration which is discussedbelow: Operation of the facility in accordance with the proposed amendment wouldnot: (1) Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequencesof an accident previously evaluated. Operation of the facility has no effecton the accidents analyzed in the UFSAR. The modification of the startuprate reactor trip functions by enabling them at a higher point in the intermediateneutron flux range. Although this enabling at a higher flux level willcause the functions to be actuated at a later time, the delay does notimpact accident probabilities as these functions are of a mitigative natureproviding reactor core control and protection during transients and accidents.This proposed modification also has no effect on the accident analysis,particularly the Control Rod Withdrawal from Subcritical, since these functionsare not credited. These functions will still be acutated sooner than thereactor trip on overpower, the credited trip for the Control Rod Withdrawalfrom Subcritical accident. Therefore, the accident probabilities and consequencesare not affected by this change. Operating of the facility in accordance with the proposed amendment wouldnot: (2) Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accidentfrom any accident previously evaluated. The modification associated withthis proposed change revises the startup rate circuit for the intermediaterange channels such that the protective functions are enabled at 10^4%of full reactor power versus 10^7% of full power. The protective functions,high startup rate rode stop and high startup rate power trip, providedby the intermediate range channels are still available and will functionas they did previously. Only their time of actuation will be delayed. Thismodification does not result in a new accident because these functionsare of a mitigative nature providing reactor core protection and control.A different kind of accident is not created since these functions are notcredited in any of the accident analyses. In the case of Control Rod Withdrawalfrom Subcritical, these functions are a back-up to the reactor overpowertrip. They will still actuate well before the overpower trip occurrenceat 118% of full reactor power providing reactor core protection. Therefore,a new or different kind of accident from any previously evaluated is notcreated. Operation of the facility in accordance with the proposed amendment wouldnot: (3) Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. The modificationassociated with this change revises the startup rate circuit for the intermediateneutron flux range by moving the enabling setpoint to 10^4% of full reactorpower. This change affects the operational margin to some extent becausethe protective functions provided by the intermediate range channels areactuated at a later time. As previously indicated, this delay has no effecton the accident analysis because there protective functions are not credited.Therefore, the safety margins associated with the accident analyses arenot affected. As indicated in Figure 15.8-1 of the Updated Final SafetyAnalysis Report, the protective function, overpower trip, for the ControlRod Withdrawal from Subcritical, occurs at 17.5 seconds. This timing isnot affected by the change because the high startup rate rod stop or thehigh startup rate trip would have been actuated well before that time.Therefore, the margin of safety is not affected by this proposed change.The NRC staff has reviewed the analysis and, based on that review, it appearsthat the three criteria are satisfied. There, the NRC staff proposes todetermine that the amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Comments should be addressed to the Regulatory Publications Branch, Divisionof Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Office of Administrationand Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington,DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page number of this<T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-216, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland,from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments may be examinedat the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC 20555.The filing of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to interveneis discussed below.By May 30, 1989, the licensees may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject provisional operating license,and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenrequest for hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requests fora hearing and petitions for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordancewith the Commission's ``Rules of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings''in 10 CFR Part 2. If a request for hearing or petition for leave to interveneis filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard, designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safetyand Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition, andthe Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board willissue a notice of hearing or an appropriate order. As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene must setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding;and (3) the possible effect of any order which may be entered in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspects of the subject matterof the proceeding as to which petitioner wished to intervene. Any personwho has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has been admittedas a party may amend the petition without requesting leave of the Boardup to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduledin the proceeding, but such as amended petition must satisfy the specificityrequirements described above. Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth in reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited to matterswithin the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitioner whofails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirements withrespect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission may make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, not withstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene shall be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW.,Washington, DC 20555, by the above date. Where petitions are filed duringthe last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitioneror representative for the petitioner promptly so inform the Commissionby a toll-free telephone call to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (inMissouri 1-(800) 342-6700). The Western Union operator should be givenDatagram Identification Number 3737 and the following message addressedto George W. Knighton: petitioner's name and telephone number; date petitionwas mailed; plant name, and publication date and page number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel-White Flint, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, and to Charles R. Kocher, Assistant GeneralCounsel and James Beoletto, Esq., Southern California Edison Company, P.O.Box 800, Rosemead, California 91770, attorneys for the licensees.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment which is available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at theGeneral Library, University of California, P.O. Box 19557, Irvine, California92713.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 21st day of April, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Charles M. Trammell,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Senior Project Manager, Project Directorate V, Division of ReactorProjects_III, IV, V and Special Projects, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10235 Filed 4-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>