<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89418-0018 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-18-89.f2.A1017</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Part 1079</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. AO-295-A38; DA-88-111]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Milk in the Iowa Marketing Area; Recommended Decision and OpportunityTo File Written Exceptions on Proposed Amendments to Tentative MarketingAgreement and to Order</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This decision recommends a limited expansion of the Iowamarketing area to include certain unregulated areas in Iowa, Illinois andMissouri, and two Wisconsin counties now included in the marketing areafor the Chicago Regional order.Also recommended is a lock-in provision that would continue to fully regulateunder the Iowa order a distributing plant that meets the pooling requirementsof another Federal order as well, and that has a larger route sales volumein the other order's marketing area, until the third consecutive monthof greater sales in the other marketing area. However, if the other orderdid not recognize the lock-in, the plant would shift to regulation underthe other order in the first month of such greater sales. A proposal topermanently pool under the Iowa order a distributing plant located in theIowa marketing area is denied.The actions recommended in this decision are based on evidence receivedat a public hearing held in August 1988 to consider proposals by SwissValley Farms, Co., a dairy farmer cooperative. The changes in the orderproposed in this recommended decision are necessary to reflect currentsales distribution patterns of handlers regulated under the Iowa orderand to maintain stable and orderly marketing conditions in the market.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments are due on or before May 9, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments (four copies) should be filed with the HearingClerk, Room 1079, South Building, United States Department of Agriculture,Washington, DC 20250.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Richard A. Glandt, MarketingSpecialist, USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968,South Building, P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-4829.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This administrative action is governedby the provisions of sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291.The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires the Agency toexamine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to 5U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The amendments would promoteorderly marketing of milk by producers and regulated handlers.Under actions recommended herein, one currently unregulated handler thatis a small business may become partially regulated under the Iowa order.The order provides partially regulated plants with options that could tendto minimize the impact of such regulation. In any event, any impact ofadopting the proposed changes is expected to be minimal for this plant.Prior documents in this proceeding:<T3>Notice of Hearing:</T3> Issued July 11, 1988; published July 13, 1988(53 FR 26446).<T3>Notice of Rescheduled Hearing:</T3> Issued July 21, 1988; publishedJuly 25, 1988 (53 FR 27863).<ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>Notice is hereby given of the filing with the Hearing Clerk of this recommendeddecision with respect to proposed amendments to the tentative marketingagreement and the order regulating the handling of milk in the Iowa marketingarea. This notice is issued pursuant to the provisions of the AgriculturalMarketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and theapplicable rules of practice and procedure governing the formulation ofmarketing agreements and marketing orders (7 CFR Part 900).Interested parties may file written exceptions to this decision with theHearing Clerk, Room 1079, South Building, U.S. Department of Agriculture,Washington, DC, 20250, by the 21st day after publication of this decisionin the <T2>Federal Register</T2>. Four copies of the exceptions should be filed.All written submissions made pursuant to this notice will be made availablefor public inspection at the office of the Hearing Clerk during regularbusiness hours (7 CFR 1.27(b)).The proposed amendments set forth below are based on the record of a publichearing held at Bettendorf, Iowa, on August 9-11, 1988, pursuant to a noticeof hearing issued July 21, 1988 (53 FR 27863).The material issues on the record of hearing relate to:1. Regulation of a distributing plant with greater Class I route salesin the marketing area of another order.2. Expansion of the Iowa Marketing Area.3. Location adjustment revision.4. Whether emergency conditions warrant the omission of a recommended decisionand the opportunity to file written exceptions thereto with respect toissue No. 1.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof:<ITAG tagnum="84">Background Statement</ITAG>Swiss Valley Farms, Co. (SVF), is a dairy farmer cooperative that operatesa distributing plant located in Dubuque, Iowa, which is a pool plant regulatedby the Iowa order. The plant has route dispositions in both the Iowa andChicago Regional marketing areas. Class I route disposition from the Dubuqueplant in the Chicago Regional (Order 30) marketing area exceeds that inthe Iowa (Order 79) marketing area. However, both orders recognize salesto pool plants qualified on the basis of route disposition in the marketingarea in determining which order will regulate the plant as a pool plant.In order to maintain the Dubuque plant's regulation under the Iowa order,SVF handles milk that is moved as Class I milk to another pool plant underthe Iowa order. It is through this mechanism that the SVF plant has beenpooled on the Iowa order. SVF testified that this procedure is costly andthat there is no guarantee that the arrangement with other handlers forshipping milk to another plant or plants will continue. The cost was reportedto be about $16,000 to $20,000 per month. If it were not for these bulksales to other plants, the Dubuque plant would shift from regulation underthe Iowa order to regulation under the Chicago order. SVF maintains thatsuch a switch would be ``devastating'' to its producers because regulationunder the Chicago order would jeopardize SVF's ability to remain competitivein attracting milk to the Dubuque plant.The record indicates that SVF procures milk in competition with about 40other handlers and has producers in four states. The handlers and the ordersthat they are regulated under are not identified, although there can belittle doubt that other handlers regulated under the Iowa order are included.There also can be little doubt that many of the Dubuque plant's producersare in Iowa. However, the record does not provide enough data to determinethe origin of SVF's receipts of farm milk at the Dubuque plant, althoughthe proponent's principal witness did express a belief that ``* * * morethan two-thirds of their producers * * *'' are in Iowa. Thus, it is notpossible from data in the record to substantiate the impact that regulationunder the Chicago order would have on SVF's ability to maintain suppliesfor its Dubuque plant. SVF maintained that it could cost in excess of $1million per year if the Dubuque plant were regulated under the Chicagoorder.The blend, or ``uniform'' price, is higher under the Iowa order, than itis under the Chicago order. The location adjustment under the Chicago orderfurther reduces the blend price at Dubuque. Thus, the monies availableto SVF to pay producers in the procurement area (wherever it is) for theDubuque plant would be less under the Chicago order than under the Iowaorder. It is because of this that SVF wants to have the Dubuque plant continueits pool status under the Iowa order.The main issue at this proceeding involves defining the marketing areato appropriately reflect that territory within which Iowa handlers arethe principal distributors of milk. The resolution of this issue is totallyindependent from the issue of a lock-in provision. The marketing area issuecannot be decided on the basis of a handlers ability to attract milk toits plant.<T3>1. Regulation of a Distributing Plant With Greater Class I Route Salesin the Marketing Area of Another Order</T3>A modified version of the two-month lock-in provision originally proposedby SVF should be adopted. However, it must be recognized that such provisionwould have no effect unless the other order involved has a complementaryprovision that recognizes the lock-in. Thus, even though adopted, the provisionwould not prevent an Iowa pool distributing plant from shifting to theChicago order until such time that the Chicago order may be changed torecognize the Iowa provision.The witness for SVF testified that their proposal number 2 would establisha lock-in for Order 79 so that a handler regulated under that order wouldcontinue to be pooled there until the third consecutive month of greaterClass I route sales by the handler in another marketing area.The witness said that since monthly reports are due promptly after theend of the month it is difficult to make an accurate determination in timeto file the report as to within which area a plant has the greater volumeof sales. He said that the retroactive impact of a plant changing ordersis irreparable to the plant's customers and its producers. Producers, hesaid, may not want to deliver to the plant anymore, but that they may notbe aware of the plant's change in regulation until six to seven weeks later.The witness for the proponent stated that their lock-in proposal shouldbe modified to provide that the market administrator announce the namesof distributing plants that qualify pursuant to this provision.The representative for SVF testified that some lead time is needed to servethe interests of handlers, producers and customers. He said that in thecase of their Dubuque plant, a change in regulation would not be just asimple one-plant switch in regulation. This, he said, is because it wouldeffect supply plants, milk diverted to nonpool plants and pumpover stations.Furthermore, he said, different qualifying and pooling provisions wouldhave to be applied.Proponent's witness testified that SVF was modifying its lock-in proposalto make the lock-in permanent. The modified proposal, he said, would applyso long as the Order 79 Class I price that applies at a plant locationis not less than the other order's Class I price that would apply to thatsame location. He said that this modified proposal would avoid the shiftingof an Order 79 plant to another order having a lower Class I price withthe consequent impairment of the plant's ability to maintain its producermilk supply.The witness for SVF said that if its Dubuque plant became regulated underOrder 30, it would have to increase the over order premium so as to bringthe producer pay price up to what would be payable if the plant had beenregulated by Order 79 for the same period. He said that if the Dubuqueplant became regulated by Order 30, its Class I price would decrease 21cents and the producer blend price would decrease even more.The witness for the proponent said that SVF cannot expect their dairy farmersin the Corydon, Iowa area to accept a 13-to-15-cent lower blend price anda minus 36-cent location adjustment for a total reduction of 50 cents.He said that the same would be true for producers in the Cedar Rapids area.Proponent's witness said that SVF has a cheese plant in Clayton Countyand the milk diverted to this plant receives the Iowa blend price lessa 24-cent location adjustment. He said that if milk diverted to this plantbecame regulated by Order 30, the blend price would be 13 to 15 cents lowerthan the Iowa blend, and a minus location adjustment of 36 cents wouldapply. Thus, returns to producers would be 26 cents per hundredweight lowerthan the Iowa blend price at that location.The witness for SVF said they must now pay more than the Iowa blend priceto procure milk. He said that if the Dubuque plant were to become regulatedunder Order 30 with its lower blend price and applicable location adjustments,it would be unable to compete for the procurement of milk from the farmsnow serving it. Regulation under Order 30, he said, would cost SVF approximatelyone million dollars per year because of the additional payments that wouldbe necessary to maintain their current producers.The proponent's witness stated that although the Department, in the past,has generally pooled a distributing plant in the order in which it hasthe largest volume of sales, it recently has departed from that policybecause of changes in the marketplace. He said that recently the Departmenthas locked-in several distributing plants in markets where they were locatedeven though they had a larger volume of sales in other markets. He notedrecent such decisions involving the Louisville-Lexington-Evansville andOhio Valley orders and also the Nashville, Tennessee order.A dairy farmer who is a member of SVF testified that regulation under Order30 would cost him about $4,900 a year, therefore, he would have to findanother market.A witness for Central Milk Producers Cooperative (CMPC) testified thathe was appearing on behalf of AMPI-Morning Glory Farms Region, Golden GuernseyCooperative, Independent Milk Producers Cooperative, Lake-to-Lake Divisionof Land O'Lakes Dairy Cooperative, Manitowoc Milk Producers Cooperative,Midwest Dairymens Company, Milwaukee Cooperative Milk Producers, OutagamieMilk Producers Cooperative, Southern Milk Sales, Wisconsin Dairies Cooperativeand Woodstock Progressive Milk Producers Association. The CMPC witnessindicated that CMPC is a federation of cooperatives whose members poolabout 93 percent of the producer milk on Order 30 and that in additionabout 94 percent of the Class I milk is priced through CMPC's premium pool.The CMPC witness testified that the lock-in proposal should be modifiedto make it clear that SVF does not intend to lock-in a pool supply plant.Furthermore, he said, there must be a corollary lock-out provision in Order30 in order to accommodate this proposal. He said without the lock-outprovision, both orders would be required to regulate the plant. The CMPCwitness proposed a modification to the proposed lock-in provision thatwas intended to insure that the Order 30 language not be superseded bythe Order 79 language.National Farmers Organization stated at the hearing that there may be somejustification for a one-month lock-in.The order currently provides that the term ``pool plant'' shall not applyto a plant that qualifies as a pool plant but which has a greater quantityof Class I dispositions in the marketing area of another order than inthe Iowa marketing area. However, the dispositions included in making thiscomparison include route dispositions plus dispositions to other plantsthat qualify as pool plants under the respective orders. So long as a plant'sroute dispositions in the Iowa marketing area plus dispositions to otherplants that are pool plants based on in-area route dispositions are greaterthan similar dispositions to another order, the plant will be pooled underthe Iowa order. The Chicago order has essentially the same provision. Thus,SVF's Dubuque plant has been able to remain fully regulated under the Iowaorder.As originally proposed, the lock-in would potentially create an impassewhere a distributing plant meets the pooling requirements of two orders.The impasse would exist because each order would claim the plant as a poolplant and neither order would yield to the other one. At the hearing, amodification was proposed such that the Iowa order lock-in would not takeeffect unless the other order had a provision that recognized the lock-in.At this time the only prospective application of a lock-in is in conjunctionwith the Chicago order. Some opponents expressed the view that a lock-inshould not be adopted since it could not function anyway.The basic purpose for a two-month lock-in is to prevent a plant from flip-floppingregulatory status between two orders and to allow some time for sales adjustmentsto be made in the event a plant has an unexpected change in its distributionpattern that would cause a shift in regulation from one order to another.Thus such a provision may be helpful in preserving market stability atunforeseen times and circumstances that may develop in the future, sincesome other nearby orders would rcognize a two-month lock-in.A lock-in provision should be applicable only to a distributing plant.This point was raised by CMPC, and is consistent with the intent of theprovision as revealed in the testimony of the proponent's witness. Therewas no indication that proponent intended any application to plants otherthan distributing plants.A suggestion by proponent that the market administrator publicly announcethe name of each handler qualifying a plant as a pool plant under the lock-inprovision should not be adopted. The purpose of this suggestion was sothat producers, handlers and customers would have advance notice of a possibleswitch in regulatory status of such a plant.The evidence on the need for such a provision is sparse. It may be, asproponent contends, that producers need to know that a plant has switchedfrom one order to another. On the other hand, it does not necessarily followthat a plant pooled under the two-month lock-in will necessarily be regulatedunder another order in the next succeeding month. It may be that the lock-inprovision has been applicable in a situation where the handler has madeadjustments in operations that will result in the plant continuing to bepooled under the Iowa order. Given the possible range of conditions thatapplication of the lock-in may reflect, it does not appear that an announcementby the market administrator would be particularly useful. The lock-in provisionrecommended in this decision does not contain such a requirement.As adopted, a plant that had been a pool distributing plant under the Iowaorder for the preceding month, but which in the current month has greaterClass I dispositions (route sales and/or transfers to plants) in anothermarketing area, would continue to be a pool plant until the third consecutivemonth of such greater dispositions in the other area, unless the otherorder nevertheless regulates the plant.A further proposed modification by the proponent should not be adopted.SVF proposed an additional provision to permanently lock a distributingplant located in the Iowa marketing area into the Iowa order so long asthe Iowa order's Class I price at that plant's location is not less thanthe price at that location under the order in which the plant had the greaterroute disposition. Such a provision was adopted recently in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansvilleorder, with a corollary change in the Ohio Valley order, and in the Nashvilleorder, with a corollary change in the Georgia order. SVF maintains thatthe market situations that led to such amendments to these orders are similarto SVF's procurement problem involved in this proceeding. This latter proposedmodification also was widely opposed.The two recent proceedings involving other orders that were cited by bothproponents and opponents have no bearing on this proceeding. Whether ornot there are certain similarities in the situation that concerns SVF andthose that existed in the other orders cannot be decisive in this proceeding.Moreover, without regard to the merit of any evidence submitted by SVFor opponents, further consideration at this time is unwarranted becausea corollary amendment to the Chicago order clearly would be required. However,such an amendment to the Chicago order is not an issue in this proceeding.Therefore, adoption of a permanent lock-in provision would serve no purpose.At the hearing, the witness for the proponents expressed his view thatabsent a corollary amendment of the Chicago Regional order to recognizea lock-in provision in the Iowa order, the lock-in nevertheless could beimplemented by terminating certain provisions of the Chicago order.If this were done, it would change the Chicago order's present applicationwhere the order does not recognize any lock-in provision, to potentiallyhaving to recognize lock-in provisions in any order having such provisions.The merits of such an action have not been explored on the record of thisproceeding. There simply is no record evidence supporting such a change,nor any other evidence that would lead to a conclusion that such actionwas necessary because the provision to be terminated obstructs or doesnot tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act.2. Expansion of the Iowa marketing areaThe Iowa marketing area should be expanded to incorporate additional territorieswhere it is clear that a majority of the milk distributed therein was distributedby plants fully regulated under the Iowa order. The specific territoriesthat should be added are identified on a state-by-state basis later inthe discussion of this issue.Swiss Valley Farms, Co. (SVF), proposed that the Iowa marketing area beexpanded to include the following counties:1. In Iowa, the counties of Des Moines, Henry, Lee and Van Buren.2. In Illinois the counties of Hancock and Henderson, and the townshipsof Fulton, Ustick, Clyde, Genesee, Mount Pleasant, Union Grove, GardenPlain, Lynden, Fenton, Newton, Prophetstown, Portland and Erie in WhitesideCounty.3. In Missouri, the counties of Clark, Grundy, Harrison, Lewis, Mercer,Putnam, Schuyler and Scotland.4. In Wisconsin, the counties of Crawford and Grant.At the hearing, SVF modified the proposal by deleting Hancock County inIllinois and Lewis and Clark Counties in Missouri.The witness for the proponents testified that SVF markets milk of approximately2300 dairy farmer members and that most of the milk is pooled under theIowa marketing order (Order 79) through their fluid milk plant in Dubuqueand their supply plants that assemble milk for transfer to the Dubuquedistributing plant.The proponent's witness said that SVF distributes a substantial amountof packaged fluid milk products into the Chicago Regional marketing area(Order 30) and that any further expansion into Order 30 will regulate theirDubuque plant under Order 30. He said that the impact of that change inregulation would be devastating because of the location adjustment provisionsand the unit qualification for supply plant provisions of Order 30. Hestated that the price that SVF would be able to return to its members underOrder 30 would not allow it to be competitive in the supply area for theirDubuque plant. SVF witness stated that their proposals would allow it to continue poolingtheir Dubuque plant under Order 79 and avoid jeopardizing its supply ofmilk. The proponent's witness said that SVF is not attempting to secure a lowerprice on the Class I milk distributed from its Dubuque plant. He said thatthe Class I price fixed by the Iowa order at the Dubuque location is 21.9cents higher than the Class I price fixed by Order 30 at this same location.The witness stated that the plants that SVF compete with in the Order 30marketing area are not placed at a competitive price disadvantage withthe Dubuque plant being pooled under Order 79 rather than Order 30. The witness for the proponent said that the location adjustment under Order30 fixes the minimum Order 30 Class I price and blend price at Dubuquebelow the prices set by Order 79. Order 79, he said, like most orders,establishes a lower price to the north and higher price to the west andsouth whereas Order 30 establishes a lower price west and south. The proponent's witness said that the Agricultural Marketing AgreementAct of 1937 requires the Secretary to fix the price at locations that willinsure an adequate supply of milk at that location. He said that this standardis not met under both orders by having a lower price at Waterloo, Iowa,under Order 30, than the price at this same location under Order 79. Thenet effect of this misalignment, he said, is to create an artificial tradebarrier. The witness stated that proponent's exhibit shows that as the distancefrom Chicago increases in a westerly direction through Davenport, Iowa,the price difference increased from 29.2 cents at Davenport to 52.3 centsin Jasper County (Iowa) and points west. He said that these price differenceshave stopped Iowa producers from supplying plants regulated by Order 30.There is no Iowa producer milk moving to Order 30 regulated plants, hesaid, except from the extreme northeast counties of Iowa. Proponent's witness indicated that in order for a distributing plant tocompete for sales, it must have a raw product price reasonably in linewith others selling in the area. He said that raw product costs are a combinationof the order's class prices and the additional payment that it takes toattract milk to the plant. He stated that the additional payment must bemade to all producers supplying the plant; otherwise there would be instability(disorderly marketing) in the procurement area. Thus, a plant located inIowa cannot pay the Order 30 price reduced by location adjustments andprocure milk in competition with plants paying the Order 79 price, he said.The witness for the proponent indicated that the Department in the pasthas recognized this inconsistency in other markets and has resolved theproblem by snubbing the price in a marketing area to the price fixed bythe order for that area. He said that would require a major overhaul ofthe Order 30 pricing system and the support of the majority of the Order30 producers and that a more expedient way in dealing with the problemis to revise the Order 79 marketing area to fit the distribution pattenof plants subject to regulation by the order. In his opinion, the SVF proposalsdo not completely resolve this inconsistency in prices and that this problemeventually must be resolved by an appropriate amendment to Order 30. Inthe meantime, proponents are looking for other ways to keep the plant pooledunder the Iowa order. The proponent's witness testified that the distribution pattern of fluidmilk plants have changed substantially since the marketing orders in Iowaand neighboring states were established. He said that distributing plants,such as the SVF Dubuque plant, distribute fluid milk products over a muchgreater geographical area and that this benefits the milk suppliers, plantoperators and consumers by way of a lower per unit processing cost. The witness for SVF testified that a survey conducted by SVF indicatedthat Iowa handlers have approximately 92 percent of the sales in that portionof Whiteside County that is proposed being added to the marketing area.In Henderson County, he said, Iowa handlers have about 53 percent of thesales. In Hancock County, he said Order 32 handlers (Southern Illinois)have the majority of sales. Hancock County, he said, is included in theproposal for the convenience of Iowa handlers because of the requirementfor reporting in-area and out-of-area sales. Iowa handlers, he said, have about 95 percent of the sales in Henry County;about 72 percent in Des Moines County; about 64 percent in Lee County andabout 94 percent of the sales in Van Buren County. He said in total, Iowahandlers have about 74 percent of the sales in the Iowa counties proposedto be added.In the Missouri counties of Harrison, Mercer, Putnam, and Schuyler, Iowahandlers, he said, have 100 percent of the sales. In Grundy, he said, Iowahandlers have 55 percent of the sales. He said that in Scotland Countysales are divided equally between Iowa and Illinois plants. Order 32 plants,he said, have the majority of sales in Lewis and Clark Counties. The inclusionof these two countries, he said, also is for the convenience of the Iowahandlers who have to report separately in-area and out-of-area sales. Intotal, he said, Iowa handlers have 61 percent of the sales in the Missouricounties proposed being added to the Order 79 marketing area.The witness for SVF said that for Grant and Crawford Counties, Iowa handlershave 61 percent of the sales, Upper Midwest handlers have 20 percent andChicago handlers have 14 percent. He said that adding these two countiesto the Order 79 marketing area will not change the current status of anyplant under either order or the classification of milk or the blend pricein either order.The proponent's witness stated that SVF wished to modify its expansionproposal by deleting Hancock, Lewis, and Clark Counties because the surveyshowed that Order 79 handlers do not have the majority of sales in thesecounties.Anderson Erickson Dairy Co., although it did not present testimony at thehearing, filed a brief in support of the SVF proposals.The first of many witnesses to testify in opposition to the proposals wasa representative for Prairie Farms Dairy (PFD). The PFD witness said thattheir organization, although it has a joint venture interest in an Order30 pool plant as well as a joint venture interest in two plants regulatedunder Order 79, was testifying on behalf of their solely owned plants pooledon the Southern Illinois market (Order 32).The opponent's witness stated that PFD has over 500 producers located inthe Order 32 marketing area and that it also acquires milk from cooperativeswhose members are located in Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin and Illinois. Hesaid that the SVF proposal could adversely impact on these cooperativesand their ability to provide milk to their Order 32 plants.The PFD witness said that their immediate concern was their distributingplant located at Quincy, Illinois (Adams County). He said that the Quincyplant receives about 8 million pounds of milk per month and utilizes about70 percent of this milk in Class I. The Quincy plant, he said, is in anunregulated county with large unregulated areas around Quincy.The witness for PFD testified that for the past 12 months the Quincy plantsales averaged about five percent in Central Illinois (Order 50), about19 percent in Order 32 and about 76 percent in non-regulated areas. Hesaid that SVF proposal for the expansion of the marketing area, prior toits modification deleting several counties, would have made it very difficultfor it to remain pooled under Order 32. He maintained that the expansionproposal would not solve SVF problem but would shift the problem from onecooperative to another.The witness for PFD testified that although they did not do their own surveyof the proposed expansion, it did compare its sales in the various countieswith SVF estimated PFD sales. He said that there is no economic, historical,practical, or beneficial justification for including any of the Missouri,Illinois or Iowa counties in the expansion except for the Iowa countiesof Henry, Des Moines, and the Illinois county of Henderson.The opponent's witness testified that their exhibit shows that for Hendersonand Hancock counties in Illinois in total, SVF had 15.1 percent of thesales in these two counties and that SVF estimated that PFD had 62 percentof the sales in the two counties while PFD's exhibit shows actual salesas 25.7 percent.The representative for PFD said that their exhibit shows for the eightMissouri counties in total, SVF has 7.9 percent of the sales in those countiesand that SVF estimated PFD had 29.6 percent of the total county sales.PFD's exhibit shows actual sales as 25.5 percent.The witness said that the PFD exhibit shows that for the four Iowa countiesin total, that SVF had 21.4 percent and that SVF estimated that PFD had8.9 percent of those sales compared to PFD actual sales of 19.1 percent.The witness for the opponent testified that for March 1988, the Quincyplant had 19.8 percent of its sales in Order 32 and if all of the countiesoriginally proposed by SVF would become part of the Order 79 marketingarea, their Quincy plant would have had 15.6 percent of their sales inOrder 79. He said that the 4.2 percent difference, which equates to about200,000 pounds of milk, is unacceptable to PFD.The opponent's witness proposed that only Henderson County (Illinois) andHenry and Des Moines Counties (Iowa) be included in the expanded marketingarea. These three counties, he said, would give SVF about 53 percent oftheir sales in all of the 14 proposed counties. He said that allowing the11 other counties to remain as unregulated would allows PFD a reasonablesales cushion between orders 32 and 79. Of the 11 counties, he said, theQuincy plant would have had about 34 percent of the total sales comparedto 13 percent for SVF. He said that for the three counties that PFD suggestsbe added to the marketing area, SVF would have about 23 percent of thetotal and the Quincy plant less than one percent. He also indicated thatPFD could support adding the townships named in Whiteside County, Illinois,to the marketing area. Land O'Lakes, Inc., although not presenting testimonyat the hearing, filed a bried in support of PFD's modified proposal.The witness for PFD testified that the 120 Quincy producers are locatedin southeast Iowa, northeast Missouri, and western Illinois. He said thatthe central locations in the proposed two Illinois counties are on theaverage only 68 miles from Quincy while they are 154 miles from Dubuque.Central locations in the proposed Iowa counties, he said, are on the average74 miles from Quincy compared to an average of 154 miles from Dubuque.He said that central locations in the proposed Missouri counties show thaton average they are 99 miles from Quincy while being 236 miles from Dubuque.Efficiency of distribution alone, he said, should support the concept thatthis area is best served by the Quincy plant compared to the Dubuque plant.The witness for the opponent testified that regulation of their Quincyplant by Order 79 would be devastating to PFD and their dairy farmers.For example, he said that the blend price to dairy farmers associated withthe Quincy plant would have averaged 45 cents less if the plant had beenregulated by the Iowa order. A 45-cent reduction in blend prices wouldamount to over $560,000 for one year, according to the witness. Land-O-Lakesand Associated Milk Producers, Inc., he said, have told PFD that they couldnot deliver milk to Quincy at these prices.The representative for PFD said that since May 1987 PFD has been receivingmilk from SVF into its joint venture pool distributing plants located inIowa City and Des Moines, Iowa, for the purpose of helping SVF continueto qualify the Dubuque plant on Order 79.The expansion proposal, he said would encourage SVF to increase their salesinto this newly expanded area, so as to be able to increase their salesinto Order 30. He said that PFD would be discouraged from expanding intothe area that has been home country for the Quincy plant for over 50 years.Numerous interested parties that are either dairy farmer cooperatives orproprietary handlers regulated under the Chicago order presented testimonyin opposition to the SVF proposals. In general, such opposition expressedviews that: (1) SVF should be regulated under the Chicago order becauseit has greater Class I route dispositions in the Chicago marketing areathan in the Iowa marketing area; (2) SVF, due to the higher Iowa blendprices, has a competitive advantage over Order 30 regulated handlers inobtaining raw milk supplies in some areas of Wisconsin and Illinois; (3)because SVF has a milk procurement advantage, it also has an advantagein selling packaged milk (lower sales price). Chicago handlers have lostsales accounts to SVF. (4) SVF's problems are its own doing since SVF activelyhas expanded sales outlets in the Chicago market; (5) expansion of theIowa marketing area now will lead to further expansion in the future; (6)the Chicago and Iowa marketing areas should be merged; (7) SVF activelyseeks (and obtains) contracts to supply milk to schools and colleges inthe Chicago marketing area; (8) adding Crawford and Grant Counties in Wisconsinto the Iowa marketing area would increase the Iowa blend price and decreasethe Chicago order blend price, and thus take away about $1.6 million peryear from Order 30 producers; and (9) the evidence shows an overlap inthe milk procurement areas of the Chicago and Iowa orders such that theChicago marketing area should be expanded. Therefore, the record shouldbe kept open so that additional proposals on this issue could be submitted.In addition, CMPC witnesses specifically opposed all the SVF proposalsfor the following reasons:(1) Failure of the Department of Agriculture (USDA) to notify all interestedpersons that a hearing request had been made and to invite comments onadditional proposals;(2) USDA's refusal to consider that because a marketing area proposal wouldbe heard, then all other provisions of the order would be open for proposedamendment;(3) Removing two counties from the Chicago marketing area and adding themto the Iowa marketing area would, in effect, amend the Chicago order withoutproviding Order 30 interested parties an opportunity to submit additionalproposals; and (4) The proposals attempt to circumvent the pool plant provisions of theChicago order without a proper notice to amend the order's pool plant definition.Most of the testimony by interested parties regulated under the Chicagoorder concerned opposition to continued pool status under the Iowa orderfor DVF's Dubuque plant. However, most of that testimony more nearly relatesto the issue of a lock-in-provision. That issue has been dealt with earlierin this document. Therefore, only a brief summary of the Chicago parties'positions has been noted here.A witness for Deters All Star Dairy, Inc. (Deters), said that they operatean unregulated distributing plant in Quincy, Illinois, with about 15 percentof their sales in the Iowa Counties of Lee, Des Moines, Henry and Van Buren;the Missouri Counties of Scotland, Putnam, Schuyler, and the Illinois Countiesof Hancock and Henderson. He said that Deters is opposed to all of theproposals except for adding the Wisconsin Counties of Crawford and Grant,the Illinois County of Whiteside or the Missouri Counties of Grundy, Harrisonor Mercer. The expansion proposal, he said, would cause Deters to becomeregulated, resulting in an increase in their reporting and bookkeepingcosts.<ITAG tagnum="81">Specific Territories to be Added to the Marketing Area</ITAG>(a) <T3>Illinois territory: </T3>The unregulated townships in Whiteside Countyand Henderson County should be added to the Iowa marketing area. In WhitesideCounty, the 13 townships are predominantly served by Iowa handlers, whoseClass I sales in the area are estimated at over 90 percent of the total.In Henderson County, SVF reported its own sales and estimated sales forone other Order 79 handler to comprise 53 percent of total Class I sales.SVF's survey resulted in an estimate that Prairies Farms (Quincy) had about28 percent of the sales and that another Order 32 plant had 19 percent.The only other data submitted at the hearing was by the Prairie Farms Dairyrepresentative. His data showed that the Quincy plant's sales amountedto only one percent of the estimated total in Henderson County. This isa large discrepancy (28 percent versus one percent). However, the SVF estimatesof the Quincy plant's sales were larger than actual. Since it is clearthe survey did not over-estimate, it is probable that the 53 percent oftotal estimate may be too low. Henderson County's Class I sales appearto come mostly (more than half, at least) from Iowa handlers' plants. Accordingly,Henderson County should be identified as part of the marketing area forthe Iowa order.(b) <T3>Iowa territory</T3>: Henry, Des Moines, and Van Buren Counties, whichnow are unregulated, should be included in the Iowa marketing area. Iowahandlers are estimated to have about 90 percent of the Class I sales inHenry and Van Buren Counties, and about 70 percent in Des Moines County.The Prairie Farms representatives presented data on its sales in Henryand Van Buren Counties, which showed less sales than estimated by SVF.A witness for Deters Dairy, Quincy, Illinois, indicated that any salesfrom its plant in these counties would be very small. Therefore, thereis no reason to question whether Iowa handlers predominate in service tothese counties. No one offered any data other than SVF's estimate of salesin Des Moines County.Lee County also was proposed to be in the marketing area. SVF's estimatedtotal distribution in this county was 804,358 pounds, of which SVF distributed173,339 pounds and estimated another 43 percent of the total to have beendistributed by two other Iowa handlers. SVF estimated that Prairie FarmsDairy, Qunicy, Illinois, had another 20 percent, which left 16 percentdivided almost equally among three other non-Iowa order handlers. However,the Prairie Farms witness testified that actual sales in Lee County fromits Quincy plant amounted to 396,352 pounds, or 49.3 percent of estimatedtotal consumption, rather than the 20 percent figure noted above. Thisdiscrepancy cannot be explained from information available in the record.Thus, assuming that the estimated total consumption figure for Lee Countyis reasonable, it cannot be concluded that Iowa handlers have a majorityof Class I distribution in the County. Accordingly, Lee County should notbe identified as part of the marketing area for the Iowa order.(c) <T3>Missouri territory</T3>: Five of the eight proposed unregulated Missouricounties should be added to the marketing area. They are: Grundy, Harrison,Mercer, Putnam, and Schuyler Counties. The other three (Clark, Lewis, andScotland) should remain unregulated.Class I consumption in Grundy County was estimated by SVF to be about 223,000pounds per month. SVF's sales in Grundy County are small, at about 6,000pounds, while sales by other Iowa handlers were projected by SVF to bemore than 50 percent of the total. However, SVF overestimated the amountof milk distributed in Grundy County by Priarie Farms of Quincy. At thehearing, Deters dairy indicated that they had no problem with Grundy Countybeing added to the marketing area of the Iowa order. Thus it appears thatIowa handlers have at least 55 percent of the Class I disposition in GrundyCounty. Harrison and Mercer Counties also should be included in the marketingarea. SVF's survey indicated virtually all of the Class I milk in bothcounties was distributed by plants regulated under the Iowa order. Therewas no contrary evidence concerning these counties.SVF's survey of Putnam County indicated that virtually all the Class Imilk was distributed in the County by Iowa order handlers. The witnessfor Deters Dairy indicated that any milk distributed from the Quincy plantwould be small, and was not sure whether it would include any Class I milkat all. Thus, there is a sound basis in the record to include Putnam County.The preceding paragraph could apply to Schuyler County as well, since theSVF survey found only products distributed by Iowa handlers. However, therepresentative for Deters Dairy indicated that here, too, there might bea very small amount of Class I milk dispositions by a distributor, butnot any direct distribution by Deters. So, in Shuyler County, the evidenceleads to a conclusion that Iowa handlers have nearly all, if not all, ofthe Class I sales.Clark, Lewis, and Scotland Counties, should not be added to the Iowa marketingarea. The first two were dropped from the proposal by the proponents. Moreover,the sales data would not support the proposal. The latter, Scotland County,should not be included because there is at least a 50 percent discrepancyin sales survey results. SVF's survey indicated 100 percent of the salesin Scotland County came from Iowa order plants. Prairie Farms, on the otherhand, indicated that it's Quincy plant had route sales equal to 58 percentof the estimated consumption. This discrepancy remains unresolved. Theavailable data do not permit a conclusion that Scotland County is servedprimarily by Iowa plants. Therefore, the inclusion of Scotland County mustbe denied.In several of these counties, the sales by SVF are a small proportion ofthe total. However, what is most important in this case is whether thepredominant distributors of Class I milk are handlers regulated by theIowa order.Deters, in its testimony and in its brief, took the view that several ofthe proposed counties should not be added to the marketing area becauseno evidence can be found that disorderly marketing conditions exist.It is not necessary that disorderly marketing conditions exist before acounty or other parcel of territory may be annexed to a marketing area.While other factors may be involved, the principal basis for defining marketingareas under the Federal milk marketing order program long has been thata marketing area defines a common sales area served primarily by competinghandlers. If that condition exists, and it does in most of the countiesdiscussed thus far, then the absence of market disorder of no consequence.A major purpose of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 isto promote orderly marketing. It is not a prerequisite that disorderlymarketing must exist before this goal of the Act may be achieved.The territory in Illinois, Iowa, and Missouri that should be added to theIowa marketing area should have no impact on the regulatory status of thePrairie Farms plant at Quincy, and only minimal impact upon Deters Dairy,which is unregulated. The representative of Prairie Farms introduced an exhibit showing its Quincyplant's route sales in the counties proposed to be part of the Iowa marketingorder. The total shown for March 1988 was 871,842 pounds. The witness expressedconcern that this amount was large enough that any increase in sales inthe Iowa order could cause the plant to flip over to regulation under theIowa order. However, the plant's sales in the nine counties adopted inthis decision amounted to only 115,273 pounds, or only 13 percent of thetotal sales in the counties originally proposed by SVF. This should minimizeany concern of Prairie Farms that expanding the Iowa order could causeits Quincy plant to shift to the Iowa order. With regard to Deters Dairy, it is not possible to state exactly what portionof its Class I distribution will be partially regulated under the expandedIowa order. However, in the nine counties in Illinois, Iowa, and Missouri,Deter's witness indicated only very small, or perhaps no sales at all.Therefore, it is expected that any impact upon Deters due to this actionwould be minimal, in that the plant would be only partially regulated.As the operator of a partially regulated distributing plant, Deters wouldbe required to pay an administrative assessment on the total hundredweightsof route dispositions in the marketing area, less any receipts of milkpriced as Class I milk under a Federal order. The maximum assessment ratefor this purpose is four cents per hundredweight. Additionally, Deters would have the option to have any further obligationcomputed under one of the following: 1. Compute the handler's total value of milk at the order's class pricesjust as if the plant were a fully regulated pool plant. Subtract paymentsmade for milk that would have been producer milk if the plant had beenfully regulated. Any positive difference would be paid to the producer-settlementfund. 2. An amount computed by multiplying the total hundredweights of routedispositions in the marketing area, less any receipts at the plant of milkpriced as Class I milk under a Federal order, by the difference betweenthe applicable Class I and uniform prices. This amount would be paid tothe producer-settlement fund. If the plant received milk priced as ClassI milk under a Federal order in an amount at least equal to the in-arearoute dispositions, there would be no obligation. In order to determine the payment obligations referred to above, Deterswould be subject to certain reporting requirements of the order. Deters undoubtedly operates a small business. Although the options justdescribed are available to any handler that operates a partially regulateddistributing plant, they do provide a small business with choices thatcan help minimize the impact of even partial regulation.(d) <T3>Wisconsin territory: </T3>The marketing area of the Iowa order shouldbe expanded to include Crawford and Grant Counties in Wisconsin. Both ofthese counties are currently included in the marketing area for the ChicagoRegional order. The data submitted by SVF in their sales survey included estimates forthese two counties. These data show that Chicago order handlers accountfor an estimated 8 percent of the route dispositions in Crawford County,and 16 percent in Grant County. The actual sales by SVF in these countiesrepresent 54 and 70 percent of estimated consumption in Crawford and GrantCounties, respectively. The remainder was estimated to be distributed bya handler regulated under the Upper Midwest milk order. At the hearing, a representative for Dean Foods indicated through cross-examinationthat his firm's route disposition amounted to some 13.6 percent of thetotal in Crawford County, rather than 8 percent as shown on the SVF exhibit.It must be noted that the exhibit does not list Dean Foods as a distributorin Crawford County, but does for Grant County at an estimated level of8 percent. This raises a question as to whether the SVF survey erred innot picking up Dean as a distributor in Crawford County, or whether theDean representative misspoke in his question to a AMPI witness. It probablymakes little difference because the sales figures quoted for SVF are basedon actual sales figure, whereas the percentages indicated for other distributorsare estimates. Thus, if the estimated total consumption figures are aboutright, an error in estimates for other distributors would not change theconclusion that an Iowa handler, SVF, is the largest distributor with morethan half of the Class I milk in both counties. This being the case, bothcounties should be identified as part of the Iowa order marketing area,rather than the Chicago Regional order marketing area, based on currentmarketing conditions as revealed in the record of this proceeding. It is noted that there were no distributing plants under either order ineither county in May 1988. However, there were four reserve supply plantsunder the Chicago order that were located in these counties, and two supplyplants pooled under the Iowa order located therein. Crawford and Grant Counties clearly are areas where there is overlappingof supplies for both the Chicago and Iowa Orders. The evidence in the recordindicates also that there is keen competition for those supplies. In December1987 the producers located in the two counties were about evenly dividedbetween the two orders, with a few more producers and a little bit moremilk that participated in the Iowa market than in the Chicago market. The facts just noted do not weigh heavily in favor of inclusion in eithermarketing area. Therefore, the question of which order's handlers distributemore milk in the two counties takes on added importance as a determiningfactor concerning which marketing area should include the two counties.In this regard, this record clearly supports a conclusion that, Crawfordand Grant Counties in Wisconsin have a stronger association with the Iowamarket than with any other market for which data were provided at the hearing.At the hearing, and in certain briefs filed, the validity of the salessurvey conducted by or for SVF was questioned. Briefly stated, the estimateswere made as follows: (1) Estimated consumption of fluid milk products for each county._Used a national average annual per capita consumption figure (source_MilkIndustry Foundation, Washington, DC) divided by 365 to get a per capitaconsumption figure of .622 pounds per day._Used population data based on the 1980 U.S. Census, adjusted to 1985 (source_RandMcNally Atlas)._Multiplied the population for a given county by the daily per capita consumptionfigure, and multiplied the result by 30 to get an estimate of total monthlyfluid milk products consumption.(2) The sales figures for SVF are annual sales divided by 12 to producea monthly figure.(3) The estimated percentages of total sales in each county by handlersother than SVF were arrived at through discussions with customers and byon-site observations in ``Practically every store of any consequence.''There is no doubt that the methodology employed by SVF did not produceperfectly accurate results. The testimony by Prairie Farms' witness indicatedactual sales figures different from those estimated by SVF clearly showsthis. Nevertheless, such differences generally did not change the criticalquestion of whether Iowa handlers were the dominant distributors in a givencounty. If such differences appeared to raise a serious question in thatregard, the county was not included in the marketing area expansion. Italso must be noted that except for Prairie Farms, no one else producedspecific sales data. By and large, SVF's estimates remained unchallengedand uncontradicted. Accordingly, they must be regarded in this record asreasonable estimates, except as otherwise noted in the discussions of theindividual counties.The current issue of whether Crawford and Grant Counties in Wisconsin shouldbe in the Iowa marketing area is quite similar to an earlier question involvingeight counties in northwestern Indiana. The eight counties, formerly knownas the Northwestern Indiana marketing area were involved in the ChicagoRegional marketing area when that order was promulgated on July 1, 1968.However, only a few months later it was found that the inclusion of thosecounties in the Chicago Regional marketing area had caused major competitiveproblems for 12 small local handlers because they were not regulated ina way that insured a milk cost comparable with their main competition.This occurred because the blend price under the Chicago order would belower than the uniform prices as computed under the former NorthwesternIndiana order. For example, the decision notes that under the Chicago orderthe blend price at Northwestern Indiana plants ``* * * is expected to averagemore than 30 cents below the prices received by Indiana producers shippingto Fort Wayne or Indianapolis.'' Accordingly, the eight counties were removedfrom the Chicago order and were included in the new Indiana marketing area.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Official Notice is taken of the Assistant Secretary'sdecision, issued December 5, 1968, published on December 10, 1068 (33 FR18282) on Milk in Indianapolis, Ind. (Renamed ``Indiana''), Fort Wayne,Ind., and Chicago Regional Marketing Areas.The record in this proceeding clearly demonstrates that SVF's Dubuque plantwould be competitively disadvantaged in competing with other plants regulatedby the Iowa order for local supplies of milk if it became regulated underthe Chicago order. Thus, this decision parallels in many ways the 1968decision to remove the eight northwestern Indiana counties from the ChicagoRegional marketing area.Including Crawford and Grant Counties in the Iowa marketing area, basedon the fact that Iowa regulated handlers have the majority of Class I dispositionsin those counties, will lessen the likelihood that the Dubuque plant willswitch to regulation under the Chicago order. However, if SVF continuesto expand its sales in the remainder of the Chicago marketing area, suchaction nevertheless could bring about such a shift.The principal opposition to expanding the marketing area came from cooperativesand handlers subject to the Chicago Regional order. In their view, if SVFhad greater route dispositions in the Chicago marketing area than in theIowa area, then the Dubuque plant should be regulated under the Chicagoorder. Otherwise, SVF should reduce distribution in the Chicago marketingarea. The Chicago interested parties also held that SVF has an advantageover Chicago cooperatives and handlers in competing for producer milk suppliesin Wisconsin so long as SVF is regulated under the Iowa order, which hasa higher uniform price than the Chicago order. They also urged that otheravenues should be pursued, such as revising the location adjustment provisionsof the Chicago order, merging orders, and expanding the Chicago marketingarea to include the territory previously regulated by the Quad Cities-Dubuquemilk order, which is part of the marketing area of the current Iowa order.Accordingly, Counsel for CMPC moved that this proceeding should be terminatedwithout issuing a recommended or final decision. The basis for the motionwas that SVF failed to provide the data necessary to permit the Secretaryto reach a decision on the merits of the proposals considered at the hearing.Alternatively, he urged that the record be kept open so that other proposalsnot heard could be considered at a continuation of the hearing. The issuance of this document constitutes a denial of the motion to terminatethe proceeding or to keep the record open. As noted earlier, the limitedlock-in provision that is adopted cannot be made effective with respectto the Chicago order for the reason stated. Also, the proposal raised atthe hearing for a permanent lock-in is denied for the reasons stated. Theremaining issue, marketing area expansion, can be, and has been, appropriatelydecided based on the information obtained at the hearing. Therefore, itis concluded that it would serve no useful purpose to reopen the hearingto consider additional proposals at this time. Such action would only serveto delay the timely issuance of appropriate action based on the hearingrecord. It must be recognized that the limited marketing area expansion adoptedherein may not provide a permanent solution to the issues raised at thisproceeding. Rather, it may serve as a stop-gap approach to SVF's problemof regulatory status while the dairy industry in the areas involved searchesfor a broader based longer-term solution. Some of the information introducedin this proceeding suggests that the industry needs to study the questionof order mergers or other possible actions. However, there is no indicationat this point that such studies are underway or that any consensus existsabout what type of action to pursue in the future. Therefore, this proceedingshould be completed in a timely fashion. If and when the industry is readyto pursue some other action, a new proceeding can be requested. The Chicago interested parties also objected vigorously to the fact thatthe Chicago order was not open for amendment in this proceeding, especiallywith regard to the two Wisconsin counties considered for addition to theIowa marketing area. In the Chicago parties' views, the Secretary couldnot delete those counties from the definition of the Chicago order marketingarea without a proceeding to amend the Chicago order. In response we note that all cooperatives and handlers that supply milkto or are fully regulated under the Chicago order were sent a copy of theHearing Notice. That notice advised such parties of the nature of the proposaland invited any interested parties to participate in the hearing and toaddress specifically the question of whether the counties should be partof the Iowa marketing area. Even though the provisions of the Chicago orderwere not open for consideration, those who may be directly affected bythis proceeding were so notified and provided an opportunity to testifyor otherwise submit evidence. No one was denied an opportunity to be heardon this issue. At issue is the question of which mechanism to employ to implement findingsbased on a public hearing. This decision finds that Crawford and GrantCounties in Wisconsin should be included in the Iowa marketing area ratherthan in the Chicago marketing area. In order to implement these findings,two steps are necessary. One is to add the territory to the Iowa marketingarea by amendment of the Iowa order. The other step involves removing theterritory from the provision defining the Chicago order marketing area.This may be done either of two ways. One way is to amend the Chicago order.However, that cannot be done in this instance because the Chicago orderwas not open in this proceeding. However, the Secretary has authority inandSection; 608c(16)(A)(i) to terminate any provision of an order that doesnot tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act. Having found onthe basis of a properly noticed public hearing that the two Wisconsin countiesshould be included in the marketing area defined by the Iowa order, theSecretary must conclude that they should no longer be defined as part ofthe Chicago marketing area. An entirely appropriate means for carryingout this conclusion is by terminating that part of the Chicago order whichprovides that the two counties in question are included under the order.Such method has an advantage in terms of timeliness and of economy in implementinga decision. 3. Location adjustment revision. The order should be amended to specifythat the territory in Whiteside County, Illinois, which is being addedto the marketing area, should be included in Zone 2 for location adjustmentpricing purposes. The other Illinois counties in the marketing area arein Zone 2 now. Aside from proponent's brief statement, no one else addressed this proposal.Currently there are no Iowa order pool plants in the 13 townships of WhitesideCounty. Thus, addition of these townships to Zone 2 (minus 7 cents) willnot change the Class I or uniform price of any handler fully regulatedunder the Iowa order. This change is necessary to assure proper price alignment should thereever be a pool plant, or a nonpool plant that handles surplus milk pooledunder the Iowa order, located in the portion of Whiteside County that willbe in the marketing area. The townships are adjacent to other territoryin Illinois and Iowa that are in Zone 2. For these reasons, the proposalshould be adopted.4. Whether an emergency exists to warrant the omission of a recommendeddecision and the opportunity to file written exceptions with respect toissue number 1. The notice of hearing stated that evidence will be takento determine whether emergency marketing conditions exist that would warrantthe omission of a recommended decision under the rules of practice andprocedure with respect to Proposal No. 2 (plant lock-in). Although thisdecision provides for the two month lock-in as modified, the provisionwould have no application until such time as the Chicago order may be amendedto provide for an accommodating lock-out provision. Several parties objectedto the request by SVF for the omission of a recommended decision. We concludethat omitting a recommended decision would serve no useful purpose. Therecan be no justification for adopting and implementing on an emergency basisa provision that cannot be utilized in the foreseeable future. Accordingly,a recommended decision has been issued.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings</ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the Iowa order was first issued and when it was amended.The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,except where they may conflict with those set forth herein.(a) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, will tend toeffectuate the declared policy of the Act;(b) The parity prices of milk as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the marketing area, and the minimum prices specifiedin the tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors, insurea sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and be in the publicinterest; and(c) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, will regulate the handling of milk in the same manner as,and will be applicable only to persons in the respective classes of industrialand commercial activity specified in, a marketing agreement upon whicha hearing has been held.<ITAG tagnum="85">Recommended Marketing Agreement and Order Amending the Order </ITAG>The recommended marketing agreement is not included in this decision becausethe regulatory provisions thereof would be the same as those containedin the order, as hereby proposed to be amended. The following order amendingthe order, as amended regulating the handling of milk in the Iowa marketingarea is recommended as the detailed and appropriate means by which theforegoing conclusions may be carried out.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 1079</ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1079_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 7 CFR Part 1079 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-674.</ITAG>2. Amend andSection; 1079.2 by revising paragraphs (a) and (b), and addingparagraphs (c) and (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1079.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Iowa marketing area.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(a) The Iowa counties of: Adair, Adams, Allamakee, Appanoose, Audubon,Benton, Back Hawk, Boone, Bremer, Buchanan, Butler, Calhoun, Carroll, Cedar,Cerro Gordo, Chickasaw, Clarke, Clayton, Clinton, Dallas, Davis, Decatur,Delaware, Des Moines, Dubuque, Fayette, Floyd, Franklin, Greene, Grundy,Guthrie, Hamilton, Hancock, Hardin, Henry, Humboldt, Iowa, Jackson, Jasper,Jefferson, Johnson, Jones, Keokuk, Linn, Louisa, Lucas, Madison, Mahaska,Marion, Marshall, Monroe, Muscatine, Pocahontas, Polk, Poweshiek, Ringgold,Scott, Story, Tama, Taylor, Union, Van Buren, Wapello, Warren, Washington,Wayne, Webster, Wright, and the city of Osage in Mitchell County.(b) The Illinois counties of: Henderson, Henry, Mercer, Rock Island.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">and the city of East Dubuque in Jo Daviess County, and the townshipsof Fulton, Ustick, Clyde, Genesee, Mount Pleasant, Union Grove, GardenPlain, Lyndon, Fenton, Newton, Prophetstown, Portland and Erie in WhitesideCounty.(c) The Missouri counties of: Grundy, Harrison, Mercer, Putnam, Schuyler.(d) The Wisconsin counties of: Crawford and Grant.3. In andSection; 1079.7, revise paragraph (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1079.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Pool plant.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) The term ``pool plant'' shall not apply to the following plants:(1) A producer-handler plant;(2) A governmental agency plant;(3) A plant qualified as a pool plant pursuant to paragraph (a) in thissection which also meets the pooling requirements of another Federal orderand from which during the month a greater quantity of fluid milk products,except filled milk, was disposed of as route disposition, in such othermarketing area and to pool plants qualifed on the basis of route dispositionin such other marketing area than was so disposed of from such plant inthe Iowa marketing area as route dispositon, or to pool plants qualifiedon the basis of route disposition, except that if such plant was subjectto all the provisions of this part in the Iowa marketing area as routedisposition, or to pool plants qualified on the basis of route dispostion,except that if such plant was subject to all the provisions of this partin the immediately preceding month, it shall continue to be subject toall the provisions of this part until the third consecutive month in whicha greater proportion of its fluid milk products disposition, except filledmilk, is made in the above described manner in such other marketing area,unless, notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, it is regulatedby such other order;(4) A plant qualified as a pool plant pursuant to this section which alsomeets the pooling requirements of another Federal order and from whichduring the month a greater quantity of fluid milk products, except filledmilk, was disposed of as route disposition in this marketing area, andto pool plants qualified on the basis of route dispositon in this marketingarea than was so disposed of in such other Federal order marketing areabut which plant is, nevertheless, fully regulated under such other Federalorder; and(5) That portion of a plant that is physically separated from the GradeA portion of such plant, is operated separately, and is not approved byany regulatory agency for the receiving, processing, or packaging of anyfluid milk product for Grade A disposition.4. In andSection; 1079.52, revise paragraph (a)(2)(ii) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1079.52 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plant location adjustments for handlers.</ITAG>(a) * * *(2) * * *(ii) The Illinois counties of Henry, Mercer, Rock Island, and the townshipsof Fulton, Ustick, Clyde, Genesee, Mount Pleasant, Union Grove, GardenPlain, Lyndon, Fenton, Newton, Prophetstown, Portland and Erie in WhitesideCounty.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on April 12, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J. Patrick Boyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator Agricultural Marketing Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-9155 Filed 4-17-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>