<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89426-0103 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-26-89.f2.A1102</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 79 / Wednesday, April 26, 1989/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[OPP-34000; FRL-3562-2]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act Amendments of1988; Schedule of Implementation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> Environmental Protection Agency (EPA or Agency).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary:</T2> On October 25, 1988, the President signed into law theFederal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) Amendmentsof 1988 (FIFRA '88). This notice summarizes the provisions of FIFRA '88and sets forth EPA's general plan and schedule for implementing them. EPAinvites comments on its general approach for implementation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>dates:</T2> Comments on this notice must be submitted by July 25, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>address:</T2> Comments on this notice should reference the documentcontrol number ``OPP-34000'' and be mailed to: Public Docket and Freedomof Information Section, Field Operations Division (H7506C), Office of PesticidePrograms, Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington,DC 20460.In person, bring comments to: Rm. 246, CM andplusmin;2, 1921 Jefferson DavisHighway, Arlington, VA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:</T2>By mail: Deborah J. Sisco, FIFRA'88 Task Force (H7501C), Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental ProtectionAgency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460. Office location and telephonenumber: Rm. 1101, CM andplusmin;2, 1921 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington,VA. Telephone (703) 557-7372.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>A. Regulation of Pesticides Under FIFRAUnder FIFRA, pesticides must be registered (licensed by EPA before theymay be sold or distributed in commerce in the United States. Pesticidesinclude insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, rodenticides, disinfectants,plant growth regulators, and other substances intended to control pests.Approximately 35,000 to 40,000 pesticide products are currently registeredin the United States. FIFRA requires that pesticides used according tolabeling directions perform their intended functions without causing unreasonableadverse effects on people or the environment. In assessing the potentialto cause unreasonable risks for pesticide registration decisions, EPA isrequired by law to take into account the economic, social, and environmentalcosts and benefits of pesticide uses.FIFRA was first enacted in 1947. Thousands of pesticide products have sincebeen registered. However, Congress has amended FIFRA several times since1947, and the standards for pesticide registration have evolved in tandemwith advances in science and public policy. In particular, test data requirementsfor pesticides have become increasingly more stringent in light of advancesin such areas as toxicology and analytical chemistry.Under FIFRA, the registrant or applicant for registration has the responsibilityfor demonstrating that a pesticide meets all the criteria for registration.The Agency bases registration decisions for new pesticides on its evaluationof test data provided primarily by applicants for registration (usuallythe companies that produce the pesticide products). Required studies includetesting to show whether a pesticide has the potential to cause adverseeffects in humans and wildlife, including endangered species. Potentialhuman effects include acute reactions such as toxic poisoning and skinand eye irritation, as well as other effects such as cancer, birth defects,or reproductive system disorders. In addition, EPA must have data to estimateexposure to pesticides, such as data on residues in food and potentialworker exposure. Data on environmental fate, or how a pesticide behavesin the environment, are also required so that EPA can determine, amongother things, whether a pesticide poses a threat to ground or surface water.Testing to acquire such data must be conducted in accordance with GoodLaboratory Practice Regulations and may be subject to audit by the Agency.In addition to registering new pesticides, EPA is charged with protectinghuman health and the environment from any unreasonable adverse effectsassociated with pesticides already registered and in use. FIFRA authorizesEPA to cancel the registration of an existing pesticide if data show thatit causes unreasonable adverse effects on human health or the environment.The cancellation process can take 2 years or more to complete. Under certaincircumstances, EPA may take action to suspend the registration of a pesticideto prevent an imminent hazard during the cancellation review.Until the 1988 amendments, EPA was required under FIFRA to accept pesticidessuspended and cancelled due to their potential for imminent hazard fordisposal at government expense. In addition, an indemnification provisionrequired EPA to reimburse holders of such suspended and cancelled pesticidesfor financial losses suffered, up to the fair market value of the pesticide.To ensure that previously registered pesticides meet current scientificstandards, FIFRA requires that pesticides originally registered a numberof years ago be ``reregistered'' under current scientific standards. Thisis a massive undertaking. In the interest of efficiently identifying neededdata, obtaining and reviewing those data, and reaching regulatory conclusionsregarding the continued registrability of pesticides, EPA initiated itsRegistration Standards and Data Call-In programs. Through these programs,EPA has been reexamining by current standards the health and environmentalsafety of pesticides.Pesticide products are normally formulations of one or more pesticidallyactive chemicals (the active ingredients) combined with one or more pesticidallyinert ingredients. Products are regulated primarily on the basis of theirpesticidally active ingredients. There are approximately 1,300 individualactive ingredients, which the Agency has combined into basic active ingredientgroups that may be regulated together as active ingredient ``cases'' (e.g.,salts and esters of the same chemical). A review of the available dataon each active-ingredient case and its use culminates in the issuance ofa Registration Standard for the group of individual active ingredientswhich constitute a case.A Registration Standard describes the Agency's evaluation of the availabledata and the conditions registrants must meet in order to reregister pesticideproducts containing the active ingredient. These conditions typically includerequirements for submission of needed additional data; compliance withrequirements for product composition and labeling and packaging. Certainchanges in application methods or other label directions may also be required,and some uses may be restricted for use by or under the direct supervisionof certified applicators as a condition of continued use.EPA has established priorities for conducting its Registration Standardreviews on the basis of clusters of pesticides registered for similar uses,such as grain fumigants and fungicides. High-volume and food-use pesticideshave been among the highest priority clusters. Thus far, 194 RegistrationStandards have been completed. Because certain active ingredients of thesame ``chemical family'' are grouped into one Registration Standard ``case'',these 194 Registration Standards represent 350 individual active ingredients.An example of such a grouping is the Registration Standard for 2,4-D, whichincludes 35 individual active ingredients. Because of the factors consideredby EPA in setting priorities for review of registered pesticides, the 194Registration Standards issued to date represent approximately 85 to 90percent of the total volume of pesticides used in the United States.Following receipt of the data called in at the time the Registration Standardis issued, the Agency must complete a comprehensive review of those dataand the pesticide's uses before a final decision on whether to reregisterthe active ingredient and products containing it can be made. This reviewof data submitted after issuance of the Registration Standard is calleda ``second round review.'' In many instances, this second round reviewshows that additional data are needed before a reregistration decisioncan be made. Further, once the active ingredient is found to be eligiblefor reregistration, data on the formulated product (including other ingredients),called product-specific data, must be reviewed before the pesticide productcan be reregistered.B. Legislative HistoryEPA has not been able to review and reregister existing pesticides as quicklyas Congress originally envisioned. Consequently, legislation to revampthe reregistration process has been considered since 1985. In 1986, theHouse of Representatives and Senate passed similar bills (both of whichincluded provisions on many more subjects than the 1988 amendments as passed),but the differences were not reconciled by the end of the legislative year.Similar bills were reintroduced in the new Congress in 1987. On May 13,1988, the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry reporteda bill (S. 1516, Senate Report 100-346) that contained essentially allthe provisions ultimately enacted, as well as a number of others; the fullSenate never voted on S. 1516. On September 16, 1988, the House Committeeon Agriculture reported a bill (S. 659) that was essentially identicalto the amendments later enacted; it was adopted by the full House in lateSeptember and by the Senate shortly thereafter, and signed by the Presidenton October 25, 1988.C. FIFRA '88The major provisions of FIFRA '88 became effective on December 24, 1988.FIFRA '88 provides for the following:1. The acceleration of the process of reregistration by providing deadlinesand new procedures.2. Expedited processing of applications for certain types of registrationor amendments to existing registrations.3. The establishment of a fee system to help pay for accelerated reregistrationand expedited processing.4. The promulgation of regulations for the handling of pesticides, includingtheir storage, transportation, and disposal.5. An indemnity program to cover certain private-sector costs resultingfrom suspension or cancellation of pesticides, and requiring specific Congressionalappropriations for certain indemnifications.In addition to these 5 major provisions, FIFRA '88 amends the complianceprovisions and criminal penalties under FIFRA and contains a provisionrelative to the Scientific Advisory Panel. The remainder of this Noticediscusses each provision, EPA's schedule for implementation of the majorprovisions, and the Agency's communication plans to promote effective implementation.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Accelerated Reregistration</ITAG>The reregistration provisions of FIFRA '88 establish mandatory timeframesand duties, applicable to EPA and pesticide registrants, for the reregistrationof pesticides. FIFRA '88 requires EPA to complete, over approximately a9-year period, the reregistration review of each registered product containingany active ingredient first registered before November 1, 1984. Only pesticidesfor which EPA has determined, between November 1, 1984, and December 24,1988, that there are no outstanding data requirements, and for which therequirements of FIFRA section 3(c)(5) have been satisfied, are exceptedfrom this requirement. Section 3(c)(5) is the section which provides generallythat EPA shall register a pesticide if it can perform its intended functionwithout causing unreasonable adverse effects on people or the environment.The charge to complete the reregistration review of exiting pesticidesin 9 years represents a tremendous challenge to the Agency. Registrantstoo will be expected to accept part of the burden for the accelerationof reregistration. They will be expected to review their previously submitteddata and to supply the remaining required data within prescribed time periods.Pesticide users are also encouraged to work with registrants to assistin the generation of data, where appropriate.Reregistration of pesticides under FIFRA '88 will be carried out in fivephases. These phases establish deadlines for pesticide registrants to identifyand supply the test data necessary for EPA to make pesticide reregistrationdecisions, as well as for EPA to analyze submissions and to determine whetherto reregister currently registered pesticides. The phases are describedbelow.A. Phase 1_Reregistration ListsIn Phase 1 of the reregistration process, the Agency is required to listthe names of pesticide active ingredients subject to reregistration infour installments over a 10-month period following December 24, 1988, andto ask registrants of pesticide products containing those active ingredientswhether they intend to seek reregistration. The content of these listsis not subject to judicial review. A description of the four lists andthe dates by which they are required to be listed appear below.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/> <H1> </H1><H1> </H1><ITAG tagnum="1">List A_Pesticide active ingredients for which Registration Standardswere issued before 12/24/88<D>March 4, 1989</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">List B_Next 150 active ingredients subject to reregistration<D>April 24, 1989</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">List C_Next 150 active ingredients subject to reregistration<D>July 24, 1989</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">List D_Remainder of active ingredients subject to reregistration<D>October 24, 1989</D></ITAG></ITAG>For reregistration purposes, EPA will continue to group chemically-relatedactive ingredients into active-ingredient cases. Lists B and C will eachcontain 150 active-ingredient cases. In determining which active-ingredientcases to include on Lists B, C, and D, FIFRA '88 requires that, among othercriteria, priority be given to those that meet the following criteria:_Used on or in food or feed and may result in postharvest residues._Result in residues of potential toxicological concern in portable groundwater, edible fish, or shellfish._Determined to have significant outstanding data requirements prior toDecember 24, 1988._Used on sites where worker exposure is most likely to occur, includinggreenhouses and nurseries.The Agency will implement Phase 1 of the reregistration process as follows:1. <T3>List A.</T3> List A, which was published on February 22, 1989 (54 FR7740), contains the names of the pesticide active ingredients for whichRegistration Standards were issued prior to December 24, 1988. This listincludes the Registration Standard case name and the individual pesticideactive ingredients covered in each specific Registration Standard. (SeeUnit I. A for explanation of Registration Standard cases.) ReregistrationPhases 2 through 4 do not apply directly to List A. Reregistration of ListA active ingredients will be discussed in paragraph E.1. of this unit.2. <T3>Lists B, C, and D.</T3> Lists B and C will each consist of 150 active-ingredientcases of currently registered pesticides. In developing these lists, theAgency must first determine which chemical substances should be groupedas a single active-ingredient case. The criteria for setting prioritiesdescribed above (as well as other pertinent factors) will then be usedto place active-ingredient cases on List B, C, or D. Because the due datesfor several subsequent actions are based on the date each list is published,the Agency intends to issue Lists B, C, and D, as nearly as possible onthe exact dates indicated in this unit. Each of the lists will be publishedin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> with a brief discussion of the following: A descriptionof the various lists; criteria for placement of active ingredients on ListsB, C, and D; time frames for registrant responses; and Agency contacts.Each list will be sent by certified mail to the registrants holding registrationsfor products containing the pesticide active ingredients included on thespecific lists. EPA will also send instructions to registrants of ListB, C, and D pesticides on how to respond in Phase 2.B. Phase 2_Registrants' Intent to Seek Reregistration1. <T3>Lists B, C, and D.</T3> In Phase 2 of the reregistration process, theregistrants of each pesticide active ingredient identified on Lists B,C, and D are required to respond to the Agency concerning their intentto seek reregistration. If a registrant intends to seek reregistration,the submission must include:(a) Identification of data required by regulations to support the registrationof the pesticide active ingredient.(b) Identification of data that were previously submitted to support theregistration but are inadequate to meet such regulations.(c) Identification of required data that have not previously been submittedto the Agency.(d) A commitment to replace or submit any required data or an offer toshare in the cost of generating such data within specified periods of time.For the purpose of a registrant's Phase 2 response, data are to be consideredinadequate if the registrant cannot certify the availability of raw datafrom the study, or if the data were first submitted to EPA before January1, 1970 (unless the registrant demonstrates to the Agency that such datashould be considered).Registrants of listed active ingredients are required to submit their Phase2 responses to the Agency within 3 months after publication of the listin the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>If publication occurs on the precise dates indicatedin Unit II.A. of this Notice, the Phase 2 responses would be due as follows: <ITAG tagnum="15">List B Response_July 24, 1989  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">List C Response_October 24, 1989  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">List D Response_January 24, 1990  </ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The Agency is given limited discretion to extend these deadlines underextraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the registrant.  If a registrant commits to produce data in its Phase 2 response, the datamust be submitted within a reasonable period of time as determined by theAgency but not more than 48 months after the date of the registrant's commitment.Time periods for submission of data will be provided to registrants whenthe Agency mails each list, as directed by FIFRA '88. EPA is required tosuspend the registration of a pesticide if progress is insufficient toensure the submission of the required data in a timely manner or if thedata are not submitted by the date specified. Again, EPA is given limiteddiscretion to extend deadlines under extraordinary circumstances beyondthe control of the registrant. The Report of the Senate Committee on Agriculturecites as examples of such circumstances the unintentional loss of laboratoryresults, the unintentional destruction of laboratory equipment or facilities,major animal loss, or similarly serious unanticipated occurrences.  2. <T3>Cancellation and removal. </T3>If a registrant submits a notice ofintention not to seek reregistration of a pesticide, a notice to that effectwill be published in the <T4>Federal Register, </T4>and the registrant's response will be treatedas a request for cancellation. If a registrant fails to submit the requiredPhase 2 response within the prescribed time, the Agency is required toissue a notice of intent to cancel the registration. After a 60-day commentperiod, the Agency may cancel the registration or take other appropriateaction without a hearing.  If no registrant satisfies the Phase 2 response requirements for a particularactive ingredient, EPA must publish in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>a notice of intent to remove the active ingredientfrom the list and a notice of intent to cancel the registrations of allproducts containing the active ingredient. After a 60-day comment period,the Agency may cancel those registrations unless, during that period, anotherperson acquires the rights of a registrant and files a notice of intentto reregister the pesticide and, within 120 days of the <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice, completes the Phase 2 requirements. C. Phase 3_Registrants' Submission of Information  1. <T3>Lists B, C, and D. </T3>In Phase 3 of the reregistration process, eachregistrant who is seeking reregistration of a pesticide active ingredienton List B, C, or D shall submit the following information on the specificactive ingredient to the Agency:  (a) A summary of each previously submitted study considered by the registrantto be adequate to support registration.  (b) A summary of each previously submitted study that may not comply withthe requirements of section 3 of FIFRA and the regulations issued thereunder,but which the registrant asserts should be deemed adequate to support continuedregistration.  (c) Reformatted data from each summarized study submitted to the Agencyprior to January 1, 1982, which concerns chronic dosing, oncogenicity,reproductive effects, mutagenicity, neurotoxicity, teratogenicity, or residuechemistry (including metabolism studies) or, where these studies are notrequired, reformatted of acute and subchronic dosing data.  (d) Identification of data indicating adverse effects.  (e) Identificiaton of additional data that the registrant believes willsupport registration.  (f) Certification of access to raw data.   (g) A commitment to submit data to fill outstanding data requirements oran offer to share in the cost of developing such data.  Registrants are required to submit the information outlined above within12 months after publication of the list on which the active ingredientis identified. If publication occurs on the precise dates indicated inUnit II. A. of this Notice, the Phase 3 responses would be due as follows:<ITAG tagnum="15">List B Response_April 24, 1990  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">List C Response_July 24, 1990  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">List D Response_October 24, 1990</ITAG>To assist registrants in complying with the requirements of Phase 3, EPAwill develop guidance and send it to those who have declared their intentto seek reregistration. Guidelines are discussed in detail in paragraphG of this unit.  2. <T3>Cancellations. </T3>If a registrant of a pesticide fails to submitthe information required in Phase 3 within the prescribed time period,the Agency is required to cancel the registration without hearing. If theregistrant submits the required information but it does not conform toguidelines established by EPA, the Agency must determine whether the registrantmade a good faith attempt to conform its submission to the guidelines,and if so, a reasonable time will be allowed to make necessary changesor corrections. If the Agency finds that a good faith attempt was not made,the Agency may issue a notice of intent to cancel and, unless the registrantrequests a hearing within 30 days, cancel the registration. The only matterfor resolution at such a hearing shall be whether the registrant made agood faith attempt to conform its submission to the guidelines.  <T3>D. Phase 4_EPA Review of Submissions and Identification of Data Gaps </T3>In Phase 4, EPA is required to review the data and information submittedby registrants during Phases 2 and 3, and to identify data gaps independently.To assist in this review, the Agency may require registrants to submitcompleted copies of studies which have been summarized, but in general,the Phase 4 review will identify data requirements for which already submittedstudies are adequate and those which warrant more detailed review. It ispossible that a detailed review of the data in Phase 5 will reveal thata study, which appeared adequate based on the Phase 3 submission, needsto be replaced or supplemented.  The Agency is then required to publish in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>the outstanding data requirements for each activeingredient and Lists B, C, and D. Concurrently, a notice under section3(c)(2)(B) of FIFRA will be issued to registrants requiring the submissionof the identified data.  The Agency is required to complete its Phase 4 review of registrant submissionsand publish the notice of the data gaps within the time periods specifiedin FIFRA '88 (assuming the planned list-publication dates, by the datesshown below.<ITAG tagnum="15">List B Notice_October 24, 1990 (18 months after publication of List) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">List C Notice_July 24, 1991 (24 months after publication of List) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">List D Notice_July 24, 1992 (33 months after publication of List)</ITAG>The Phase 4 review process will resemble the process used to review dataunder the former Registration Standards program. EPA expects, however,that the review will proceed more rapidly and efficiently since the Agencywill be reviewing summaries and reformatted data to determine which aregood candidates for more detailed review.  <T3>E. Phase 5_Final Review and Reregistration  </T3>Phase 5 culminates the reregistration process under FIFRA '88. It requiresthe Agency to conduct a thorough, comprehensive examination of all datasubmitted in support of reregistration. Based on this review, EPA willeither reregister a pesticide or take other appropriate regulatory action. Once all the required data on an active ingredient have been received,the Agency has 1 year to complete its review and determine whether thepesticides containing the active ingredient are eligible for reregistration.If they are eligible, the Agency must obtain any needed product-specificdata prior to reregistering individual pesticide products. Registrantsare required to submit these data no later than 8 months after a determinationof eligibility for reregistration, unless the Agency finds that a longerperiod of time is required to generate the data.  Once all the product-specific data have been received, the Agency is requiredto review those data within 90 days and to reregister the product or takeother appropriate action within 6 months after receipt of the requiredproduct-specific data.  1. <T3>Phase 5 review of List A chemicals. </T3>The Phase 5 review of ListA chemicals highlights some issues which will also arise with the otherlists. Of the 194 Registration Standards issued to date, 13 second roundreviews of the active-ingredient cases have been issued and three moreare in draft. While theoretically the data base for a pesticide activeingredient undergoing a second round review should be complete, or at leastnearly so, experience shows that most of these second round reviews identifya number of new data gaps, and a reregistration decision must be postponeduntil these data are submitted and reviewed. This situation results fromseveral factors, including tier testing (in which the results of one studyindicate the need for additional testing); revised guidelines; new datarequirements; and inadequate studies submitted by registrants.  For the active ingredients on List A (active ingredients for which RegistrationStandards have been issued), the Agency will identify chemicals whose databases are complete enough to conduct a thorough evaluation and make a reregistrationdecision and those chemicals for which more data are needed before reregistrationdecision can be made. For active ingredients with essentially completedata bases, the Agency will schedule and conduct second round reviews andissue data call-in notices for product-specific data. For chemicals withless complete data bases, the Agency will develop an efficient processfor promptly requiring the additional data needed to evaluate the activeingredients, conducting second round reviews when data are received, andthen calling in product-specific data. A system and schedule are beingdeveloped for completing reregistration of the List A chemicals as soonas possible within the 9 years provided.2. <T3>Definition of reregistration.</T3> Registration of a pesticide underFIFRA requires that EPA find that its use will not result in unreasonableadverse effects on people or the environment. In light of the continuingevolution of scientific knowledge, and therefore changing data needs forthe evaluation of a pesticide's risks, it will be necessary for the Agencyto define a specific set of conditions that, when met, will allow the Agencyto make the reregistration decision within the deadlines established inFIFRA '88. Although additional studies not now anticipated may be neededin the future, a reregistration decision can then be made once those conditionshave been met. A definition of reregistration might include, for example,completion and satisfactory review of specific categories of studies toprovide scientifically valid data which are essential for the Agency todetermine that use of a pesticide will not cause unreasonable adverse effectsand can be reregistered. However, even after reregistration, the Agency'sobligation to consider new data about pesticide's effects continues, anddata received after reregistration may serve as the basis for further regulatoryaction by the Agency.3. <T3>Form of decision.</T3> The Agency must also decide how to present itsdecision on reregistration and the procedures and process to be followedin issuing those decisions. Currently, EPA's reregistration review of apesticide active ingredient is prevented in the form of the RegistrationStandard document. The Registration Standard summarizes EPA's evaluationof data available for each scientific discipline and describes the conditionsthat must be met before the Agency will consider the active ingredienteligible for reregistration. However, reregistration is not granted throughissuance of the Registration Standard for either the active ingredientor individual products.F. Addressing Impacts on Pesticide Minor UsesEPA recognizes the potential impact of FIFRA '88 on minor use pesticides.Frequently, there is insufficient economic incentive for pesticide productmanufacturers to justify the timely development of data needed to supportpesticide registrations for many small scale, infrequently needed, or specialtypesticide uses. As discussed in its Policy Statement on Minor Uses of Pesticides(51 FR 11341, April 2, 1986), EPA recognizes that the continued availabilityof pesticides registered for minor uses is important for the productionof a diverse food supply and has taken an active role in addressing theproblem by giving minor uses special attention in its regulatory activities.FIFRA directs EPA to make data requirements for minor uses commensuratewith the anticipated extent and pattern of use and degree of exposure ofman and the environment to the pesticide. FIRFA '88 also contains provisionsfor reregistration fee waivers for active ingredients used solely for minoruses, which indicate Congressional intent that minor uses should be accommodated.Even pior to the enactment of FIFRA '88, reregistration has had an impacton the availability of pesticides for minor uses. Because EPA has givenpriority to the review of high-volume and food use pesticides, most ofthe 194 active-ingredient cases for which the Agency has already issuedRegistration Standards are food use pesticides which had both major andminor uses. Minor uses often lack sufficient market potential to offsetthe cost of generating data to meet statutory requirements for reregistration.As a result of the Agency's issuing these Registration Standards, for anumber of minor uses associated with the old pesticides, registrationshave been voluntarily withdrawn by registrants or suspended and cancelledby the Agency for failure to meet data call-in requirements. Many peoplebelieve the loss of existing pesticides for minor uses as a result of decisionsby registrants not to support reregistration will be accelerated underFIFRA '88.Low-volume pesticides and low-volume uses of a major pesticides are atrisk when the data requirements make the generation of new data economicallyunacceptable to the registrant. When there is no alternative pest controlmethod for a low-volume use, loss of the registered pesticide is likelyto impact users adversely.In the past, the Agency has pursued policies designed to allow flexibilityfor minor uses to the extent possible within the context of FIFRA and theFederal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA). One approach to this problemhas been to encourage third party organizations, such as user groups andIR-4 (Interregional Research Project Number 4, a nationwide cooperativeeffort including EPA, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, state agriculturalexperiment stations, and industry), to gather data needed to support continuedregistration of minor uses which are not supported by a registrant.The Agency is aware that FIFRA '88 may place additional burdens on minoruses, and will consider what can be done to alleviate that burden. TheAgency is working with State lead agencies to help ensure that user groupsand others are aware of the potential impact of reregistration and of actionsthat can be taken by users to aid registrants in maintaining registrations.In addition, the Agency is developing guidance for registrants and otherson how to determine data requirements for minor uses and how to make themost effective use of the Agency's existing policies.G. Guidance for Reregistration Under FIFRA '88FIFRA '88 shifts a substantial portion of the burden for the early reviewof previously submitted data from EPA to the registrants. In order forthe Agency to review the data bases of more chemicals in a shorter time,registrants of List B, C, and D active ingredients are required to makethe initial evaluation of their data and to submit the results of theirreview in the form prescribed in Phase 3. To assist registrants in complyingwith the Phase 3 requirements, FIFRA '88 requires EPA to issue the followingfour sets of guidelines. Although the law requires that the four mandatedguidelines be issued by December 24, 1989, the Agency wishes to make themavailable as soon as possible so that registrants will be able to beginpreparing their Phase 3 responses.1. <T3>Guidelines for summarizing studies. </T3>In Phase 3, all previouslysubmitted studies on which a registrant wishes to rely must be summarizedin accordance with guidelines to be issued by EPA. This includes both datawhich the registrant believes to comply with regulatory requirements anddata which, although they may not fully comply with requirements, the registrantbelieves should be relied upon.2. <T3>Reformatting guidelines. </T3>All studies submitted to the Agency priorto January 1, 1982, which will be relied upon for reregistration and whichconcern chronic dosing, oncogenicity, reproductive effects, mutagenicity,neurotoxicity, teratogenicity, or residue chemistry of the active ingredientmust be reformatted in accordance with guidelines to be issued by EPA.For chemicals whose uses do not require the data listed above, the registrantsmust reformat acute and subchronic dosing data submitted prior to January1, 1982, on which they intend to rely.3. <T3>Guidelines for identifying adverse data. </T3>Guidance must be givenfor registrants to identify adverse data (required to be reported by FIFRAsection 6(a)(2)). An Interpretive Rule specifying what information mustbe submitted under section 6(a)(2) is expected to be published this year.A brief guidance document will be prepared explaining how to identify adversedata, but the interpretive rule will determine what data must be identified.4. <T3>Identifying data that may not meet guidelines. </T3>Even though a studymay not comply in all respects with EPA's Pesticide Assessment Guidelines,its shortcomings may be sufficiently minor that the data are still of someuse to support reregistration. In such a case, the Agency might not rejectthe data outright. The registrants must be given guidance as to when EPAmight accept such data. The Agency is preparing checklists to make it easierfor registrants to screen their data for acceptability.H. 40 CFR Part 158 Data RequirementsIn addition to the guidelines specifically required by FIFRA '88 to assistregistrants in preparing their Phase 3 responses, the Agency plans to provideguidance for interpreting the data requirements. At the time the listsare sent to registrants, EPA will provide information on how to identifythe data required through the regulations pertaining to data requirements(40 CFR Part 158) to support specific use categories, and clarify currentdata requirements in terms of the conditions under which certain studiesare required. For example, while Part 158 indicates that certain studiesare ``conditionally required'' on a case-by-case basis, experience allowsthe Agency to identify more specifically when the study is necessary. Inaddition, the Agency will identify for registrants, data routinely requiredto support registration of a pesticide for specific uses.The Agency plans to propose an amendment to 40 CFR Part 158 this year,which will include an update of Part 158 to include routinely requireddata which to date have not been identified specifically in the data tablesof Part 158. EPA also expects to propose other amendments to add new datarequirements. For example, new storage, transportation, and disposal datarequirements provided for in FIFRA '88 will be added. In addition, manyof the Pesticide Assessment Guidelines may be updated and new ones developed.For example, the Agency intends to add neurotoxicity and immunotoxicitytesting guidelines. (The Senate Committee on Agriculture, on reportingthis bill, requested that EPA intensify the degree of testing for neurotoxicand behavioral effects, including testing related to chronic exposure,prenatal, and neonatal effects.) Also, the Agency expects to have in placeamended Good Laboratory Practice regulations (GLPs; current regulationsare at 40 CFR Part 160) which expand the scope of the testing requiredto be performed under GLPs.Revisions to Part 158 to add new requirements will take place over thenext few years. While registrants are not required to identify in theirPhase 2 response data gaps that result from these anticipated new requirements,such future requirements represent an additional expense which must betaken into consideration when they decide whether they wish to supportthe reregistration of the pesiticide. Therefore, the Agency intends toprovide registrants with a description of the changes in data requirementswhich it anticipates.I. Other Guidance  In addition, FIFRA '88 may require changes to some existing regulationsand policies. For example, the Agency's prior policy which made voluntarycancellations effective upon receipt (published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on March 27, 1987, 52 FR 9937) has been supercededby FIFRA '88. Under FIFRA '88, the Agency must publish in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> a notice of receipt of a request for cancellationor for an amendment to delete one or more uses before approving it. TheAgency is evaluating its policies and procedures and will amend them asappropriate to implement the new requirements.  There may also be other guidance which will be appropriate to issue asimplementation continues. In some cases regulations must be amended. Inothers, a <T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice of Policy Statement, new PR (PesticideRegistration) Notice, or Standard Operating Procedure may be appropriate.The Agency is currently evaluating its existing guidance and policies toestablish priorities for revising and creating new guidance.  J. Enhancement of Automated Data Processing Systems  Effective management of the process of accelerated reregistration requiresthat the progress of each active ingredient toward reregistration be monitoredfrom the initial mailing of the chemical lists to registrants to the finalreregistration of end use products. Significant modifications to EPA'sexisting data processing systems, several new systems, and informationintegration will be required to support this process.  To facilitate the submission and processing of study summaries, reformattedold studies, and new data, EPA will assess the utility of the electronicsubmission of data to improve efficiency. Systems may also be developedto support the assessment of data and the development and documentationof scientific and regulatory determinations about each active ingredient.In addition, increased automation of EPA laboratory facilities may be requiredto support the efficient validation of residue methods and other activitiesrelated to tolerance reassessment.  <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Expedited Registration  </ITAG>Because of budgetary constraints in 1986 through 1988, EPA was forced tochoose among competing priorities. The Agency chose to concentrate itsresources on processing applications for new pesticide active ingredientsand new uses and on reregistration activities. Processing of applicationsfor registration of pesticide products that are identical or substantiallysimilar to another registered pesticide product (referred to as ``me-too''applications) and minor amendments to existing registrations were givena lower priority. This redirection of resources resulted in a predictablebacklog of ``me-too'' applications and amendments.  FIFRA '88 requires that EPA expedite processing of these two classes ofapplications and authorizes up to $2 million to be allocated from the feesto be collected under the Act for that purpose. Expedited considerationmust be given to applications for initial or amended registration of productswhich are similar to pesticides already registered with EPA. In addition,the Agency is required to expedite certain minor amendments (amendmentsnot requiring scientific review of data).  Under the expedited review provisions, an applicant must be notified, within45 days after the Agency receives an eligible application, whether theapplication is complete. Within 90 days after the Agency has received acomplete application, the registrant must be notified in writing whetherthe request is granted or denied. If it is denied, the specific reasonsfor denial must be given.  As of the effective date of FIFRA '88, the Agency had over 3500 ``me-too''applications and over 4500 amendments pending. Based on past years' receipts,the Agency estimates that approximately 6000 to 6500 more applicationswill have been received by the end of the fiscal year (September 30, 1989). The short-term approaches to implementing the expedited registration requirementsfocus on attaining two goals: to handle applications received after December24, 1988, within the statutory time frames (45 days to determine if theapplication is complete; 90 days to decide whether to grant or deny theapplication); and to process as quickly as possible applications that werepending with the Agency prior to the effective date of FIFRA '88 (referredto as backlog applications).  One action already taken which will reduce the number of applications receivedeach year is the promulgation of the regulatory amendments to PesticideRegistration Procedures published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on May 4, 1988, and effective in August 1988(53 FR 15952). These regulatory revisions, often referred to as the ``maxi-package'',define categories of amendments to registration that do not require reviewor approval by the Agency prior to implementation by registrants. Suchamendments fall into two categories: notifications to a registration thatrequire the registrant to notify the Agency before the modified productis distributed or sold (referred to as ``notifications'') and modificationsnot needing Agency approval or notification. Although portions of the maxi-packagemay have to be revised (e.g., voluntary cancellations, described in UnitII.H. of this notice certain types of amendments that previously requiredAgency approval now do not need to be reviewed, thereby reducing some demandon Agency resources and permitting immediate implementation of some registrantmarketing decisions.The Agency has already taken the first steps necessary to reduce the backlog.The pending applications have been sorted first into broad categories ofthose requiring either minimal or no administrative review (notifications)and those requiring administrative review (e.g., product chemistry, precautionarylabeling, use directions). The Agency intends to reduce substantially thebacklog of applicants by the end of September 1989. To improve the efficiency of processing applications, a front-end processingoperation to screen all applications is being developed and will be inplace this spring. This centralized processing unit will send only completeapplications on for review by the product management teams. If an applicationis found to be incomplete, the unit will generate a letter within the statutory45-day time frame enumerating the application's deficiencies and send theapplication package back to the applicant. In addition, the Agency is developing guidance for registrants' use inpreparing applications for registration of pesticide products. The Agencyspends a significant amount of time reviewing applications that are poorlydone or that require several resubmissions. Improved guidance will aidapplicants in correctly completing the required forms and documents, therebyreducing the Agency's review time and the number of resubmissions necessary.A new instruction booklet will also serve as a training guide for Agencystaff and contractors. The agency has sent a draft of the booklet to tradeassociations and others for comment. Longer-term plans focus on evaluating the current registration programand identifying areas for improved efficiency. The Agency will focus onthe daily operations of the product management teams and identify measuresthat can be adopted to increase efficiency and productivity. As part ofthe Office of Management and Budget's (OMB) Productivity Improvement Program,a productivity study is being conducted of the registration process. Resultsfrom this study could serve as a basis for potential changes in areas ofthe registration process to increase productivity. The evaluation of the registration program will identify operational areasthat consume time and resources unnecessarily, and therefore need to bestreamlined and improved. This approach will focus on measures to reducethe daily activities on the product management teams so that resourcescan be used more effectively to processs actions under the expedited processingprovision of FIFRA '88, as well as other program activities (e.g., newchemical and significant new use registrations). In evaluating potentialprocess changes, the Agency will consult with the regulated industry andthe public to obtain insights and to identify areas where cooperative activitiescan lead to improved efficiency, (e.g., automated data submission). As the Agency seeks to simplify the registration process, additional systemsmay be needed. The primary data processing support required in the short-termis improvement in and integration of internal application tracking systemsand product inventory systems. These improvements will facilitate the handlingof the increased information necessary to eliminate the application backlogand to monitor compliance with the new statutory processing times. In addition,a study of the feasibility of providing direct registrant access to trackinginformation will be conducted.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Fees </ITAG>Accelerated reregistration and expedited processing of certain registrationactions will be resource intensive regulatory processes expected to costat least $260 million over the 9-year period provided by Congress. Approximately$110 to $120 million of these costs are expected to be met from a continuationof the current service level of EPA's budget for reregistration. The remainingmoney is to be obtained from two new fees, (1) a reregistration fee foreach active ingredient subject to reregistration, and (2) an annual registrationmaintenance fee for each pesticide registration. The registration maintenance fees are intended to generate about $14 millionper year for each of the next 9 years, and should thus generate about $125million in total. The reregistration fees have various provisions for exemptionsand waivers. Overall, the reregistration fee should generate about $25to $50 million in revenues. EPA's current budget for reregistration, alongwith the registration maintenance fees and the reregistration fees, willprovide approximately the resources required.A. Maintenance Fees FIFRA '88 provides for a yearly registration maintenance fee for each pesticideregistration to be paid to EPA. The maintenance fees are applicable toall pesticide registrations. Current EPA records indicate that there areabout 35,000 to 40,000 products registered under FIFRA. Congress calculatedthe initial fee levels to generate $14 million per year based on the numberof registrations in EPA records at the time. Initial fees established inthe law are $425 per registration for up to 50 registrations held by thesame registrant plus $100 per registration for each additional registrationup to 200 held by the same registrant. Although there is no provision for waivers or reductions in maintenancefees, maximum fees per registrant were established. The maximum amountto be paid by a registrant each year with up to 50 registrations is $20,000;for those having more than 50 registrations, the maximum is $35,000.The authority to levy the registration maintenance fee extends for 9 years.During this time period, the Agency is prohibited from levying any otherfee for the registration of a pesticide product. A <T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice published on March 22, 1989 (54 FR 11922),suspended the registration fees established by regulation on May 26, 1988(53 FR 19108).The Agency expects that imposition of annual maintenance fees, as wellas the other requirements of FIFRA '88 will result in a number of voluntarycancellations of economically marginal or inactive product registrations.While for many registrants the fees envisioned are not significant, thereare some registrations for products which have been out of production forsome time or whose sales are not sufficiently large to justify even a modestfee. Therefore, the number of registrations subject to fees, is expectedto be smaller than the number in existence when Congress established theinitial fee levels. EPA is required by FIFRA '88 to adjust the annual feelevels to generate the $14 million specified in FIFRA '88.For this first year of registration maintenance fees, the Agency will collectthe original fees of $425 and $100. The total to be collected in 1989 istherefore expected to fall short of the target. However, the Agency expectsto have enough resources to accomplish what is required the first year.To collect the first year's maintenance fees, the Agency has updated itsproduct records based on the best information available and has sent aform to over 4500 registrants to complete and to return payment of fees,which were due to EPA by March 1, 1989. The registrant of record on March1 is responsible for payment of the maintenance fee. If a registrant isin the process of transferring a registration to another registrant, butthe transfer is not yet complete, the transferor is the registrant of record.If the fee for a product is not paid by the time prescribed, the Agency,by order and without hearing, may cancel the registration. The filing formalso gives registrants the opportunity to request cancellation of a registrationin order to avoid payment of fees on a registration the registrant mayno longer wish to support.In future years, the fees will be adjusted to comply with the intent ofCongress that, as nearly as possible, $14 million per year be generated.Maintenance fees will be due on March 1 of each year.B. Reregistration FeesAdditional money will be collected from fees levied on the registrantsof each active ingredient which is subject to reregistration, includingthose active ingredients for which Registration Standards have alreadybeen issued by the Agency. The size of the reregistration fees prescribedby FIFRA '88 is related to the amount of Agency review required for reregistration.Active ingredients with major food or feed uses are to be charged $150,000.Active ingredients with no major food or feed uses for which RegistrationStandards have been issued (those on List A) will be charged $50,000 to$100,000; those for which a Registration Standard has not been issued (thoseon Lists B, C, and D) will be charged $75,000 to $150,000.1. <T3>Calculation of the fee.</T3> Consistent with the fee structure describedabove, all the individual active ingredients which would be included inan active-ingredient case (see Unit I.A.) will be considered to be one``active ingredient'' for the purpose of the calculation of reregistrationfees.The reregistration fee is to be paid for each active ingredient subjectto reregistration with the exception of the active ingredients eligiblefor waivers, discussed in Unit IV.B.2. Registrants who are eligible fora Generic Data Exemption because they purchase registered pesticides inorder to formulate another registered product are exempt from contributionto the reregistration fee.When there are two or more sources of the same active ingredient, the feewill be apportioned among all of the nonexempt registrants by market sharefor the past 3 calendar years. When a registrant chooses to withdraw supportfor a registered active ingredient and therefore does not contribute tothe fee, the fee to be paid shall be reapportioned among the remainingregistrants.Although the reregistration fee is a one-time-only fee, the law providesfor Lists B, C, and D fees to be paid in two installments (the first inPhase 2 and the second in Phase 3). The schedule for payment of List Afees is left to the discretion of the Agency but will depend, in largepart, on the time required to obtain and process the required informationon exempt or nonexempt status and market shares.Before billing registrants of products containing a particular active ingredientfor their proportional share (if any) of the required reregistration fee,the Agency will obtain through Phase 2 responses specific information onwhether or not a registrant's source of the active ingredient is anotherregistered product. This will enable the Agency to identify accuratelythose products which are exempt from the reregistration fee. For thoseproducts which are not formulated from a registered source of active ingredient,each registrant will also be required to furnish market share informationto be used in calculating the proportional contribution required. Eachnon-exempt registrant will also be afforded an opportunity to claim eligibilityfor and submit data supporting a small business waiver. The required contributionby each non-exempt registrant will be generally proportional to that registrant'smarket share on an active ingredient basis for the preceding 3 years. Nevertheless,a minimum contribution will apply for those non-exempt registrants whohave no market share, and the contribution may be reduced for those registrantswho are eligible for a small business waiver.2. <T3>Fee waivers and reductions.</T3> FIFRA '88 contains several provisionsfor exemptions and reductions, or partial waivers, of the reregistrationfees. Small businesses, defined as those firms having 150 or fewer employeesand average annual gross sales of chemicals in the prior 3 years not exceeding$40 million will receive a partial waiver of fees depending on their averageannual sales of pesticides containing the particular active ingredient.Antimicrobial pesticide active ingredients having no registered food orfeed uses and with production under 1 million pounds of that active ingredientare exempt from the reregistration fee. Antimicrobial pesticides with productionlevels larger than 1 million pounds of active ingredient or having useson food or feed sites are subject to the same fees as other types of pesticides.FIFRA '88 also provides for exemptions from fees for active ingredientswhich are contained only in pesticides registered solely for agriculturalor nonagricultural minor uses. If, for a single active ingredient, regardlessof use pattern, the value or volume of use is small, an exemption willbe given for that pesticide from the reregistration fee.C. Management of Funds FIFRA '88 states that there shall be established in the Treasury of theUnited States a reregistration and expedited processing fund. All feescollected shall be deposited into the fund and shall be available to theAgency without fiscal year limitation to carry out reregistration and expeditedprocessing of eligible applications. The fund will be a ``Revolving Fund''. The formal definition of a revolvingfund, as published by the Government Accounting Office (GAO), is a ``PublicEnterprise Revolving Fund Account: Expenditure account authorized by Congressto be credited with collections, primarily from the public that are generatedby, and earmarked to finance, a continuing cycle of business-type operations.''The revolving fund will receive funds from fees paid by registrants. EPAwill receive an apportionment (approval to spend funds) from the Officeof Management and Budget (OMB) after submission and approval of an apportionmentrequest. However, the Agency is allowed to spend only the amount that isin the revolving fund. Money in the fund not currently needed shall bemaintained on deposit or on hand, invested in obligations of the UnitedStates or those guaranteed thereby. The investments are made by the Departmentof the Treasury with input by EPA if requested. The funds received in the Revolving Fund will be available to EPA for useonly for reregistration and expedited processing and will be ``No Year''funds. This means that the budget authority remains available for obligationfor an indefinite period of time, usually until the objectives for whichthe authority was made available are attained.FIFRA '88 requires the Agency to provide Congress with an annual accountingof the fees collected and disbursed from the fund. The revolving fund hasbeen established, and the budget process is underway. The Agency is developingan accounting system to track all funds received and disbursed to meetannual reporting requirements. <ITAG tagnum="84">V. Storage, Transportation, and Disposal of Pesticides </ITAG>The 1988 amendments significantly expand EPA's authority to regulate thestorage, transportation, and disposal of pesticides. FIFRA '88 providesthat EPA may, by regulation or as part of an order issued under section6 of FIFRA (the section dealing with cancellation and suspension of pesticides),issue requirements for storage, transportation, or disposal of pesticides,their containers, rinsates, or other materials which may be contaminatedwith such pesticides. The Agency may exercise this authority through theimposition of data and labeling requirements for pesticide registration,and through other regulations governing the handling of excess pesticides,containers, rinsates (such as the rinsings from containers), and othermaterials contaminated by pesticide residues, as well as the institutionof recall plans for suspended and cancelled products, which is discussedin Unit VI of this notice.The authority to regulate storage, transportation, and disposal of pesticidesmust be exercised in a carefully planned, step-by-step approach, not onlybecause of the resources it will require, but also because the Agency needsmore information before priorities can be established and effective procedures,guidance, and regulations can be developed.Although this regulatory effort will require 3 years or more for full implementation,the Agency will begin in 1989 to facilitate better disposal practices andwaste minimization. EPA will explore opportunities for improved disposal,transportation, and storage through its outreach efforts, certificationand training program, information exchange, and policy pronouncements.These efforts will help reduce environmental harm and assure the successof the Agency's regulatory efforts when fully implemented. A. Storage, Transportation, and Disposal The Agency plans to establish requirements for storage, transportationand disposal of pesticides through revisions to existing regulations (currentlyin 40 CFR Part 165). In developing regulations, the Agency will take intoconsideration the regulatory intent of the Resource Conservation and RecoveryAct (RCRA), as well as the Agency's experience in that program.Although EPA will continue to gather information on methods of disposalof excess stocks, which may alter our current knowledge of disposal technology,the Agency plans to begin immediate development of pesticide disposal criteriaand procedures to be followed under a section 6 suspension or cancellationorder. The revisions to existing regulations are scheduled for completionin December 1991. B. Labeling The Agency is also authorized to require pesticide product labeling toinclude requirements and procedures for the storage, transportation, anddisposal of the pesticide, containers, rinsates, or other materials whichmay contain residues of the pesticide. The Agency believes that it may be appropriate to require significant labelingchanges. However, until procedures and guidance are developed and prescribedby regulations, and until transportation, storage, and disposal data arereceived from registrants or other sources, major changes in labeling requirementsmay be premature. C. Containers and Container Rinsates To reduce problems associated with pesticide containers, EPA is requiredto conduct a study to examine the feasibility of returnable/refillablecontainers, formulations that facilitate the removal of pesticide residuesfrom packaging, and the use of bulk storage facilities. EPA must promulgateregulations for the design of containers which will ensure that pesticidecontainers will facilitate residue removal, safe use, disposal, and reuseof containers. In addition, EPA must issue regulations prescribing methodsof removing pesticides from containers prior to disposal. FIFRA '88 alsoauthorizes EPA to require labeling as described in paragraph B of thisunit and to adopt regulations for the storage, transportation, and disposalof containers, rinsates, or other materials used to contain or collectexcess or spilled pesticides which have been suspended or cancelled. 1. <T3>Container and rinsate study.</T3> The Agency is required to conducta study of ways to encourage or require (1) the return, refill, and reuseof pesticide containers; (2) the development of pesticide formulationsthat facilitate removal; and (3) the use of bulk storage systems to reducethe number of containers for disposal. The Agency must consult with a widerange of affected and interested parties and must determine the feasibilityand costs of the alternatives. A report of these findings must be submittedto Congress by December 1990. From Committee testimony and other Congressionalguidance, the Agency interprets the container study mandate in broad terms,not limiting scrutiny to agricultural and commercial formulations and associatedpackaging. The Agency recognizes that certain formulations or packagingmay promote the introduction of pesticide residues into the environment(such as leakage into ground water). The Agency believes that such configurationsshould be identified and eliminated, and that safer designs should alsobe identified and required.The Agency will fulfill this requirement using contract support. InterestedFederal and State agencies, environmental groups, and private industrymet on December 7, 1988, to provide comments on the proposed contract.The contractor's findings will be used in support of planned regulatorychanges affecting disposal, transportation, and storage.2. <T3>Pesticide container design.</T3> By December 1991 the Agency must promulgatefinal regulations for the design of pesticide containers that will promotesafe storage and disposal. The regulations must ensure that the containerdesigns facilitate (1) residue removal; (2) safe use (e.g., no ``splash-back''or leakage); (3) disposal of containers; and (4) safe refill and reuseof containers.The results of the container study described in this unit will be usedin the formation of these regulations. Full compliance with the provisionsof these regulations is required beginning December 1993. A ComplianceStrategy will be developed and issued along with the regulations.3. <T3>Pesticide container residue removal.</T3> By December 1991 the Agencymust promulgate regulations prescribing procedues and standards for removalof pesticides from containers. The regulations may provide for: (1) Triplerinsing or the equivalent residue removal standards for pesticide removal;(2) procedures that can be implemented promptly for residue removal; (3)reuse/disposal of rinse water and residue; and (4) coordination of requirementsunder FIFRA with applicable provisions of the Resource Conservation andRecovery Act of 1976. Using the information gained from the container study,the Agency will promulgate Part 165 regulatory procedures that providefor the minimization or disposal of rinsates.4. <T3>State primacy.</T3> Under section 26 of FIFRA, States which have approvedcompliance programs and enforcement procedures have primary enforcementresponsibility for pesticide use violations, and under section 4, Stateswith an approved certification plan are responsible for certifying pesticideapplicators with respect to that State. Beginning in December 1993, Statesmay not exercise primary enforcement responsibility under section 26 orcertify applicators under section 4, unless the Ageny finds that the Stateis carrying out an adequate program to ensure compliance with the new regulationspertaining to pesticide residue removal. A means of reviewing State complianceprograms will be developed along with other regulatory revisions.C. Data RequirementsFIFRA '88 further provides that EPA may require registrants to submit dataregarding methods of safe storage and disposal of pesticides. The Agencyintends to investigate what data requirements would be appropriate to effectsafe storage for excess quantities of pesticide formulations. The Agencyhas also noted a lack of formulation-specific data on the best methodsfor disposal and the environmental fate of products that have been disposedof by various methods. The Agency is investigating what data requirementwould be most useful and will amend the Part 158 registration data requirementsas necessary.<ITAG tagnum="85">VI. Recall, Storage, and Indemnification of Suspended and CancelledPesticides</ITAG>Under FIFRA '88, if the Agency finds that recall of a pesticide which hasbeen suspended and cancelled under section 6 is necessary to protect healthor the environment, a recall must be ordered. The 1988 amendments alsodeleted from the law the requirement that EPA, upon request, must acceptand dispose of suspended and cancelled pesticides at government expense.The costs of storage are now to be shared by the registrant and EPA accordingto a formula detailed by the Act. In addition, indemnification provisionsare altered so that only end users and, under limited circumstances, certaindealers and distributors are automatically entitled to indemnificationpayments from EPA, and the cost is not to be borne by the Agency budget.A. Recall ProvisionsIn general, if the registration of a pesticide has been suspended and cancelledand EPA finds that a recall is necessary, the Agency can initiate eithera voluntary or a mandatory recall.If EPA finds that a voluntary recall may be as safe and effective as amandatory recall, the Agency must request the registrant to submit, within60 days, a plan to recall the pesticide. EPA must order the registrantto conduct a recall in accordance with the plan unless the Agency determinesafter an informal hearing that the plan will not protect health or theenvironment.The mandatory recall procedure, issued as a regulation, may require thatregistrants, distributors, or sellers of the pesticide (a) make storagefacilities available to receive pesticides being recalled and inform theEPA Administrator of the location of each facility; (b) accept and storeexisting stocks of pesticides; (c) on request of persons holding such pesticides,provide transportation of the pesticide to a storage facility; and (d)take reasonable steps to inform holders of the pesticide of the recallregulations, provisions, and transportation arrangements. EPA will definethe criteria for acceptable recall plans and all requirements that mustbe fulfilled through the adoption of regulations.1. <T3>Financial resources to conduct a recall. </T3>EPA also is authorizedto require registrants to give evidence of their financial and other resourcesdemonstrating capability to carry out a prescribed recall and provide forthe disposition of the pesticide in the event of suspension and cancellation.The Agency will examine this authority and propose the format and the circumstanceswhere this authority can best be used.B. Storage Cost ReimbursementA registrant who wishes to become eligible for reimbursement of storagecosts incurred as a result of a recall must submit a plan for storage anddisposal of the pesticide that meets criteria established by EPA. The planmust be reviewed and approved by EPA. Through the formula for reimbursementset forth in FIFRA '88, both the Agency and the registrant are given anincentive to complete this process as expeditiously as possible. EPA isrequired to reimburse registrants for storage costs as follows:(1) None of the costs incurred before the date of the submission of theplans to EPA.(2) One hundred percent of the costs incurred after the date of the submissionof an acceptable plan or the date of cancellation of the pesticide, whicheveris later, but before the approval of the plan by EPA.(3) Fifty percent of the costs incurred during the 1-year period beginningon the date of approval of the plan or the date of cancellation of thepesticide, whichever is later.(4) None of the costs incurred during the 3-year period beginning 1 yearafter the approval of the plan or the date of cancellation, whichever islater.(5) Twenty-five percent of the costs incurred during the period beginningwith the 5th year following the approval of the plan or the date of cancellation,whichever is later, and ending on the date that a disposal plan for thepesticide can be implemented.Although the provisions for storage reimbursement are generally self-executing,FIFRA '88 does state that any plan for storage and disposal must meet criteriaestablished by EPA by regulation. These criteria will be established throughregulations scheduled for completion in December 1991.C. Indemnification ProvisionsThe new indemnification provisions require EPA to indemnify end users ofpesticides that have been both suspended and cancelled by making paymentsfrom a general appropriation called the Judgement Fund (31 U.S.C. 1304),which is used to pay claims against the government. A buyer who is notan end user may obtain reimbursement from the seller of the pesticide forlosses caused by either suspension or cancellation, of the registration.The seller must reimburse that buyer unless the seller gave written noticeat the time of sale that reimbursement would not be provided. Pesticidedealers and distributors who own a quantity of pesticide which has beenboth suspended and cancelled are also entitled to reimbursement from theJudgement Fund if they suffer losses because the person who sold to themis insolvent (and that person had not previously given notice that reimbursementwould not be provided). These provisions for payment from the JudgementFund should result in less delay in payment of those entitled to indemnificationthan has been the case in the past.Anyone else who suffers losses due to the suspension and cancellation ofa pesticide may be reimbursed only if Congress provides a line-item appropriationfor that purpose. This new provision was not intended to change EPA's existingobligation to indemnify owners of pesticides that were suspended and cancelledbefore FIFRA '88 went into effect. The Indemnification provisions of FIFRA`88 are effective on April 24, 1989.D. Notice RequirementsSection 6 of FIFRA pertains to administrative review, suspension, and cancellationof pesticide registration. Under the new section 6(g) of FIFRA, variousregistrants, producers, sellers, distributors, and commercial applicatorsof pesticides which have been cancelled or suspended under FIFRA section6 must notify the Agency and appropriate State and local governments ofsuch possession, quantities, and the place held.The Agency, working with the States, will explain how such notificationshould take place. A <T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice will be published to communicate the noticerequirements to the public.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Compliance Provisions</ITAG>FIFRA previously gave EPA the authority to require producers of pesticidesto keep certain records regarding their products, including sale and distributionrecords, and the data that supported the registrations. Under FIFRA '88,EPA can extend these requirements for recordkeeping to registrants andapplicants for registration as well. FIFRA '88 also gives the Agency clear authority to issue regulations thatlimit the sale, distribution, and use of unregistered pesticides if necessaryto prevent unreasonable adverse effects on the environment, and explicitlyprovides that violation of any such regulation is an unlawful act. Underthe former law, the Agency's authority in this area and ability to takeaction against violators were not always clearly defined.A. Books and RecordsThe Agency may prescribe regulations which require producers, registrants,and applicants for registration to keep records concerning their operationsand the pesticides and devices produced, as necessary for effective enforcementof the Act. The current regulations at 40 CFR Part 169 will be revised(scheduled for completion in August 1991) to include registrants and applicantsfor registration.B. Unregistered PesticidesThe Agency may, by regulation, limit the sale, distribution, and use ofpesticides that are unregistered, or not covered by the provisions of anExperimental Use Permit (section 5) or Emergency Exemption (section 18),if necessary to prevent such activities from causing unreasonable adverseeffects on the environment. The Agency, in consultation with States, willdetermine the need for regulations to address specific situations wherethe sale, distribution, or use of unregistered pesticides could resultin environmental risk.C. FIFRA Enforcement Response PolicyThere are a number of other changes or additions to section 12 or FIFRA,Unlawful Acts. For example, it is now unlawful to:(a) Refuse to prepare, maintain, or submit records or reports requiredby various sections of the Act.(b) Violate suspension orders issued under sections 3(c)(2), 4, or 6.(c) Fail to notify the Agency or appropriate state if in the possessionof a cancelled or suspended pesticide.(d) Submit false information to the Agency in support of a registrationor relating to tests on a pesticide.(e) Violate a regulation under section 3(a) or 19. A revised FIFRA EnforcementResponse Policy will be produced to insure uniform enforcement of theseprovisions across all EPA regions. The revised policy is scheduled forcompletion in December 1989.D. Criminal PenaltiesCriminal penalties for knowingly violating any provision of FIFRA by aregistrant, applicant for registration, or producer now include a fineof not more than $50,000 or imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both.Commercial applicators of restricted use pesticides or other pesticidesellers who knowingly violate the provisions of FIFRA are subject to finesof up to $25,000 or imprisonment for up to a year or both.<ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Scientific Advisory Panel</ITAG>The Administrator's Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP), is a group of independent,non-government experts who convene to advise the Agency on major scientificissues under FIFRA. In the past the SAP was required to be reauthorizedby Congress every 5 years. FIFRA '88 makes the SAP permanent.<ITAG tagnum="84">IX. Communications</ITAG>Successful implementation of FIFRA '88 will require effective communicationson many levels. The Agency plans to communicate major decisions and significantactivities according to individual Communication Strategies which willbe developed for each action as it occurs. For example, some of the activitiesfor which communications are already being planned are: the issuance ofeach list in Phase 1, establishment of front-end processing for expeditingeligible applications, cancellations (both voluntary and for failure tocomply), issuance of guidelines and regulations, major fee announcements,resolution of major issues, and individual active ingredient decisions.In many cases, actions and decisions will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. FIFRA '88 requires publication in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>of the chemical lists, all regulations, and certainother notices. In addition, there may be other actions and notices thatthe Agency will publish in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>to increase their availability.Communication strategies generally include announcements to the press,mailing information to interested parties, and telephone contact with keyaffected groups. The pesticide industry (chemical manufacturers, formulators,distributors, and retailers) and their support industries (such as laboratories);pesticide users (farmers, commercial applicators, institutions, and householdusers); the food industry (growers, processors, and retailers); and environmentaland public interest groups, as well as individual concerned citizens_eachhas an interest in EPA's implementation of this new law. The Congress,EPA Regions, State and local governments, other Federal agencies, and internationalinterests also must be kept informed.The Agency has compiled an extensive mailing list of organizations knownto be interested in various pesticide-related issues. Persons who havea particular interest in one or more planned activities and wish to havetheir names added to the mailing list may contact the Field OperationsDivision, Program Communications Branch at the address listed at the beginningof this notice under <T2>``ADDRESS''</T2> (telephone (703) 557-5017). The Agency also is interestedin learning what specific types of information various groups would liketo receive and suggestions on ways to improve communications among allinterested parties.A number of other activities are planned to help inform various interestedgroups and individuals. A fact sheet and informational charts describingthe law have been distributed to EPA's regional offices, States, and otherinterested parties. The fact sheet has also been mailed to every pesticideregistrant. The Agency plans to participate in seminars, conferences andmeetings around the country where the subject of FIFRA '88 and relatedissues will be covered.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: April 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Victor J. Kimm,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Administrator for Pesticides and Toxic Substances.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-9987 Filed 4-25-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>