<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89315-0127 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-15-89.f2.A1126</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">Commonwealth Edison Co.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendment toFacility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-454, 50-455, 50-456 and 50-457]</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License Nos. NPF-37 andNPF-66, issued to Commonwealth Edison Company, for operation of Byron Station,Units 1 and 2 located in Ogle County, Illinois and Facility Operating LicenseNos. NPF-72 and NPF-77, issued to the licensee, for operation of BraidwoodStation, Units 1 and 2 located in Will County, Illinois.This amendment requests dated February 17, 1989, are being made in accordancewith Generic Letter 88-06 to change the Administrative Control Section,Section 6.0 of Technical Specifications, to include the removal of theorganizational figures, a position change from Radiation Chemistry Technicalto Radiation Protection Technician, several position title changes, a clarificationto the distribution requirements for Onsite Reviews and typographical oreditorial changes.Before issuance of these proposed license amendments, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that these amendment requestsinvolve no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facilities in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety.These proposed Technical Specification (TS) amendments request severalchanges. The first change involves the removal of organizational Figures6.2-1and 6.2-2 and the revision of TS 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 in accordance withthe guidance provided in Generic Letter 88-06. The second proposed revisioninvolves a position change from Radiation Chemistry Technician to RadiationProtection Technician in TS 6.2.2 and 6.12. The third proposed revisioncorrects several position titles that changed due to corporate reorganization.The fourth change clarifies the distribution requirements for onsite reviewdocumentation discussed in TS 6.5.2. The fifth and last change are typographicalcorrections.In accordance with Generic Letter 88-06, these amendments replace the organizationalFigures 6.2-1 and 6.2-2 in Technical Specifications with more general organizationalrequirements. These general requirements capture the essence of those organizationalfeatures depicted on the figures that are necessary for ensuring safe operation.The proposed revisions to the Technical Specifications will require organizationalcharts to be maintained in the Quality Assurance Manual. In addition, theimportant organizational features depicted on the organizational figuresare also contained in other regulatory controlled documents. Chapter 13of the Updated Final Safety Analysis Report (UFSAR) contains details ofthe organizational structure and description of the Conduct of Operations.This information is required by 10 CFR 50.71 to be maintained and updatedannually. Also a Quality Assurance (QA) program is required for Byron andBraidwood by 10 CFR 50, Appendix B. In addition to the organizational charts,the Quality Assurance Manual and Topical Report CE-1-A contain descriptionsof the functional responsibilities and reporting requirements.None of the proposed changes are initiating events for an accident, therefore,the probability of an occurrence of an accident is not affected. Even thoughthe organizational figures are being removed, TS 6.2.1a is being revisedto require the organizational figures be maintained in the Quality AssuranceManual. In addition, TS 6.2.1 proposed revisions adds general requirementsthat capture the essence of the organizational features included in thefigures. Also, important organizational features are contained in otherregulatory controlled documents. Therefore, safe plant operation is notaffected and the consequence of any accidents presented in the UFSAR arenot impacted by the changes.The proposed changes do not revise any functional or design parametersused at the station. These changes do not modify any equipment or systemsor cause the unit to be operated in a different manner. Therefore, thepossibility of a new or different kind of accident is not created.All the proposed changes are administrative, editorial or typographicaland, as such, do not affect any margins of safety. The proposed organizationchanges do not affect safe operation of the plant. Creation of a RadiationProtection Technican position in lieu of a Radiation Chemistry Technicanadequately meets the requirements for Health Physics coverage identifiedin NUREG 0452. Updating position titles, clarifying documentation distributionrequirements and typographical and editorial changes, facilitie plant operationsbut do not affect safe operations.For the reasons stated above, the staff believes these proposed amendmentsinvolve no significant hazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Rules and Procedures Branch,Division of Rules and Records, Office of Administration, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication dateand page number of the <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto P-216, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland from8:15 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Copies of written comments received may be examinedat the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC. Thefiling of requests for a hearing and petitions for leave to intervene isdiscussed below.By April 14, 1989, the licensee may file a request for hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryof the designated Atomit Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particulatity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results to the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceedings as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW.,Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during thelast ten (10 days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitionerpromptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to WesternUnion at 1-800-325-6000 (in Missouri 1-800-342-6700). The Western Unionoperator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the followingmessage addressed to Daniel R. Muller: petitioner's name and telephonenumber; date petition was mailed; plant number; and publication date andpage number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel_Rockville, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, and to Michael Miller, Esquire; Sidleyand Austin, One First National Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60603, attorneyfor the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or request shouldbe granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.174(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment which is available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC, and for ByronStation, the Rockford Public Library, 215 N. Wyman Street, Rockford, Illinois61101; for Braidwood Station, the Wilmington Township Public Library, 201S. Kankakee Street, Wilmington, Illinois 60603.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 9th day of March 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Stephen P. Sands,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate III-2, Division of Reactor Projects_III,IV, V and Special Projects.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Leonard N. Olshan,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate III-2, Division of Reactor Projects_III,IV, V and Special Projects.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 5986 Filed 3-14-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>