<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89509-0032 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-09-89.f2.A1031</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">16 CFR Part 13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[File No. 891 0059] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Panhandle Eastern Corporation; Proposed Consent Agreement With AnalysisTo Aid Public Comment </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Trade Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed consent agreement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>In settlement of alleged violations of federal law prohibitingunfair acts and practices and unfair methods of competition, this consentagreement, accepted subject to final Commission approval, would allow,among other things, Panhandle Eastern Corp. to acquire Texas Eastern TransmissionCorp. Respondent would be required to divest its ownership of TrunklineOffshore Co., which owns the half-share of Stingray, would require a trusteeto sell Trunkline to a Commission-approved acquirer within 18 months afterthe order becomes final, and would also require respondent to obtain FTCapproval before acquiring any natural gas pipeline in the affected offshorearea.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments must be received on or before July 10, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments should be directed to: FTC/Office of the Secretary,Room 159, 6th St. and Pa. Ave., NW., Washington, DC 20580.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Ronald B. Rowe, FTC/S-3302, Washington,DC 20580, (202) 326-2610.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Pursuant to section 6(f) of the FederalTrade Commission Act, 38 Stat. 721, 15 U.S.C. 46 and andSection; 2.34 ofthe Commission's Rules of Practice (16 CFR 2.34), notice is hereby giventhat the following consent agreement containing a consent order to ceaseand desist, having been filed with and accepted, subject to final approval,by the Commission, has been placed on the public record for a period ofsixty (60) days. Public comment is invited. Such comments or views willbe considered by the Commission and will be available for inspection andcopying at its principal office in accordance with andSection; 4.9(b)(6)(ii)of the Commission's Rules of Practice (16 CFR 4.9(b)(6)(ii). <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 16 CFR Part 13 </ITAG>Natural gas pipelines, Trade practices. <ITAG tagnum="84">Agreement Containing Consent Order </ITAG>The Federal Trade Commission (``the Commission''), having initiated aninvestigation of the proposed acquisition of the common stock of TexasEastern Corporation (``Texas Eastern'') by Panhandle Eastern Corporation(``Panhandle Eastern'') and Panhandle Eastern having been furnished witha copy of a draft complaint that the Bureau of Competition has presentedto the Commission for its consideration and which, if issued by the Commission,would charge Panhandle Eastern with violations of the Clayton Act and FederalTrade Commission Act, and it now appearing that Panhandle Eastern is willingto enter into an agreement containing an order to divest certain assetsand to cease and desist from certain acts: <T3>It is hereby agreed </T3>by and between Panhandle Eastern, by its dulyauthorized officers and its attorneys, and counsel for the Commission that:1. Proposed respondent Panhandle Eastern is a corporation organized underthe laws of Delaware, with its executive offices at 5400 Westheimer Court,Houston, Texas 77056-5310. 2. Texas Eastern is a corporation organized under the laws of Delaware,with its executive offices at 1221 McKinney Street, P.O. Box 2521, Houston,Texas 77252-2521. 3. Panhandle Eastern admits all jurisdictional facts set forth in the attacheddraft of complaint. 4. Panhandle Eastern waives: a. Any further procedural steps; b. The requirement that the Commission's decision contain a statement offindings of fact and conclusions of law; c. All rights to seek judicial review or otherwise challenge or contestthe validity of the order entered pursuant to this agreement; and d. All rights under the Equal Access to Justice Act. 5. This agreement shall not become a part of the public record of the proceedingunless and until it is accepted by the Commission. If this agreement isaccepted by the Commission, it, together with the draft of complaint contemplatedthereby, will be placed on the public record for a period of sixty (60)days and information in respect thereto publicly released. The Commissionthereafter may either withdraw its acceptance of this agreement and sonotify Panhandle Eastern, in which event it will take such action as itmay consider appropriate, or issue and serve its complaint (in such formas the circumstances may require) and decision, in disposition of the proceeding.6. This agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitutean admission by Panhandle Eastern that the law has been violated as allegedin the draft of complaint here attached.7. This agreement contemplates that, if it is accepted by the Commission,and if such acceptance is not subsequently withdrawn by the Commissionpursuant to the provisions of andSection; 2.34 of the Commission's Rules,the Commission may, without further notice to Panhandle Eastern, (1) issueits complaint corresponding in form and substance with the draft of complainthere attached and its decision containing the following Order to divestand to cease and desist in disposition of the proceeding, and (2) makeinformation public with respect thereto. When so entered, the Order todivest and to cease and desist shall have the same force and effect andmay be altered, modified, or set aside in the same manner and within thesame time provided by statute for other orders. The Order shall becomefinal upon service. Delivery by the U.S. Postal Service of the complaintand decision containing the agreed-to Order to Panhandle Eastern's addressas stated in this agreement shall constitute service. Panhandle Easternwaives any right it may have to any other manner of service. The complaintmay be used in construing the terms of the Order, and no agreement, understanding,representation or interpretation not contained in the Order or the agreementmay be used to vary or contradict the terms of the Order. 8. Panhandle Eastern has read the draft of complaint and Order contemplatedhereby. Panhandle Eastern understands that once the Order has been issued,it will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing thatit has fully complied with the Order. Panhandle Eastern further understandsthat it may be liable  for civil penalties in the amount provided by lawfor each violation of the Order after it becomes final. <ITAG tagnum="84">Order </ITAG>I. As used in this Order, the following definitions shall apply: a. ``Acquisition'' means Panhandle Eastern's acquisition of shares of thecommon stock of Texas Eastern. b. ``Panhandle Eastern'' means Panhandle Eastern Corporation, its predecessors,subsidiaries, divisions, groups and affiliates controlled by PanhandleEastern and their respective directors, officers, employees, agents, andrepresentatives, and their respective successors and assigns. c. ``Texas Eastern'' means Texas Eastern Corporation as it was constitutedprior to the acquisition, its predecessors, subsidiaries, divisions, groupsand affiliates controlled by Texas Eastern and their respective directors,officers, employees, agents, and representatives, and their respectivesuccessors and assigns. d. ``Schedule A Properties'' means the assets and businesses listed inSchedule A of this Order. e. ``Trustee'' means a trustee designated as such pursuant to the Votingand Selling Trust Agreement that is Attachment A to the Agreement to Establisha Voting and Selling Trust attached hereto and made part hereof as AppendixI to this Order. f. ``Voting and Selling Trust Agreement'' means the Voting and SellingTrust Agreement that is Attachment A to the Agreement to Establish a Votingand Selling Trust. II. <T3>It is ordered </T3>That: (A) Panhandle Eastern shall divest, absolutely and in good faith, the ScheduleA Properties, as well as any additional assets and businesses relatingto the transportation of natural gas that Panhandle Eastern may at itsdiscretion include as a part of the assets to be divested and are acceptableto the acquiring entity or entities and the Federal Trade Commission. Provided,however, this obligation to divest shall be satisfied by the divestitureof the Schedule A Properties pursuant to the Agreement to Establish a Votingand Selling Trust. Provided, further, Panhandle Eastern may divest absolutelyand in good faith and subject to this Order, Texas Eastern TransmissionCompany if the Federal Trade Commission, in its sole discretion, approvesthe substitute divestiture of Texas Eastern Transmission Company. (B) At the earliest opportunity, but no later than 15 days after the appointmentof the Trustee, Panhandle Eastern shall resign as the operator of StingrayPipeline Company. (C) Panhandle Eastern shall provide the acquiring entity or entities ofthe Schedule A Properties gas transportation and exchange arrangementsto the extent necessary to ensure divestiture of the properties as ongoingviable businesses engaged in the same business in which the Schedule AProperties are presently employed. (D) The Agreement to Establish a Voting and Selling Trust shall continuein effect until such time as the Federal Trade Commission has approvedPanhandle Eastern's divestitures of the Schedule A Properties or untilsuch other time as that agreement provides, and Panhandle Eastern shallcomply with all terms of that agreement. (E) Divestiture of the Schedule A Properties shall be made only to an acquiringentity or entities that receive the prior approval of the Federal TradeCommission and only in a manner that receives the prior approval of theFederal Trade Commission. The purpose of the divestiture of the ScheduleA Properties is to ensure the continuation of the assets as ongoing, viablebusinesses engaged in the same businesses in which the Properties are presentlyemployed and to remedy the lessening of competition resulting from theAcquisition as alleged in the Federal Trade Commission's complaint. (F) Panhandle Eastern shall take such action as is necessary to maintainthe viability and marketability of the Schedule A Properties, includingthe payment of operating expenses if necessary, and shall not cause orpermit the destruction, removal or impairment of any assets or businessesto be divested except in the ordinary course of business and except forordinary wear and tear. III. <T3>It is further ordered </T3>That: (A) Within ten (10) days of the appointment of the Trustee Panhandle Easternshall transfer the Schedule A Properties to the Trustee whose powers andduties and terms of service are defined  in the Voting and Selling TrustAgreement. Panhandle Eastern shall be bound by the terms and conditionsof the Agreement to Establish a Voting and Selling Trust and by the Votingand Selling Trust Agreement. The appointment of the Trustee shall not precludethe Federal Trade Commission from seeking civil penalties or any otherrelief available to it for any failure by Panhandle Eastern to comply withthis Order. (B) The Trustee shall have eighteen (18) months from the date the dutyto sell arises under paragraph 6.c of Voting and Selling Trust Agreementto accomplish the divestiture, which shall be subject to the prior approvalof the Federal Trade Commission. If, however, at the end of the eighteen-monthperiod the Trustee has submitted a plan of divestiture or believes thatdivestiture can be achieved within a reasonable time, the Trustee's divestitureperiod may be extended by the Federal Trade Commission. Provided, however,that the Federal Trade Commission may extend the Trustee's divestitureperiod only two (2) times.(C) No later than thirty (30) days after receiving the prior approval ofthe Federal Trade Commission of a divestiture of the Schedule A Properties,Panhandle Eastern shall in good faith apply for (and cause the acquiringentity or entities as part of the agreement to apply for) approvals byany state or federal agency from which approval must be obtained beforePanhandle Eastern may divest and the acquiring entity or entities may acquire,own and operate the Schedule A Properties. Panhandle Eastern shall cooperatewith and shall support in good faith with all due diligence and expeditionthe acquiring entity or entities in obtaining necessary regulatory approvals,including filing a statement that demonstrates Panhandle Eastern's supportfor each such application. Panhandle Eastern shall take no action to impedeor interfere with the necessary regulatory approvals. (D) The Trustee shall have full and complete access to the personnel, books,records and facilities of any businesses that the Trustee has the dutyto divest. Panhandle Eastern shall develop such financial or other informationas such Trustee may reasonably request and shall cooperate with the Trustee.Panhandle Eastern shall take no action to interfere with or impede theTrustee's accomplishment of the divestiture. (E) Subject to Panhandle Eastern's absolute and unconditional obligationto divest at no minimum price and the purpose of the divestiture as statedin Section II(E) of this Order, the Trustee shall use his or her best effortsto negotiate the most favorable price and terms available for the divestitureof the Schedule A Properties. The divestiture shall be made in the mannerset out in Section II; provided, however, if the Trustee receives bonafide offers from more than one acquiring entity or entities, the FederalTrade Commission shall determine whether to approve each such purchaser,and the Trustee shall divest to the acquiring entity or entities selectedby Panhandle Eastern from among those approved by the Federal Trade Commission.(F) The Trustee shall be compensated as provided in the Voting and SellingTrust Agreement. He or she shall serve, on such  reasonable and customaryterms and conditions as the Federal Trade Commission may set, includingthe employment of accountants, attorneys or other persons reasonably necessaryto carry out the Trustee's duties and responsibilities. To the extent thetrust properties do not have sufficient working capital or distributionsto cover expenses and assure that the Trustee can serve on reasonable termsand conditions, Panhandle Eastern shall provide the necessary working capital.The Trustee shall account for all monies derived from the sale and allexpenses incurred. After approval by the Federal Trade Commission of theaccount of the Trustee, including fees for his or her services, all remainingmonies shall be paid at the direction of Panhandle Eastern and the Trustee'spower shall be terminated. (G) If the Trustee ceases to act or fails to act diligently, a substituteTrustee shall be appointed in the same manner as provided in Section III(A)of this Order. (H) The Trustee shall report in writing to Panhandle Eastern and the FederalTrade Commission every sixty (60) days concerning the Trustee's effortsto accomplish divestiture. (I) Panhandle Eastern may terminate the trust if the divestiture of TexasEastern Transmission Company has been completed in accordance with theterms of the Consent Order. IV. Within 12 months of the termination of the Voting and Selling Trust Agreement,pursuant to paragraph 6.a.iv thereof, Panhandle  Eastern shall divest,absolutely and in good faith, the Schedule A Properties, as well as anyadditional assets and businesses relating to the transportation of naturalgas that Panhandle Eastern may at its discretion include as a part of theassets to be divested and are acceptable to the acquiring entity or entitiesand the Federal Trade Commission. V. <T3>It is further ordered </T3>That within sixty (60) days after the datethis Order becomes final and every sixty (60) days thereafter until PanhandleEastern has fully complied with the provisions of Sections II and III ofthis Order, Panhandle Eastern shall submit to the Federal Trade Commissiona verified written report setting forth in detail the manner and form inwhich it intends to comply, is complying or has complied with those provisions.Panhandle Eastern shall include in its compliance reports, among otherthings that are required from time to time, a full description of all contactsor negotiations with prospective acquirers for the divestiture of assetsor businesses specified in Section II or Section IV of this Order, includingthe identity of all parties contacted. Panhandle Eastern also shall includein its compliance reports, copies of all written communications to andfrom such parties, all internal memoranda, reports and recommendationsconcerning divestiture, and a description of the status of all regulatoryproceedings filed in accordance with this Order. VI. <T3>It is further ordered </T3>That for a period commencing on the datethis Order becomes final and continuing for ten (10) years, Panhandle Easternshall cease and desist from acquiring, without the prior approval of theFederal Trade Commission, directly or indirectly, through subsidiariesor otherwise, assets used or previously used by (and still suitable foruse by), any interest in, or the stock or share capital of any naturalgas pipeline any part of which is located in a quadrilateral shaped areaof the Central and Western Gulf of Mexico (as those areas are designatedby the Mineral Management Service of the United States Department of Interior)cornered by and including the following blocks: High Island East AdditionBlock A-221, Garden Banks Block 971, Garden Banks Block 999, and VermilionBlock 206. One year from the date this Order becomes final and annuallyfor nine years thereafter Panhandle Eastern shall file with the FederalTrade Commission a verified written report of its compliance with thisparagraph. Provided nothing in this Order shall require prior Federal TradeCommission approval (1) of the construction of new facilities or (2) if,and only if, Panhandle Eastern has provided the Federal Trade Commissionwith thirty (30) days prior notice, of the acquisition of stocks or assetsif the total consideration, including assumption of liabilities of thepresent owner of such stock or assets, does not exceed one million dollars($1,000,000).VII. <T3>It is further ordered </T3>That for the purposes of determining orsecuring compliance with this Order, and subject to any legally recognizedprivilege, upon written request and on reasonable notice to Panhandle Easternmade to its principal office, Panhandle Eastern shall permit any duly authorizedrepresentatives of the Federal Trade Commission: (A) access, during office hours and in the presence of counsel, to inspectand copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence, memoranda and otherrecords and documents in the possession or under the control of PanhandleEastern relating to any matters contained in this Order; and (B) upon five days notice to Panhandle Eastern and without restraint orinterference from Panhandle Eastern, to interview officers or employeesof Panhandle Eastern who may have counsel present, regarding such matters.VIII. <T3>It is further ordered </T3>That Panhandle Eastern shall notify theFederal Trade Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to any proposedchange in the corporation that may affect compliance with this Order. PanhandleEastern shall also notify the Federal Trade Commission at least thirty(30) days prior to any proposed change in Trunkline Gas Company such asdissolution, assignment or sale resulting in the emergence of a successorcorporation, the creation or dissolution of subsidiaries or any other changethat may affect compliance obligations arising out of the Order. <T3>In Witness Whereof, </T3>the undersigned have executed this AgreementContaining Consent Order on this 28 day of April, 1989. <ITAG tagnum="84">Schedule A_Assets, Interests and Businesses  </ITAG>(1) Panhandle Eastern's interest in the Stingray Pipeline Company. (2) Trunkline Offshore Company. Provided, however, if the divestiture ofTrunkline Offshore Company results in the divestiture of Panhandle Eastern'sinterest in the Stingray Pipeline Company, Panhandle Eastern shall divestonly Trunkline Offshore Company. <ITAG tagnum="85">Appendix I_Agreement to Establish a Voting and Selling Trust </ITAG>This Agreement to Establish a Voting and Selling Trust (this ``Agreement'')is by and between Panhandle Eastern Corporation (``PEC''), a Delaware corporation,and the Federal Trade Commission (the ``Commission''), an independent agencyof the United States Government, established under the Federal Trade CommissionAct of 1914, 15 U.S.C. 41, <T3>et seq</T3>. (collectively, the ``Parties''). Premises <T3>Whereas, </T3>Pan Acquisition Co., a wholly-owned subsidiary of PEC,commenced a tender offer on February 21, 1989, as amended, for up to 48,650,000of the outstanding shares of Texas Eastern Corporation (``TEC'') with theintent of effecting a merger of Pan Acquisition Co. into TEC pursuant towhich TEC would survive and become a subsidiary of PEC (the ``Acquisition''),all as contemplated by and provided for in that certain Merger Agreemententered into among PEC, Pan Acquisition Co. and TEC dated as of February20, 1989; <T3>Whereas, </T3>the Commission is now investigating the transaction todetermine if the Acquisition would violate any of the statutes enforcedby the Commission; and <T3>Whereas, </T3>if the Commission accepts the attached Agreement ContainingConsent Order (``Consent Order''), the Commission must place it on thepublic record for a period of at least sixty (60) days and may subsequentlywithdraw such acceptance pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.34 ofthe Commission's Rules; and <T3>Whereas, </T3>the Commission is concerned that if an understandingis not reached, preserving the status quo ante of certain pipeline assetsand businesses of PEC's wholly-owned subsidiary, Trunkline Offshore Company(``TOC'') and the associated interest as a fifty percent (50%) partnerof Stingray Pipeline Company (``Stingray''), during the period prior tothe final acceptance of the Consent Order by the Commission (after the60-day public notice period), divestiture resulting from any proceedingchallenging the legality of the Acquisition might not be possible, or mightbe less than an effective remedy; and <T3>Whereas, </T3>the Commission is concerned that if the Acquisition isconsummated, it will be necessary to preserve the Commission's abilityto require the divestiture of properties described in Schedule A to theConsent Order (the ``Schedule A Properties'') as a viable competitor; and<T3>Whereas, </T3>the purpose of this Agreement and the Consent Order isto put TOC and its associated interest in Stingray in the hands of a trusteewho will be charged: (a) if the Commission accepts the Consent Order, with selling TOC in orderto remedy any anticompetitive effects of the Acquisition, and (b) in the interim, with managing TOC and its interest in Stingray, topreserve the independence, viability and marketability of TOC and its interestin Stingray; and <T3>Whereas, </T3>PEC entering into this Agreement shall in no way be construedas an admission by PEC that the Acquisition is illegal; and <T3>Whereas, </T3>PEC understands that no act or transaction contemplatedby this Agreement shall be deemed immune or exempt from the provisionsof the antitrust laws or the Federal Trade Commission Act by reason ofanything contained in this Agreement. <T3>Now, therefore, </T3>the parties agree, upon understanding that theCommission has not yet determined whether the Acquisition will be challenged,and in consideration of the Commission's agreement that, unless the Commissiondetermines to reject the Consent Order, it will not seek further relieffrom PEC with respect to the Acquisition, except that the Commission mayexercise any and all rights to enforce this Agreement, the Voting and SellingTrust Agreement that is Attachment A to this Agreement (``Voting and SellingTrust Agreement''), and the Consent Order to which this Agreement is annexedand made a part thereof: 1. PEC agrees to execute and be bound by the attached Consent Order.2. Within thirty (30) days of the date on which the Commission acceptsthis Agreement, the Commission shall appoint a trustee pursuant to an agreementwith PEC on the appointment of a trustee. Such trustee shall act in accordancewith the Voting and Selling Trust Agreement. 3. If PEC and the Commission are unable to agree on the appointment ofa trustee within thirty (30) days, the Commission shall select the trustee,subject to the consent of PEC, which consent shall not be unreasonablywithheld. The trustee shall be a person with experience and expertise inacquisitions and divestitures. 4. Within ten (10) days of appointment of the Trustee, PEC shall transferto the Trustee, all the shares of TOC and the associated interest in Stingray.PEC shall observe all the terms and conditions of the Voting and SellingTrust Agreement once executed. 5. In the event the Commission has not finally approved and issued theConsent Order within one hundred twenty (120) days of its publication inthe Federal Register, PEC may, at its option, terminate this Agreementby delivering written notice of termination to the Commission, which terminationshall be effective ten (10) days after the Commission's receipt of suchnotice, and the shares in TOC and the associated interest in Stingray shallthen revert to PEC. If this Agreement is so terminated, the Commissionmay take such action as it deems appropriate, including but not limitedto an action pursuant to Section 13 (b) of the Federal Trade CommissionAct, 15 U.S.C. andSection;  53(b). Termination of this Agreement shall inno way operate to terminate the Consent Order. 6. For the purpose of determining or securing compliance with this Agreement,subject to any legally recognized privilege, and upon written request withreasonable notice to PEC made to its principal office, PEC shall permitany duly authorized representative or representatives of the Commission:a. Access during the office hours of PEC and in the presence of counselto inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence, memoranda,and other records and documents in the possession or under the controlof PEC relating to compliance with this Agreement; b. Upon five (5) days notice to PEC, and without restraint or interferencefrom it, to interview officers or employees of PEC, who may have counselpresent, regarding any such matters. No information or documents obtained by the Commission shall be divulgedby any representative of the Commission to anyone outside the Commission,except in legal proceedings, a request from Congress, a request from aCongressional Committee, to secure compliance with this Consent Order,or as otherwise permitted by law. If at any time information or documents are furnished by PEC and PEC identifiessuch documents as ``Confidential,'' then the Commission shall provide toPEC ten (10) days notice or, if ten (10) days is not possible, as manydays notice as possible prior to divulging such material. 7. This agreement shall not be binding until approved by the Commission.<ITAG tagnum="84">Attachment A_Voting and Selling Trust Agreement</ITAG>This voting and selling trust agreement (this ``Agreement'') is enteredinto on <T2>XXXXXX</T2>, 1989, by and between Panhandle Eastern Corporation (``PEC''),and <T2>XXXXXXXXXX</T2> (``Trustee''). For the purposes of this Agreement,PEC means Panhandle Eastern Corporation, its subsidiaries, divisions, groups,and affiliates controlled by PEC and their respective directors, officers,employees, agents and representatives, and their respective successorsand assigns. Witnesseth <T3>Whereas, </T3>PEC has agreed, subject only to final approval and issuanceby the Federal Trade Commission (the ``Commission'') of a proposed AgreementContaining Consent Order (``Consent Order''), to divest all of the outstandingstock and assets of Trunkline Offshore Company (``TOC'') and its associatedinterest as a fifty percent (50%) partner in Stingray Pipeline Company(``Stingray''); <T3>Whereas, </T3>the Commission and PEC have agreed that pending Commissiondeliberations about whether finally to accept the Consent Order, the votingstock of TOC and its associated interest in Stingray be placed in a votingtrust to be administered by an independent Trustee to effectuate the ConsentOrder and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement;<T3>Whereas, </T3>the Trustee intends to act in furtherance of assuringthat TOC and the associated interest in Stingray will remain viable andcompetitively independent of PEC, to allow the Commission the opportunityto complete its deliberations while preserving the Commission's abilityto obtain effective divestiture or other appropriate relief if it decidesany is needed; <T3>Whereas, </T3>if the Commission finally accepts the Consent Order theTrustee will undertake to sell the shares of TOC, and its associated interestin Stingray, as promptly as practicable and at the highest available pricethat is consistent with the Consent Order, but at no minimum price, allin accordance with this Agreement, the Consent Order, and the Agreementto Establish a Voting and Selling Trust. <T3>Now, therefore,</T3> in consideration of the foregoing and of the mutualpromises, covenants and agreements hereinafter set forth, the parties heretoagree as follows: 1. Creation, Purpose and Term of Voting and Selling Trust a. Subject to the terms and conditions hereof, a voting and selling trust(the ``Voting and Selling Trust'') in respect of the shares of common stockof TOC owned by PEC (the ``Stock'') is hereby created. b. Trustee accepts the trust created by this Agreement, and agrees to hisor her appointment as trustee hereunder. c. The Voting and Selling Trust created hereunder shall remain in effect(i) until the earlier of (A) termination of the Agreement to Establisha Voting and Selling Trust, under Section 5 of that agreement or (B) thedate the Commission withdraws the acceptance of the Consent Order, if itdecides to do so, or, (ii) if the Commission finally accepts the ConsentOrder, until the termination date defined in Section 6.a, 6.b, or 6.c ofthis Agreement. 2. Solicitation, Collection, Acquisition and Ownership of Stock; VotingTrust Certificatesa. PEC agrees to transfer and deliver, within ten (10) days after appointmentof the Trustee, certificates representing all shares of Stock endorsedor accompanied by proper instruments duly executed for transfer to theTrustee pursuant to this Agreement. b. Such certificates shall at all times be and remain in the possessionand under the control of the Trustee. c. Each certificate representing shares of Stock shall bear a legend tothe effect that it is subject to this Voting Trust Agreement. The Trusteeshall promptly file with the Secretary of TOC a duplicate of this Agreement.The Trustee shall also maintain such other records and books as are necessaryor appropriate to enable him or her to carry out the terms and provisionsof this Agreement.3. Retention of Deposited Stock by Trustee.  The Trustee shall retain and hold, personally or through an agent, thecertificates representing Stock only in accordance with, and subject tothe terms and conditions set forth in, this Agreement. The Trustee shallnot have authority to sell, transfer, assign, pledge or otherwise disposeof or encumber the Stock, except in the ordinary course of business, asnecessary or appropriate to effectuate the Consent Order, or to the extentotherwise specifically provided in this Agreement. 4. Rights and Duties of the Trustee a. During the term of this Agreement and for so long as the Trustee shallhold the Stock pursuant to this Agreement, the Trustee shall possess, and,in his or her sole discretion, subject to the provisions of this Section,shall be entitled to and have the duty to exercise all voting rights ofthe Stock, including the right to vote the Stock on all matters upon whichthe holders of the Stock are entitled to vote, specifically including theright to appoint or elect members to the Management Committee of Stingray.PEC shall not attempt to exercise any voting power, influence, or control,directly or indirectly, over the conduct of business by TOC or Stingray.The Trustee shall use his or her best business judgment in exercising suchvoting trust power in a manner consistent with the purpose and requirementsof this Agreement, the Consent Order and the Agreement to Establish a Votingand Selling Trust. The Trustee shall be independent of and unrelated toany current or prospective participant in the gathering or transmissionof natural gas in the Outer Continental Shelf of the United States butmay, consistent with this Agreement and in exercise of his or her discretion,seek to obtain from any such participant, including PEC, information deemedby the Trustee to be helpful to the conduct of the business of TOC. b. The Trustee shall exercise his or her right to vote the Stock in theelection of directors of TOC. The Trustee shall have sole discretion inchoosing the identity of any directors he or she is authorized to nominateand to seek to elect. The Trustee may, but is not required to, nominateand vote for the election of himself or herself to the Board of Directorsof TOC. The Trustee shall not vote to elect to the Board of Directors ofTOC or the Management Committee of Stingray any person who is an officer,employee, director, agent, representative, shareholder, or affiliate ofPEC, nor, after due inquiry, any person who has a business or familialrelationship with PEC or any officer, employee, director, agent, representative,shareholder or affiliate of PEC. c. No other person shall have any voting right in respect of the Stockso long as this Agreement is in effect. The Trustee shall have no beneficialinterest in the Stock in his or her capacity as trustee. d. The Trustee shall have any and all such further powers, and shall takesuch further actions (including but not limited to legal action) as maybe necessary to preserve the corporate assets and confidential, competitivelysensitive information of TOC and to fulfill the Trustee's obligations underthis Agreement. e. The Trustee shall take or shall cause to be taken such action as isnecessary or appropriate to effectuate the terms of the Consent Order.f. The Trustee shall take all steps to ensure that TOC competes as vigorouslywith PEC as if there were no relationship between PEC and TOC. In furtheranceof this obligation, the Trustee shall ensure there is no communicationbetween TOC and PEC employees, except with respect to commercial arrangementsmade at arm's length in the ordinary course of business, in connectionwith the continued performance by Trunkline Gas Company of duties as Operatorof Stingray (only as long as that is necessary to install a successor),and in connection with the provision of information required by PEC forfinancial and tax reporting purposes as set forth in the Order. The Trusteeshall ensure there is no transfer or disclosure of confidential, competitivelysensitive information between PEC and TOC; if any such communications ortransfers or disclosures of information are made, the Trustee shall immediatelynotify the Commission. 5. Restrictions on PEC a. PEC shall not be involved, directly or indirectly, in the operationor management of TOC or Stingray, nor seek to influence directly or indirectlythe operation or management of TOC. TOC shall be maintained as a separatecorporate entity with an independent Board of Directors. In no event shallany director, officer, employee, agent or representative of PEC becomeor remain a member of TOC s Board of Directors or become or remain an officerof TOC or serve on the Stingray Management Committee. Nor may any director,officer, employee, agent or representative of TOC become or remain a memberof PEC s Board of Directors or become or remain an officer of PEC. Theindependent TOC Board of Directors shall maintain separate corporate booksand records for TOC. Except as authorized by this Agreement, PEC and TOCshall not transfer assets between them, except for commercial arrangementsmade at arm's length in the ordinary course of business, nor engage inany joint activity, during the term of this Order except following reasonablenotice to the Commission. PEC and TOC (or Stingray) shall not extend anyexisting contracts or agreements between them, or change the terms of suchagreements in any way, during the term of this Agreement except followingreasonable notice to the Commission. The Trustee shall provide the Commissionwith a full description of the proposed transaction and copies of all documentsrelated thereto. The Commission's Bureau of Competition shall also be promptlyprovided with copies of TOC s and Stingray's separate quarterly and annualfinancial statements and capital spending reports, and other financialinformation upon request, during the term of this Agreement.b. PEC shall not seek or obtain, directly or indirectly, any of TOC's orStingray's trade secrets, nonpublic financial and accounting books andrecords, or other confidential, competitively sensitive information; provided,however, that PEC may seek and obtain upon application to the Trustee and30 days notice to the Commission with a copy of the application, such financialinformation from TOC as is necessary for PEC to prepare and file financialand tax reports to the extent required by law, provided that (i) PEC sapplication shall specify in detail the need for the information requested;(ii) for purposes of tax reports PEC shall not seek or obtain informationat a level of detail greater than necessary to prepare and file tax reportsrequired by law, and shall certify to the Trustee that its request forinformation is so limited; (iii) the Trustee shall provide only the informationthat it determines is necessary for the preparation of the financial andtax reports; (iv) information required for tax reports shall be providedor disclosed only to designated individuals within PEC's tax departmentwho are responsible for the analysis of the information and preparationof the required tax reports, and information required for financial reportsshall be provided or disclosed only to designated individuals within PEC'saccounting department; (v) each designated individual in the tax departmentand accounting department shall submit to the Trustee an affidavit in theform appended hereto as Attachment l or Attachment 2, whichever is applicable;and (vi) PEC shall use such information only for the preparation and filingof such required financial and tax reports and not for any other purposewhatsoever. c. PEC shall not make available to TOC or Stingray, directly or indirectly,any of PEC s trade secrets, nonpublic financial or accounting books orrecords, or other confidential or competitively sensitive information.d. Except as otherwise permitted by the Order or by any other term of thisAgreement, no communications shall be made to the Trustee by PEC regardingthe operation or management of TOC or Stingray. PEC may communicate tothe Trustee for ministerial purposes as to the transfer of the Stock pursuantto Sections 6.a, 6.b, and 6.c of this Agreement, provided, however, thatany such permitted communication shall be in writing. e. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent PEC from finding and tenderingto the Trustee potential purchasers for the Stock. Any such sale wouldbe subject to the Consent Order. 6. Termination of the Voting Trust Agreement a. This Agreement and the voting trust created hereby shall terminate,on the first to occur of the following: i. The distribution of the Stock to PEC pursuant to Section 6.b of thisAgreement; or ii. The sale or other disposition of all of the Stock to a party otherthan PEC pursuant to Section 6.c of this Agreement; or  iii. PEC's exercise of its right to terminate as provided in Section III(I)of the Consent Order; or iv. The expiration of the divestiture period defined by Section III(B)of the Consent Order. b. The Trustee shall cause the certificates representing all of the Stockto be delivered to PEC, properly endorsed for transfer to PEC, and shalltake all other actions appropriate to effectuate the transfer to PEC oftitle of the Stock and all other property held by the Trustee pursuantto this Agreement, within five (5) business days, if the Commission issuesa final order rejecting the proposed Consent Order or if the Agreementto Establish a Voting and Selling Trust is terminated under Section 5 ofthe Agreement to Establish a Voting and Selling Trust. c. The Trustee shall cause the certificates representing all of the Stockto be sold if the Commission finally accepts the Consent Order. d. In disposing of the Stock pursuant to Section 6.c hereof, the Trusteeshall faithfully implement the Consent Order. The Trustee s charge shallbe to sell the Stock pursuant to the Consent Order as promptly as possibleat the highest available price but at no minimum price. PEC shall immediatelybe provided access to the information (other than competitively sensitiveinformation) submitted to the Commission for its determination of  whetherthis charge has been fulfilled. The implementation and interpretation ofthis Agreement and the Consent Order shall be in the sole discretion ofthe Commission. e. Upon disposing of the Stock pursuant to Section 6.c hereof, the votingand Selling Trust shall terminate in accordance with Section III(F) ofthe Consent Order. 7. Concerning the Trustee a. Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, the voting trust createdhereby shall be managed by the Trustee. b. The Trustee shall be compensated by PEC in return for his or her servicesas trustee hereunder. As further provided in Section III(F) of the ConsentOrder, the Commission shall determine compensation when the Trustee isappointed. PEC may provide the Commission, solely as an aid to its determinationin this respect, any information PEC deems appropriate, including compensationpaid and other similar arrangements. The Trustee shall be compensated inthe following manner. The Trustee shall receive his or her normal hourlybilling rate, which shall constitute a draw against a future commission,plus reasonable expenses, if any. If the Stock is sold to a third party,the Trustee shall receive a commission, plus reasonable expenses. If theStock is returned to PEC in accordance with Section 6.b or 6.a.iii, theTrustee shall receive his or her normal hourly billing rate plus reasonableexpenses.  c. The Trustee warrants that he or she is not and covenants that he orshe shall not become an officer, employee, director, or shareholder ofPEC, or of any of its affiliates. d. The Trustee is expressly authorized to incur and pay from the Stingraycash contribution to TOC his or her draw, all reasonable charges and otherexpenses as provided in Section III(F) of the Consent Order. PEC agreesto indemnify and hold harmless the Trustee against all claims, costs ofdefense of claims (including reasonable attorney's fees and disbursements),reasonable expenses and liability incurred by the Trustee in connectionwith the performance of his or her duties under this Agreement, exceptthose incurred as a result of the Trustee's own intentional wrongful actions,willful misconduct, or gross negligence. e. The Trustee shall be free from liability in acting upon any paper, documentor signature believed by the Trustee to be genuine and to have been signedby the proper party. The Trustee shall not be liable for any error of judgmentin any act done or omitted, nor for any mistake of fact or law, nor foranything the Trustee may do or refrain from doing in good faith. The Trusteemay consult with legal counsel of his or her choice and any action underthis Agreement taken or suffered in good faith by the Trustee in accordancewith the opinion of the Trustee's counsel shall be conclusive on PEC andthe Trustee shall be fully protected and be subject to no liability inrespect thereto.f. The rights and duties of the Trustee hereunder shall terminate uponthe Trustee's incapacity to act, death, insolvency or dissolution, andno interest in any of the Stock held by the Trustee nor any of the rightsand duties of the incapacitated, deceased, insolvent or dissolved Trusteemay be transferred by will, devise, succession or in any manner exceptas provided in this Agreement. The heirs, administrators, executors orother representatives of such incapacitated, deceased, insolvent or dissolvedTrustee shall, however, have the right and duty to convey the Stock heldby the Trustee to one or more successor trustees. g. The Trustee may resign by giving thirty (30) days advance written noticeof his or her resignation to the Commission and PEC, provided that a successorTrustee has been appointed. h. In the event of such resignation, incapacity to act or the death, insolvencyor dissolution of the Trustee, the Trustee shall be succeeded by a successorTrustee chosen by the Commission, subject to the consent of PEC which shallnot be unreasonably withheld, which successor Trustee shall be altogetherindependent of, and unrelated to, any current or prospective participantin the business of gathering or transmission of natural gas in the OuterContinental Shelf of the United States. Any successor Trustee appointedas herein provided shall indicate his or her acceptance of such appointmentby executing a counterpart of this Agreement and thereupon such successorshall be vested with all the rights, powers, duties and immunities hereinconferred upon the  Trustee as though such successor had been originallya party to this Agreement as Trustee. The term ``Trustee'' as used in thisAgreement shall apply to and mean the original Trustee (so long as he orshe is a Trustee) hereunder and his or her successors. 8. Periodic Distributions, Conservation of Assets and Proceeds of Saleof Deposited Stock a. PEC shall be entitled to receive from time to time payments from Stingraycash distributions to TOC to whatever extent the Trustee, in his or hersole discretion, believes prudent in light of the purpose of the Votingand Selling Trust. Such payments shall be made by the Trustee as soon aspracticable after the receipt of the distribution. In lieu of receivingcash distributions and paying them to PEC, the Trustee may instruct TOCin writing to pay the cash directly to PEC. In the event any such instructionis given to TOC, all liability of the Trustee with regard to payment shallcease, unless and until such instruction is revoked. The Trustee may atany time revoke such instruction by written notice to TOC and direct itto make subsequent payments to the Trustee. b. In the event of the sale of all the Stock, the Trustee shall receive,for the benefit of PEC, the money, securities, rights or property thatis or are distributed or distributable in respect of the Stock, or thatis or are received in exchange for the Stock. During the term of this Agreement,the Trustee and the Board of Directors of TOC shall use their best effortsto maintain the value of TOC's assets and shall not sell, transfer, encumberor otherwise impair their marketability, other than in the normal courseof business, upon reasonable notice to the Commission and PEC. c. If at any time during the term of this Agreement the Trustee shall receiveor collect any money or other property (other than voting securities ofTOC) on behalf of TOC, other than as set forth in Sections 8.a or 8.b,the Trustee shall distribute such money or other property to PEC to theextent the Trustee, in his or her sole discretion, believes prudent inlight of this Agreement. 9. <T3>Miscellaneous </T3>a. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the partieshereto with respect to the subject matter hereof and supersedes all priororal and written agreements, commitments or understandings with respectto the matters provided for herein. b. This Agreement shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefitof the parties hereto and their respective permitted successors and permittedassigns. This Agreement shall not be assignable by any party, except inthe event of the resignation, incapacity, insolvency, dissolution or deathof any Trustee and the appointment of a successor Trustee in accordancewith Section 7.h hereof.c. All notices and other communications given under this Agreement shallbe in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given when deliveredin person or mailed by first class, registered or certified mail, postageprepaid or transmitted by telex or telegram and addressed to: i. If to PEC: John A. Sieger, Esquire, Panhandle Eastern Corporation, 5400Westheimer Court, Houston, Texas. ii. If to the Trustee: iii. If to the Commission: Anthony Low Joseph, Esquire, Federal Trade Commission,601 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20580.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">or to such other address as any of them designate, with copies alsosent to such attorney as the Commission, PEC, or the Trustee may from timeto time designate. Each notice or other communication  which shall be personallydelivered, mailed or transmitted in the manner described above shall bedeemed sufficiently received for all purposes at such time as it is deliveredto the addressee (with any return receipt or delivery receipt being deemedconclusive evidence of such delivery) or at such time as delivery is refusedby the addressee upon presentation. d. If any part of any provision of this Agreement or any other agreement,document or writing given pursuant to or in connection with this Agreementshall be invalid or unenforceable under applicable law, said part shallbe ineffective to the extent of such invalidity only, without in any wayaffecting the remaining part of said provision or the remaining provisionsof this Agreement. e. The headings of the Sections of this Agreement are inserted for convenienceof reference only and do not form a part or affect the meaning hereof.f. This Agreement, the rights and obligations of the parties hereto, andany claims and disputes relating thereto, shall be governed by and construedin accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware (not including choiceof law rules thereof). g. This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, each ofwhich shall be deemed to be an original and all of which shall be deemedto be one and the same instrument. h. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the terms of thisAgreement and of the Order, the terms of the Order shall govern. <T3>In witness whereof, </T3>the parties hereto have executed this Agreementor caused this Agreement to be duly executed on their behalf as of thedate and year first hereinabove set forth. Trustee: <ITAG tagnum="77">By  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Panhandle Eastern Corporation </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">By </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="85">Panhandle Eastern Corporation; Analysis of Proposed Consent OrderTo Aid Public Comment </ITAG>The Federal Trade Commission has accepted, subject to final approval, anAgreement Containing Consent Order from Panhandle Eastern Corporation (``Panhandle'').The agreement would settle charges in a complaint by the Federal TradeCommission that Panhandle's proposed acquisition of Texas Eastern Corporation(``Texas Eastern'') would lessen competition for the transportation ofgas out of one area in the Gulf of Mexico. The complaint states that theCommission has reason to believe that this acquisition by Panhandle wouldviolate Section 7 of the Clayton Act and Section 5 of the Federal TradeCommission Act. Panhandle agreed to the proposed consent order for settlement purposesonly and does not admit that it violated the law as alleged in the complaint.The Commission has placed the proposed consent order on the public recordfor sixty (60) days for reception of comments by interested persons. Commentsreceived during this period will become part of the public record. Aftersixty (60) days, the Commission will again review the agreement and thecomments received and will decide whether it should withdraw from the agreementor make final the agreement's proposed order. The Commission's investigation of this matter concerned Panhandle's stockacquisition of Texas Eastern. Panhandle and Texas Eastern are each operatorsof major interstate natural gas pipeline systems. Panhandle's system receivesnatural gas from offshore producing areas in the Gulf of Mexico, and fromonshore  producing areas in Louisiana, Texas, Oklahoma, Colorado, Wyomingand Kansas, and delivers natural gas primarily to markets in the midwest.Texas Eastern's system receives natural gas from offshore producing areasin the Gulf of Mexico, and from onshore areas of Louisiana and Texas, anddelivers natural gas primarily to markets in the northeast. The Agreement Containing Consent Order (``Order'') would, if issued bythe Commission, settle the complaint that alleges anticompetitive effectsin the transportation of natural gas from the affected portion of the offshoreGulf of Mexico. Under the terms of the proposed Order, Panhandle must divest its whollyowned subsidiary Trunkline Offshore Company and its interest in StingrayPipeline Company. The Order provides that Panhandle shall satisfy its divestitureobligations pursuant to the Agreement to Establish a Selling and VotingTrust. Under this Agreement, Panhandle shall transfer to a trustee allits interests in Trunkline Offshore Company and Stingray. The trustee wouldhave an obligation to divest the interests within 18 months of the dateon which the Commission finally accepts the Consent Order. The Commissionmay, in certain circumstances, extend the time for the trustee to divestthe interests. The trustee would manage the interests until he or she accomplishesthe divestiture. The trustee's duties are set out in the Voting and SellingTrust Agreement, which is an attachment to the Agreement to Establish aSelling and Voting Trust. For a period of ten (10) years from its effective date, the proposed Orderprohibits Panhandle from making acquisitions of pipeline assets locatedin any part of the affected portion of the Gulf of Mexico offshore. It is anticipated that the proposed Order would resolve the competitiveproblems alleged in the Complaint. The purpose of this analysis is to invitepublic comment concerning the proposed Order to aid the Commission in itsdetermination of whether it should make final the Order contained in theagreement. This analysis is not intended to constitute an official interpretationof the agreement and proposed Order, nor is it intended to modify the termsof the agreement and proposed Order in any way.<ITAG tagnum="6">Benjamin I. Berman, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Secretary.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-11081 Filed 5-8-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6750-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>