<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89626-0105 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-26-89.f2.A1104</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Antitrust Division</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Civil No. 89-4522]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Pacific Dunlop Holdings Inc., et al.; Proposed Final Judgment, Stipulationand Competitive Impact Statements </ITAG>Notice is hereby given pursuant to the Antitrust Procedures and PenaltiesAct, 15 U.S.C. 16 (b) through (h), that a proposed Final Judgment, Stipulation,and Competitive Impact Statement have been filed with the United StatesDistrict Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Pacific Dunlop Holdings Inc., Becton, Dickinson and Co., and Edmont,Inc., </T3>Civil No. 89-4522. The Complaint in this case alleges that the effect of the proposed acquisitionof Edmont by Pacific Dunlop may be substantially to lessen competition,in violation of Section 7 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. 18, in the followingUnited States markets: (1) Dipped unsupported nitrile industrial gloves,(2) liquid proof dipped supported latex industrial gloves, (3) liquid proofdipped supported nitrile industrial gloves, (4) liquid proof dipped supportedneoprene industrial gloves, and (5) liquid proof dipped supported PVC industrialgloves. The proposed Final Judgment: (1) Orders and directs Pacific Dunlop to divestany and all interest that it has or shall acquire in Ansell Granet Inc.and (2) orders and directs Pacific Dunlop to divest any and all interestthat it has or shall acquire in certain real, personal, and intellectualproperty used in the production or sale of industrial gloves at Edmont'sindustrial gloves facility in Canton, Ohio. The proposed Final Judgment requires Pacific Dunlop to divest the abovedescribed assets within six (6) months of the filing of the proposed FinalJudgment. If the divestitures are not accomplished within the 6-month period,the Court shall, upon application of the United States, appoint a trusteeto effect the remaining divestitures. Under the proposed Final Judgment,Pacific Dunlop or the trustee, whichever is then responsible for effectuatingthe divestitures required, shall notify the Department of any proposeddivestiture required by the Final Judgment. The devestitures are to bemade to persons acceptable to the United States in its sole determination.Public comment is invited within the statutory 60-day comment period. Suchcomments, and responses thereto, will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and filed with the Court. Comments should bedirected to John J. Hughes, Chief, Middle Atlantic Office, Antitrust Division,United States Department of Justice, The Curtis Center, Suite 650, 7thandamp; Walnut Streets, Philadelphia, PA 19106 (Area Code 215) 597-7401,within the statutory 60-day comment period. <ITAG tagnum="6">Joseph H. Widmar, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Operations Antitrust Division. </ITAG>In the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.<ITAG tagnum="21">In the matter of <T3>United States of America, Plaintiff, </T3>v. <T3>Pacific Dunlop Holdings Inc.; Becton, Dickinson and Company; and Edmont,Inc., Defendants. </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Civil No. 89-4522. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Filed: 6/16/89.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Stipulation </ITAG>It is stipulated by and between the undersigned parties, by their respectiveofficers or attorneys, that: (1) The parties consent that a Final Judgment in the form hereto attachedmay be filed and entered by the Court, upon the motion of any party orupon the Court's own motion, at any time after compliance with the requirementsof the Antitrust Procedures and Penalties Act (15 U.S.C. 16), and withoutfurther notice to any party or other proceedings, provided that plaintiffhas not withdrawn its consent, which it may do at any time before the entryof the proposed Final Judgment by serving notice thereof on the defendantsand by filing that notice with the Court. (2) The parties shall abide by and comply with the provisions of the FinalJudgment pending entry of the Final Judgment. (3) In the event plaintiff withdraws its consent or if the proposed FinalJudgment is not entered pursuant to this Stipulation, this Stipulationwill be of no effect whatever and the making of this Stipulation shallbe without prejudice to any party in this or any other proceeding. <ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Plaintiff United States of America: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Michael Boudin, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Attorney General. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Judy Whalley, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John W. Clark, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John J. Hughes, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert E. Connolly, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Attorneys, Antitrust Division, U.S. Department of Justice. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Richard S. Rosenberg, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Mary Ann Ryan, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Attorneys, Antitrust Division, Department of Justice, Middle AtlanticOffice, The Curtis Center, Suite 650, 7th and Walnut Streets, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania 19106, Telephone: (215) 597-7401.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Defendant Pacific Dunlop Holdings Inc.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Pepper, Hamilton andamp; Scheetz.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Hugh Latimer, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Pepper, Hamilton andamp; Scheetz, 1300 19th Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington,DC 20036. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Defendant Becton, Dickinson and Co. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Roy Weber, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate General Counsel, Becton, Dickinson and Co., One Becton Drive,Franklin Lakes, New Jersey 07417. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Defendant Edmont, Inc. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Roy Weber,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Vice President and General Counsel, Edmont, Inc., 1300 Walnut Street,Coshocton, Ohio 43812. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">So ordered. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20"/><T3>United States District Judge.</T3><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Final Judgment</ITAG><T3>Whereas, </T3>plaintiff, United States of America, having filed itsComplaint herein on June, 1989, and plaintiff and defendants, by theirrespective attorneys, having consented to the entry of this Final Judgmentwithout trial or adjudication of any issue of fact or law herein, and withoutthis Final Judgment constituting any evidence against or an admission byany party with respect to any issue of law or fact herein;<T3>And whereas, </T3>defendants have agreed to be bound by the provisionsof this Final Judgment pending its approval by the Court;<T3>And whereas, </T3>prompt and certain divestiture is the essence ofthis agreement and defendants have represented to plaintiff that the divestiturerequired below can and will be made and that defendants will later raiseno claims of hardship or difficulty as grounds for asking the Court tomodify any of the divestiture provisions contained below;<T3>Now, therefore, </T3>Before the taking of any testimony, and withouttrial or adjudication of any issue of fact or law herein, and upon consentof the parties hereto, it is hereby <T3>Ordered, adjudged, and decreed </T3>as follows:I. JurisdictionThis Court has jurisdiction over the subject matter of this action andover each of the parties hereto. The Complaint states a claim upon whichrelief may be granted against the defendants under section 7 of the ClaytonAct, as amended (15 U.S.C. 18).II. DefinitionsAs used in this Final Judgment:A. ``Ansell Granet'' means any and all interest that defendants have inall of the real, personal, and intellectual property of Ansell Granet Inc.,a Delaware corporation.B. ``Edmont'' means Edmont, Inc., a Nevada corporation wholly-owned byBecton, Dickinson and Company, a New Jersey corporation.C. ``Canton facility'' means any and all interest that defendants haveor shall acquire in all of the real, personal and intellectual propertyused in the production or sale of industrial gloves by Edmont in Canton,Ohio.D. ``Industrial gloves'' means gloves used to protect hands from cuts andabrasions and environmental, chemical, and biological agents and/or toprotect products from hand-borne contamination.E. ``Pacific Dunlop'' means Pacific Dunlop Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporationwholly-owned by Pacific Dunlop Limited, a Victoria (Australia) corporation.III. ApplicabilityA. The provisions of this Final Judgment apply to the defendants, to theirsuccessors and assigns, to their subsidiaries, affiliates, directors, officers,managers, agents, and employees, and to all other persons in active concertor participation with any of them who shall have received actual noticeof this Final Judgment by personal service or otherwise.B. Nothing contained in this Final Judgment shall suggest that any portionof this Final Judgment is or has been created for the benefit of any thirdparty, and nothing herein shall be construed to provide any rights to anythird party.C. Pacific Dunlop shall require, as a condition of the sale or other dispositionof all or substantially all of its interest in the Canton facility andAnsell Granet, that the acquiring party or parties agree to be bound bythe provisions of this Final Judgment.IV. Divestiture of AssetsA. Pacific Dunlop is hereby ordered and directed to divest, to an eligiblepurchaser or purchasers, any and all interest that it has or shall acquirein Ansell Granet, including the right to use the name ``Granet.''B. Pacific Dunlop is hereby ordered and directed to divest, to an eligiblepurchaser or purchasers, any and all interest that it has or shall acquirein all the real, personal, and intellectual property used in the productionor sale of industrial gloves at the Canton facility, but excluding formers,patents, trademarks, trade names, copyrights, trade dress, nitrile formulations,and research and development.C. Pacific Dunlop shall provide to the purchaser or purchasers of the Cantonfacility all proprietary information (subject to Section IV.B above) required(1) To manufacture and package each type of industrial glove product manufacturedfor commercial sale at the Canton facility at any time since January 1,1987, to standards of quality at least equal to currently manufacturedproduct and (2) to maintain equipment at current levels of efficiency.Pacific Dunlop shall also provide to the purchaser or purchasers of theCanton facility a non-exclusive, perpetual license to use any and all patentscurrently used in the production of industrial gloves at the Canton facility.Pacific Dunlop shall also provide for twelve (12) months following thedates of divestiture under Sections IV.A and IV.B, or by the trustee appointedpursuant to Section V, if requested by the purchaser or purchasers, anytechnical assistance required to manufacture and package such gloves andmaintain such equipment, for which Pacific Dunlop will be compensated inan amount equal to the salaries, benefits, and out of pocket expenses incurredin providing such services. Pacific Dunlop shall also provide to the purchaseror purchasers of the Canton facility identification of all customers towhom industrial gloves manufactured at the Canton facility were sold sinceJanuary 1, 1987 and the types of industrial gloves sold to each.D. Pacific Dunlop shall provide to the purchaser or purchasers of AnsellGranet identification of all customers to whom industrial gloves manufacturedby Ansell Granet were sold.E. Unless plaintiff otherwise consents, divestiture under Sections IV.Aand IV.B, or by the trustee, shall be accomplished in such a way as tosatisfy plaintiff, in its sole determination, that the Canton facilityand Ansell Granet can and will be operated by the purchaser or purchasersas viable, ongoing businesses engaged in the production of industrial gloves.Divestiture under Sections IV.A and IV.B, or by the trustee, shall be madeto a purchaser or purchasers for whom it is demonstrated to plaintiff'ssatisfaction that (1) The purchase or purchases are for the purpose ofcompeting effectively in the sale of industrial gloves in the United Statesand (2) the purchaser or purchasers have the managerial, operational, andfinancial capability to compete effectively in the sale of industrial glovesin the United States.F. Without the consent of the purchaser or purchasers, Pacific Dunlop shallnot offer, for six (6) months following the dates of divestiture underSections IV.A and IV.B, or by the trustee, employment to employees currentlyemployed at the Canton facility or Ansell Granet.G. Within one (1) month of the divestiture under Section IV.B, or by thetrustee, Pacific Dunlop shall notify customers to whom industrial glovesmanufactured at the Canton facility were sold since January 1, 1987 that(1) Industrial gloves they purchased from Edmont were manufactured at theCanton facility and (2) the Canton facility was sold to the purchaser orpurchasers.H. At the time of divestiture under Section IV.B, or by the trustee, PacificDunlop shall provide to the purchaser or purchasers of the Canton facilitya nitrile formulation for use at the Canton facility which will enablesuch purchaser or purchasers to manufacture nitrile gloves of a quality,manufacturing efficiency, and yield substantially equivalent to the nitrilegloves currently manufactured by Edmont at the Canton facility.I. Pacific Dunlop or the trustee shall be entitled to require that thepurchaser or purchasers of the assets to be divested be precluded fromrepresenting in any manner that the nitrile gloves which it or they manufactureor sell utilize any Edmont nitrile formulation, and that such purchaseror purchasers be precluded from manufacturing or selling a green nitrileglove for seven (7) years following the date of divestiture under SectionIV.B, or by the trustee.J. Pacific Dunlop shall remove the formers currently in place at the Cantonfacility and replace them with new formers of a quality substantially equivalentto the current formers and suitable for the manufacturer of all productscurrently manufactured at the Canton facility. Pacific Dunlop has orderedsuch new formers and will install them as soon as they are received. Atthe option of the purchaser or purchasers, the closing of the divestitureof the Canton facility may be deferred until the new formers are installed.K. Pacific Dunlop or the trustee shall be entitled to require the issuanceof a royalty free perpetual license to Pacific Dunlop to use, after thedivestiture provided for in the Final Judgment, any and all know-how, tradesecrets, and other intellectual property provided to the purchaser or purchasersof Ansell Granet and the Canton facility, except for the name ``Granet''and other divested Ansell Granet trademarks, copyrights, trade dress, andtrade names.L. Defendants shall take all reasonable steps to accomplish quickly thedivestiture and all other obligations contemplated by this Final Judgment.V. Appointment of TrusteeA. In the event that Pacific Dunlop has not divested all of its interestsrequired by Sections IV.A and IV.B by six (6) months from the filing ofthis Final Judgment the Court shall, on application of the plaintiff, appointa trustee to effect the remainder of the divestiture required by SectionsIV.A and IV.B. After the appointment of a trustee becomes effective, onlythe trustee shall have the right to sell the assets required to be divestedpursuant to Sections IV.A and IV.B. The trustee shall have the power andauthority to accomplish the divestiture at the best price then obtainableupon a reasonable effort by the trustee, subject to the rights of PacificDunlop in Sections IV.I and IV.K, and subject to the provisions of SectionVI of this Final Judgment, and shall have such other powers as the Courtshall deem appropriate. Pacific Dunlop shall not object to a sale by thetrustee pursuant to the provisions of this Final Judgment on any groundsother than the trustee's malfeasance. Any such objections by Pacific Dunlopmust be conveyed in writing to plaintiff and the trustee within fifteen(15) days after the trustee has provided the notice required under SectionVI.B. If Pacific Dunlop has not divested all of its interests required bySections IV.A and IV.B by five (5) months from the filing of this FinalJudgment, plaintiff and Pacific Dunlop shall immediately notify each otherin writing of the names and qualifications of not more than two (2) nomineesfor the position of the trustee who shall effect the required divestiture.Pacific Dunlop shall attempt to agree upon one of the nominees to serveas the trustee. If plaintiff and Pacific Dunlop are able to agree on atrustee within thirty (30) days of the exchange of names, plaintiff shallnotify the Court of the person upon whom plantiff and Pacific Dunlop agreed,and the Court shall appoint such person as the trustee. If plaintiff andPacific Dunlop are unable to agree within that time period, plaintiff shallfurnish the Court the names of each party's nominees. The Court may hearplaintiff and Pacific Dunlop as to the qualifications of the nominees andshall appoint one of the nominees as the trustee.C. The trustee shall serve at the cost and expense of Pacific Dunlop, onsuch terms and conditions as the Court may prescribe, and shall accountfor all monies derived from the sale of the assets sold by the trusteeand all costs and expenses so incurred. After approval by the Court ofthe trustee's accounting, including fees for its services, all remainingmoney shall be paid to Pacific Dunlop and the trust shall then be terminated.The compensation of such trustee shall be reasonable and based on a feearrangement providing the trustee with an incentive based on the priceand terms of the divestiture and the speed with which it is accomplished.D. Pacific Dunlop shall use its best efforts to assist the trustee in accomplishingthe required divestiture. The trustee and any consultants, accountants,attorneys, and other persons retained by the trustee shall have full andcomplete access to the personnel, books, records, and facilities of thebusiness or businesses to be divested, and Pacific Dunlop shall developfinancial or other information relevant to such business or businessesas the trustee may reasonably request, subject to reasonable protectionfor trade secret or other confidential research, development, or commercialinformation. Upon the request of the trustee, Becton, Dickinson shall providereasonable assistance and records and documents within its possession orcontrol to aid the trustee in accomplishing the divestiture of the Cantonfacility. Defendants shall take no action to interfere with or to impedethe trustee's accomplishment of the divestiture.E. After its appointment, the trustee shall file monthly reports with plaintiffand Pacific Dunlop and the Court setting forth the trustee's efforts toaccomplish the divestiture ordered under this Final Judgment. If the trusteehas not accomplished such divestiture within six (6) months after its appointment,the trustee shall thereupon promptly file with the Court a report settingforth (1) The trustee's efforts to accomplish the required divestiture,(2) the reasons, in the trustee's judgment, why the required divestiturehas not been accomplished, and (3) the trustee's recommendations. The trusteeshall at the same time furnish such report to plaintiff and Pacific Dunlop,who shall each have the right to be heard and to make additional recommendationsconsistent with the purpose of the trust. The Court shall thereafter entersuch orders as it shall deem appropriate in order to carry out the purposeof the trust, which may, if necessary, include extending the trust andthe term of the trustee's appointment.VI. NotificationA. Pacific Dunlop or the trustee, whichever is then responsible for effectingthe divestiture required herein, shall notify plaintiff of any proposeddivestiture required by Section IV or V of this Final Judgment. If thetrustee is responsible, it shall similarly notify Pacific Dunlop. The noticeshall set forth the details of the proposed transactions and list the name,address, and telephone number of each person not previously identifiedwho offered or expressed an interest or desire to acquire any ownershipinterest in the Canton facility or Ansell Granet, together with full detailsof the same. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice, plaintiffmay request additional information concerning the proposed divestiture,the proposed purchaser, and any other potential purchaser. Pacific Dunlopor the trustee shall furnish the additional information within fifteen(15) days after receipt of the request. Within thirty (30) days after receiptof the notice or within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the additionalinformation, whichever is later, plaintiff shall notify in writing PacificDunlop and the trustee, if there is one, if it objects to the proposeddivestiture. If plaintiff fails to object within the period specified,or if plaintiff notifies in writing Pacific Dunlop and the trustee, ifthere is one, that it does not object, then the divestiture may be consummated,subject only to Pacific Dunlop's limited right to object to the sale underSection V.A. Upon objection by the plaintiff the proposed divestiture shallnot be accomplished. Upon objection by Pacific Dunlop under Section V.A.,the proposed divestiture shall not be accomplished unless approved by theCourt.B. On the date of entry of this Final Judgment and every thirty (30) daysthereafter until the divestiture has been completed, Pacific Dunlop shalldeliver to plaintiff a written report as to the fact and manner of compliancewith Section IV of this Final Judgment. Each such report shall include,for each person who during the period preceding the delivery of the reportmade an offer, expressed an interest or desire to acquire, entered intonegotiations to acquire, or made an inquiry about acquiring any ownershipinterest in the Canton facility or Ansell Granet, the name, address, andtelephone number of that person and a detailed description of each previouslyunreported contact with that person during that period. Pacific Dunlopshall maintain full records of all efforts made to divest the Canton facilityand Ansell Granet.VII. FinancingDefendants shall not finance all or any part of any purchase made pursuantto Sections IV or V of this Final Judgment without the prior consent ofthe plaintiff.VIII. Preservation of AssetsA. Pacific Dunlop shall preserve, hold, and continue to operate as goingbusinesses the Canton facility and Ansell Granet. Pacific Dunlop shalldiscontinue any efforts to integrate the operation of Ansell Granet intothe operation of any other business unit owned or affiliated with PacificDunlop. Pacific Dunlop shall use all reasonable efforts to maintain theCanton facility and Ansell Granet as viable and active competitors in themarket for the production and sale of industrial gloves.B. Pacific Dunlop shall not sell, lease, assign, transfer or otherwisedispose of, or pledge as collateral for loans (except such loans as arecurrently outstanding or replacements or substitutes therefore), assetsrequired to be divested pursuant to Sections IV.A and IV.B, except thatany component of such assets as is replaced in the ordinary course of businesswith a newly purchased component may be sold or otherwise disposed of,provided the newly purchased component is so identified as a replacementcomponent for one to be divested.C. Pacific Dunlop shall provide and maintain sufficient working capitalto maintain the Canton facility and Ansell Granet as viable, ongoing businesses.D. Pacific Dunlop shall preserve the assets required to be divested pursuantto Sections IV.A and IV.B except those replaced with newly acquired assetsin the ordinary course of business, in a state of repair equal to theirstate of repair as of the date of this Final Judgment, ordinary wear andtear excepted. Defendants shall preserve the documents, books and recordsof the Canton facility and Ansell Granet, and Pacific Dunlop shall continueto maintain such documents, books, and records until the dates of divestiture.E. Except in the ordinary course of business, Pacific Dunlop shall refrainfrom terminating or reducing one or more current employment, salary, orbenefit agreements for one or more management, engineering, or other technicalpersonnel employed in connection with the Canton facility or Ansell Granet,and shall refrain from transferring any employee employed at the Cantonfacility or Ansell Granet without the prior approval of plaintiff.F. Defendants shall refrain from taking any action that would jeopardizethe sale of the Canton facility or Ansell Granet.IX. Compliance InspectionFor the purpose of determining or securing compliance with this Final Judgment,and subject to any legally recognized privilege, from time to time:A. Duly authorized representatives of the Department of Justice, includingconsultants and other persons retained by the Department, shall, upon thewritten request of the Attorney General or of the Assistant Attorney Generalin charge of the Antitrust Division, and on reasonable notice to defendantsmade to their principal officers, be permitted:1. Access during office hours to inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts,correspondence, memoranda, and other records and documents in the possessionor under the control of defendants, which may have counsel present, relatingto any matters contained in this Final Judgment; and2. Subject to the reasonable convenience of defendants and without restraintor interference from them, to interview their officers, employees, andagents, who may have counsel present, regarding any such matters.B. Upon the written request of the Attorney General or of the AssistantAttorney General in charge of the Antitrust Division made to defendantsat their principal offices, defendants shall submit such written reports,under oath if requested, with respect to any of the matters contained inthis Final Judgment as may be requested.C. No information or documents obtained by the means provided in this SectionIX shall be divulged by any representative of the Department of Justiceto any person other than a duly authorized representative of the ExecutiveBranch of the United States, except in the course of legal proceedingsto which the United States is a party (including grand jury proceedings),or for the purpose of securing compliance with this Final Judgment, oras otherwise required by law.D. If at the time information or documents are furnished by defendantsto plaintiff, defendants represent and identify in writing the materialin any such information or documents for which a claim of protection maybe asserted under Rule 26(c)(7) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,and defendants mark each pertinent page of such material, ``subject toclaim of protection under Rule 26(c)(7) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,''then plaintiff shall give ten (10) days notice to defendants prior to divulgingsuch material in any legal proceeding (other than a grand jury proceeding)to which defendants are not a party.X. Retention of JurisdictionJurisdiction is retained by this Court for the purpose of enabling anyof the parties to this Final Judgment to apply to this Court at any timefor such further orders and directions as may be necessary or appropriatefor the construction, implementation, or modification of any of the provisionsof this Final Judgment, for the enforcement of compliance herewith, andfor the punishment of any violations hereof.XI. TerminationThis Final Judgment will expire on the fifth anniversary of the completionof the divestitures required herein.XII. Public InterestEntry of this Final Judgment is in the public interest.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: <T2>XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX</T2></ITAG>Court approval subject to procedures of Antitrust Procedures and PenaltiesAct, 15 U.S.C. 16.<ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX</T2> United States District Judge<ITAG tagnum="84">Competitive Impact Statement</ITAG>The United States, pursuant to section 2(b) of the Antitrust Proceduresand Penalties Act (``APPA''), 15 U.S.C. 16 (b)-(h), files this CompetitiveImpact Statement relating to the proposed Final Judgment submitted forentry in this civil antitrust proceeding.I. Nature and Purpose of the ProceedingOn June 15, 1989, the United States filed a civil antitrust complaint undersection 15 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. 25, challenging the proposed acquisitionof the United States assets of Edmont, Inc. (``Edmont''), a wholly ownedsubsidiary of Becton, Dickinson and Company (``BD''), by Pacific DunlopHoldings Inc. (``PDH''). The complaint alleges that the proposed acquisitionviolates Section 7 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. 18.Both PDH and Edmont are major United States suppliers of various typesof dipped supported and unsupported industrial gloves designed to protecthands from cuts and abrasions and environmental, chemical, and biologicalagents and/or to protect products from hand-borne contamination. Dippedunsupported industrial gloves are liquid proof and chemical resistant (``liquidproof'') gloves that are made from latex (natural rubber) or a syntheticmaterial such as nitrile, neoprene, or polyvinyl chloride (``PVC''); thesegloves may be flock-lined, but do not employ any other lining. Dipped supportedindustrial gloves are made of cloth or other lining material coated withlatex or a synthetic material such as those identified above; these glovesmay or may not be liquid proof depending on whether they are designed toallow for hand ventilation. The complaint names as defendants Edmont, PDH, and BD and alleges thatthe effect of the merger may be substantially to lessen competition amongproducts that sell in the United States the following types of industrialgloves: dipped unsupported nitrile gloves, liquid proof dipped supportedlatex gloves, liquid proof dipped supported nitrile gloves, liquid proofdipped supported neoprene gloves, and liquid proof dipped supported PVCgloves.Plaintiff and defendants have stipulated that the proposed Final Judgmentmay be entered after compliance with the APPA, unless the government withdrawsits consent. Entry of the proposed Final Judgment would terminate thisaction, except that the Court would retain jurisdiction to construe, modify,and enforce the proposed Final Judgment and to punish violations thereof.II. Events Giving Rise to the Alleged ViolationUnder the terms of a Purchase and Sale Agreement dated February 13, 1989between PDH and Edmont, PDH proposes to acquire all of Edmont's industrialglove operations in the United States. Under the Agreement, PDH is to paya purchase price of approximately $192 million and assume certain of Edmont'sliabilities.PDH and Edmont both produce for sale in the United States a broad lineof industrial gloves. In 1988, PDH's total industrial glove sales in theUnited States were approximately $26 million. Through its subsidiary AnsellInc., PDH sells in this country unsupported nitrile gloves manufacturedby its affiliate Ansell Glove Company Ltd. in the United Kingdom. AnotherPDH subsidiary, Ansell Granet, Inc., produces at a plant in Snow Hill,North Carolina dipped supported gloves coated with latex, nitrile, neoprene,and PVC.Edmont's total United States sales of industrial gloves were approximately$65 million in 1988. It produces unsupported nitrile gloves at plants inCanton, Ohio and Juarez, Mexico, and liquid proof dipped supported glovesat other plants in Ohio, North Carolina, Louisiana, and Canada.The complaint alleges that the production and sale of dipped unsupportednitrile gloves, of liquid proof dipped supported latex gloves, of liquidproof dipped supported nitrile gloves, of liquid proof dipped supportedneoprene gloves, and of liquid proof dipped supported PVC gloves, eachconstitutes a line of commerce and relevant product market within the meaningof Section 7 of the Clayton Act. The several types of liquid proof dippedsupported and unsupported industrial gloves each have differing degreesof suitability for the many uses for industrial gloves. As between liquidproof dipped supported and dipped unsupported industrial gloves, the formeroffer superior protection from cuts and abrasion, while the latter havesuperior protectin from cuts and abrasion, while the latter have superiortactile and dexterity properties. Within the unsupported and liquid proofsupported categories, each type of coating material offers protection againstcertain chemicals or other toxic or corrosive substances superior to othertypes. A small but significant and nontransitory increase in the priceof any of above identified types of industrial gloves is not likely tocause a significant number of customers to substitute any other type ofindustrial glove, or any other product.For each of the above types of industrial gloves, firms that produce andsell that type in the United States compete with each other for sales throughoutthe country. The United States is, as alleged in the complaint, a sectionof the country and a relevant geographic market, within the meaning ofsection 7 of the Clayton Act.The complaint also alleges that the above markets for industrial glovesare highly concentrated and would become substantially more concentratedas a result of the proposed acquisition of Edmont by PDH. In 1988, totalUnited States sales of dipped unsupported nitrile gloves were approximately$28.7 million. Edmont and PDH, through it subsidiary Ansell Inc., are respectivelythe first and fifth largest competitors in this market; based on 1988 UnitedStates sales data, Edmont and PDH market shares are, respectively, about43 percent and 4.4 percent. Based on market shares derived from UnitedStates sales of all firms in the market, the proposed acquisition wouldincrease the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (``HHI'') by about 380 points toover 3200.Total United States sales in 1988 of all dipped supported latex, nitrile,neoprene, and PVC gloves were approximately $80 million. Edmont and PDH,through its subsidiary Ansell Granet Inc., are the second and third leadingUnited States sellers of dipped supported latex gloves, with shares of1988 sales of that type of glove at about 30 percent and 5 percent respectively;the first and third leading United States sellers of dipped supported nitrilegloves, with shares of about 54 percent and 6 percent; the first and fourthleading United States sellers of dipped supported neoprene gloves, withshares of about 44 percent and 7.7 percent; and among the top five leadingUnited States sellers of dipped supported PVC gloves, with shares of about35 percent and 5.6 percent.A number of producers of dipped supported latex, nitrile, neoprene, andPVC gloves make more than one type of such gloves, and most producers canmake more than one type using the same production equipment. Further, allproducers of dipped supported gloves can make both liquid proof and non-liquidproof gloves on the same equipment. Accordingly, for purposes of assessingthe competitive structure of these markets, and thus analyzing the effectof the acquisition on competition in the markets, it is appropriate toaggregate the capacity resulting from all such equipment that can be usedby producers to make more than one type of glove.Based on 1988 United States sales of all dipped supported gloves, eachof the above identified markets for liquid proof dipped supported glovesis highly concentrated and would become substantially more concentratedas a result of the proposed acquisition of Edmont by PDH. In each market,the proposed acquisition would increase the HHI by at least 300 pointsto over 2800.As alleged in the complaint, successful entry into any of the above describedUnited States markets for dipped supported and unsupported industrial glovesis difficult and time-consuming because of the cost and time required toperfect the production technologies, to construct necessary productionfacilities, and to develop the substantial distributor relationships necessaryto compete effectively in the United States.III. Explanation of the Proposed Final JudgmentThe United States brought this action because the effect of the proposedacquisition of Edmont by PDH may be substantially to lessen competition,in violation of section 7 of the Clayton Act, in the United States marketsfor the manufacture and sale of unsupported nitrile industrial gloves,liquid proof dipped supported latex industrial gloves, liquid proof dippedsupported nitrile industrial gloves, liquid proof dipped supported neopreneindustrial gloves, and liquid proof dipped supported PVC industrial gloves.As described below, the provisions of the Final Judgment are designed toprevent the anticompetitive effects of the proposed acquisition in eachof these markets.To eliminate the competitive threat posed by the proposed acquisition inthe unsupported nitrile glove market, the proposed Final Judgment requiresPDH to divest, subject to certain exclusions, any and all interest thatit has or shall acquire in real, personal, and intellectual property usedin the production or sale of industrial gloves at Edmont's manufacturingfacility in Canton, Ohio (the ``Canton facility''). Edmont currently manufacturesunsupported nitrile gloves at this facility. It is the government's judgmentthat an acceptable purchaser of the Canton facility will compete effectivelyin the United States market for unsupported nitrile gloves, and will supplantthe loss of PDH in this market.Excluded from this divestiture are patents, trademarks, trade names, copyrights,trade dress, nitrile formulations, research and development, and currently-usedformers. However, the proposed Final Judgment requires PDH to provide thepurchaser of the Canton facility with a non-exclusive and perpetual licenseto practice any and all patents pertinent to production at the facility,a nitrile formulation that will enable the purchaser to produce glovesof a quality, manufacturing efficiency, and yield substantially equivalentto that currently achieved by Edmont at the facility, and replacement formersof comparable quality to those currently used at the facility.To preserve the current level of competition in the liquid proof dippedsupported glove markets, the Final Judgment requires PDH to divest anyand all interest that it has or shall acquire in its subsidiary AnsellGranet Inc. This divestiture would include all real, personal, and intellectualproperty used in Ansell Granet's industrial glove production and sales.Ansell Granet currently manufactures liquid proof dipped supported glovesand is PDH's sole source of such gloves for the United States markets.An acceptable purchaser of this plant thus will fully replace PDH as acompetitor in these markets.Under the Final Judgment, PDH is to complete both divestitures within sixmonths of the filing of the judgment, and if it fails to do so, the courtwill appoint a trustee to accomplish the divestitures. In the latter eventuality,only the trustee would have the right to sell the assets to be divested,and PDH would be required to pay for all of the trustee's sale relatedexpenses. If the trustee does not accomplish the divestitures within sixmonths of appointment, the trustee and the parties will make recommendationsto the Court and the Court shall thereafter enter such orders as it shalldeem appropriate in order to carry out the purpose of the trust, whichmay include extending the trust or the term of the trustee's appointment.The Final Judgment provides that both the Canton facility and Ansell Granetmust be divested in such a way as to satisfy the United States that thoseassets can and will be operated by the purchaser(s) as viable, ongoingbusinesses that can compete effectively in the sale of industrial glovesin the United States. In this regard, it affords the United States an opportunityto review any proposed sale to effect the divestitures prior to consummation.If the United States requests information from Pacific Dunlop to assessa proposed sale, the sale may not be consummated until at least 15 daysafter Pacific Dunlop supplies the information. Upon objection by the UnitedStates, a proposed divestiture may not be completed. Until the requireddivestiture has been accomplished, Pacific Dunlop must preserve and maintainthe Canton facility and Ansell Granet as ongoing and economically viablebusinesses.IV. Remedies Available to Potential Private LitigantsSection 4 of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 15) provides that any person whohas been injured as a result of conduct prohibited by the antitrust lawsmay bring suit in federal court to recover three times the damages theperson has suffered, as well as costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. Entryof the proposed Final Judgment will neither impair nor assist the bringingof any private antitrust damage action. Under the provisions of section5(a) of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 16(a)), the proposed Final Judgmenthas no <T3>prima facie</T3> effect in any subsequent private lawsuit that maybe brought against defendants.V. Procedure Available for Modification of the Proposed Final JudgmentThe United States and defendants have stipulated that the proposed FinalJudgment may be entered by the Court after compliance with the provisionsof the APPA, provided that the United States has not withdrawn its consent.The APPA conditions entry upon the Court's determination that the proposedFinal Judgment is in the public interest.The APPA provides a period of at least 60 days preceding the effectivedate of the proposed Final Judgment within which any person may submitto the United States written comments regarding the proposed Final Judgment.Any person who wishes to comment should do so within 60 days of the dateof publication of this Competitive Impact Statement in the Federal Register.The United States will evaluate comments, determine whether it should withdrawits consent, and respond to comments. The comments and the response ofthe United States will be filed with the Court and published in the FederalRegister.Written comments should be submitted to: John J. Hughes, Chief, MiddleAtlantic Office, Antitrust Division, The Curtis Center, Suite 650, 7thandamp; Walnut Streets, Philadelphia, PA 19106.VI. Alternatives to the Proposed Final JudgmentAn alternative to settling this action pursuant to the proposed Final Judgmentwould be for the United States to seek preliminary and permanent injunctionsagainst the consummation of the acquisition of Edmond by PDH. The UnitedStates rejected this alternative because the divestitures in the proposedFinal Judgment should prevent the acquisition from having significant anticompetitiveeffects in any of the industrial glove markets alleged in the complaint.With respect to the liquid proof dipped supported glove markets, AnsellGranet is the only operation affiliated with Pacific Dunlop that manufacturersdipped supported industrial gloves, and its divestiture provides all therelief that could be obtained by the United States with respect to thosemarkets. Regarding the unsupported nitrile glove market, the United Statesconsidered as an alternative requiring PDH's affiliate, Ansell Glove CompanyLtd., to divest its assets devoted to this market, which are located inthe United Kingdom; PDH is not otherwise engaged in the production of unsupportednitrile gloves. However, the United States concluded that the sale of Edmont'sCanton facility would better enable the purchaser to compete for salesin the United States than a sale of the Ansell Glove Company operations.While the two facilities have roughly equal production capacities, AnsellGlove Company's manufacturing plant is located in England, and thereforeits ability to compete in the United States is to some extent subject tofluctuating foreign exchange rates and other potential relative disadvantagesof supplying the United States from overseas facilities.The United States is satisfied that the proposed Final Judgment fully resolvesthe anticompetitive effects of the proposed acquisition alleged in thecomplaint. Although the judgment may not be entered until the criteriaestablishd by the APPA (15 U.S.C. 15 (b)-(h)) have been fully satisfied,the public will benefit immediately from the judgment's provisions becausethe defendants have stipulated to comply with its terms pending its entryby the court.VII. Determinative Materials and DocumentsThere are no materials or documents that the United States considered tobe determinative in formulating this proposed Final Judgment. Accordingly,none are being filed with this Competitive Impact Statement.<ITAG tagnum="20">Respectively submitted</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Richard S. Rosenberg,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Mary Ann Ryan, Attorneys, Antitrust Division, Department of Justice,Middle Atlantic Office, The Curtis Center, Suite 650, 7th and Walnut Streets,Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106, Telephone: (215) 597-7417.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14966 Filed 6-23-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>