<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89512-0121 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-12-89.f2.A1120</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-213]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Connecticut Yankee Atomic Power Co.; Consideration of Issuance ofAmendment to Facility Operating License and Proposed No Significant HazardsConsideration Determination and Opportunity for Hearing  </ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. DPR-61 issuedto Connecticut Yankee Atomic Power Company (the licensee) for operatingof the Haddam Neck Plant located in Middlesex County, Connecticut.  The proposed amendment provides an extension of the one-time relaxationof the containment integrity specifications issued as License AmendmentNo. 112, to allow the four containment air recirculation (CAR) fan motorheat exchangers to be cleaned or replaced while at power.  Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.  The Commission has made a proposed determination that the request for amendmentinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety.  1. <T3>Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences ofan accident previously evaluated.</T3> This Technical Specification changeis bounded by the evaluation submitted in CYAPCO's letter dated February10, 1989, and approved by the NRC staff in Amendment No. 112. The totaltime restriction of 64 hours for having the service water system open envelopesthis proposed change as well. CYAPCO is not requesting an additional 64hours, but proposes to perform the work allowed by this license amendmentunder the original 64-hour restriction approved in Amendment No. 112. Therefore,the 10 CFR 50.92 evaluation described in CYAPCO's February 10, 1989, licenseamendment request bounds this proposed change as well.  The purpose of the proposed change is to clean/replace the CAR fan motorheat exchangers. In so doing, service water flow through the heat exchangerwill increase. This increase in heat removal capacity is necessary to restorethe CAR unit performance to that assumed in the Updated Final Safety AnalysisReport for the design service water temperature. The net effect of thechange will be to improve CAR unit cooling system performance, specificallyby ensuring proper fan motor cooling.  2. <T3>Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany previously evaluated.</T3> The possibility for an accident or malfunctionof a different type than any evaluated previously in the Final Safety AnalysisReport is not created since the change and/or failure modes associatedwith the change do not modify the plant response to the point where itcan be considered a new design basis accident.  The compensatory measures, combined with the short duration of containmentintegrity relaxation, result in an increase in the probability of failureof containment insolation of 7andmultiply;10- when averaged over a year.This low probability, coupled with the low probability of accidents resultingin a release of significant radioactivity into the containment, is judgedto be negligible and need not be considered for this maintenance evolution.The basis for this determination is that containment isolation failurein the current configuration has some finite probability, and the incrementalincrease resulting from the proposed change would be insignificantly small. The proposed change does not create a new unanalyzed event based on compensatorymeasures which will be in effect. As described above, the proposed changedoes not increase the probability of an accident to the point where itshould be considered within the design basis of the plant.  3. <T3>Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety.</T3> The proposedchange does not impact the consequences of an accident on the fuel or reactorcoolant system protective boundaries. The proposed change will allow theopening of the service water piping inside containment for relatively shortperiods of time. This piping serves as the containment boundary. The relaxationof containment integrity does not represent a significant reduction inthe margin of safety. As noted above, the compensatory measures which willbe implemented provide reasonable assurance that the containment boundarywill be maintained and that the allowable off-site dose limit will notbe exceeded.  Based on the above discussion, the proposed change will not decrease themargin of safety because of:  1a. The compensatory measures to maintain the containment boundary.  b. The relatively short duration when the service water piping inside containmentis open.  c. The unavailability of the CAR fan units is bounded by that allowed byboth the Technical Specifications and existing administrative controls. Therefore, based on the above considerations, the Commission has made aproposed determination that the amendment request involves no significanthazards considerations.  The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.  Writting comments may be submitted my mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555,and should cite the publication date and page number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-223, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Marylandfrom 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m Copies of written comments received may be examinedat the NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW.,Washington, DC. The filing of request for hearings and petitions for leaveto intevene are discussed below.By June 12, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendments under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards considerations. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the request for amendment involves nosignificant hazards considerations, the Commission may issue the amendmentand make it effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearingheld would take place after issuance of the amendment.If a final determination is that the amendment involves significant hazardsconsiderations, any hearing held would take place before the issuance ofany amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitionsare filed during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1-(800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to John F. Stolz: (petitioner'sname and telephone number), (date petition was mailed), (plant name), and(publication date and page number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice). A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Gerald Garfield, Esquire, Day, Berry andamp;Howard, Counselors at Law, City Place, Hartford, Connecticut 06103-3494.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board designated to rule on the petition and/orrequest, that the petitioner has made a substantial showing of good causefor the granting of a late petition and/or request. That determinationwill be based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated March 31, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC and at the Local Public Document Room located at RussellLibrary, 123 Broad Street, Middletown, Connecticut 06457.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 8th day of May, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Alan B. Wang, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate I-4, Division of Reactor Projects_I/II,Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-11454 Filed 5-11-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>