<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891106-0033 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-06-89.f2.A1032</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">10 CFR Part 50 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 3150-AD19</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Stabilization and Decontamination Priority, Trusteeship Provisions,and Amount of Property Insurance Requirements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Nuclear Regulatory Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Nuclear Regulatory Commission proposes to amend theprovisions of its property insurance regulations applicable to commercialpower reactor licensees. The changes are proposed to (1) clarify the scopeand timing of the stabilization and decontamination processes after anaccident at a covered reactor; (2) specify that the insurance is requiredto ensure that commercial power reactor licensees will have sufficientfunds to carry out their obligation to clean up and decontaminate afteran accident; and (3) eliminate the requirement that insurance proceedsafter an accident are paid to an independent trustee. In addition, ChairmanCarr and Commissioner Rogers support the staff proposal to solicit commentson the appropriate level of required insurance in view of inflation ofdecontamination and cleanup costs. This proposed rule responds to issuesraised in three petitions for rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>The comment period expires January 5, 1990. Comments receivedafter this date will be considered if it is practical to do so, but theCommission is able to assure consideration only for comments received onor before this date.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Submit written comments to the Secretary, U.S. NuclearRegulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555. Attn: Docketing and ServiceBranch. Hand deliver comments to: 11555 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD,between 7:30 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. (Telephone (301) 492-1960). Copies of commentsreceived may be examined at the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street,NW., Lower Level, Washington, DC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Robert S. Wood, Office of NuclearReactor Regulation, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC20555, Telephone (301) 492-1280.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>On August 5, 1987, the Commission published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>(52 FR 28963) a final rule that amended 10 CFR50.54(w). The rule increased the amount of onsite property damage insurancerequired of commercial power reactor licensees. The purpose of the rulewas to provide an assured source of funds for onsite decontamination andcleanup of a power reactor facility after an accident. In particular, the1987 amendments required licensees to obtain insurance policies in whichany proceeds from such policies are to be used for stabilization of a reactorafter an accident and then for decontamination of the facility before anyother purpose. The rule also required that any insurance proceeds be paidto a trustee, who would be required to disburse funds according to thedecontamination priority. The Commission believed that these provisionswould effectively protect insurance proceeds from claims by bondholdersor their representatives or, in the event of licensee default or bankruptcy,by other creditors. The Commission based this belief on comments submittedby the Association of the Bar of the City of New York (hereinafter referredto as NYC Bar). (See comment number 12 in response to the 1984 proposedrule (49 FR 44645, November 8, 1984)). Subsequent to publication of the 1987 final rule, the NRC received threepetitions for rulemaking that sought (1) clarification of the scope andtiming of the stabilization process after an accident at a covered reactor;(2) clarification of the procedures by which the NRC determines and approvesexpenditures of funds necessary for decontamination and cleanup, and clarificationof how such procedures affect both insurers' needs to secure appropriateproofs of loss and when payments may be made for non-cleanup purposes;(3) a change in the terminology of the required insurance from ``property''insurance to ``decontamination liability'' insurance so as to better forestallclaims to insurance proceeds by a licensee's bondholders; and (4) rescissionof the provision that proceeds of the required insurance are to be paidto an independent trustee, who will disburse the proceeds for decontaminationand cleanup of the facility before any other purpose. Notice of receipt of the three petitions for rulemaking was published onSeptember 19, 1988 (53 FR 36335). These petitions are (1) Petition forRulemaking (PRM-50-51) dated June 3, 1988, from Linda S. Stein, Steptoeandamp; Johnson, counsel to American Nuclear Insurers and MAERP ReinsuranceAssociation (ANI/MAERP); (2) Petition for Rulemaking (PRM-50-51A) datedJune 21, 1988, from J. B. Knotts, Jr., Bishop, Cook, Purcell andamp; Reynolds,counsel to the Edison Electric Institute (EEI), the Nuclear Utility Managementand Resources Council (NUMARC) and several power plant licensees; and (3)Petition for Rulemaking (PRM-50-51B), received July 18, 1988, from PeterD. Lederer, Baker andamp; McKenzie, counsel to Nuclear Mutual Limited andNuclear Electric Insurance Limited (NML and NEIL-II). Interested personsmay examine and copy for a fee the above letters and petitions for rulemakingat the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW., Lower Level, Washington,DC. Four comments were received on the petitions for rulemaking, all of whichsupported the amendments recommended in the petitions. In addition, NYCBar submitted on June 30, 1988, a clarification and revision of its commentson the earlier property insurance rulemakings and called for rescindingthe trusteeship provision that it had supported previously. The NYC Bar'ssubmission was docketed as comment number 36 under the 1984 proposed rule(49 FR 44645, November 8, 1984). <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Analysis of and Response to Issues Raised by Petitioners </ITAG>A. Clarification of the scope and timing of the stabilization process afteran accident at a covered reactor.Petitioners' ConcernsPetitioners believe that the stabilization process should be defined andclarified in the rule. Insurers are concerned that, because the existingrule requires a priority on insurance proceeds first for stabilizing areactor after an accident and then for decontaminating the reactor, andbecause proceeds for decontamination but not stabilization are to be paidto an independent trustee, there could be confusion regarding when, towhom, and in what amount proceeds for stabilization should be paid. Inaddition, petitioners believe that the stabilization priority should notbe invoked until the estimated costs of stabilization and decontaminationexceed a threshold of $100 million and that this priority should only lastfor 30 days unless extended by the NRC. These changes would prioritizeuse of insurance proceeds for relatively more serious accidents in whichthere would be concern about the availability of adequate funds to protectpublic health and safety. Petitioners believe that placing a thresholdand time limit on the stabilization priority, when coupled with a procedurefor estimating and authorizing expenditures for decontamination and cleanupafter stabilization has been completed, would simplify the claims paymentprocess and reduce the likelihood that insurance proceeds for cleanup wouldbe tied up while claims by competing parties are being resolved.NRC ResponseThe NRC believes that petitioners' recommendations with respect to clarifyingthe stabilization priority generally merit incorporation in the rule. Duringthe process that culminated in the 1987 rulemaking, the Commission believed,and continues to believe, that stabilization is a relatively brief processoccurring in the immediate aftermath of an accident where quick and effectiveresponse is necessary. For that reason, the NRC chose not to make stabilizationsubject to the trusteeship provision. For the same reasons, the Commissiondid not define the stabilization process in the rule itself. However, petitionersbelieve that protection of public health and safety would be better servedby more explicit treatment of the stabilization process in the NRC's regulations.The NRC has no reason to dispute petitioners' views and believes that petitioners'proposals in this area do not substantively change the Commission's policyas expressed in the preamble to the 1987 final rule. Consequently, theNRC proposes to accept in large measure petitioners' recommendations, butalso proposes to further clarify the stabilization process beyond petitioners'recommended wording. Also, because in certain circumstances initial stabilizationcould take more than 30 days, the NRC proposes an initial stabilizationperiod not to exceed 60 days, with extensions up to 60 days each, if necessary.B. Clarification of the procedures by which the NRC determines and approvesestimates and expenditure of funds necessary for stabilization, decontaminationand cleanup. Clarification of how such procedures affect both insurers'needs to secure appropriate proofs of loss and when payments may be madefor non-cleanup purposes.Petitioners' ConcernsPetitioners expressed several related concerns with respect to the operationof the decontamination priority within the overall coverage of the policy.Petitioners are particularly concerned that the insurance proceeds notneeded for stabilization, decontamination, or cleanup would be tied upuntil cleanup was completed. This could occur both for any coverage exceedingthe $1.06 billion that NRC requires and for coverage falling within the$1.06 billion required but in excess of the amount needed for stabilization,decontamination, and cleanup after a particular accident. Thus, once itis determined that a particular accident will require, for example, $500million for stabilization, decontamination and cleanup, licensees may needearly access to the remaining insurance proceeds. Early access to thesefunds would help the licensee to better cope with any adverse financialeffects of the accident and would reduce the likelihood that a licensee'sfinancial hardship would havean adverse impact on the protection of publichealth and safety. Additionally, insurers believe that by specificallyincorporating in the rule the flexible release of insurance proceeds notneeded for accident cleanup without regard to whether such insurance ispart of the primary or excess layers being offered1<NOTE/> they will avoid problems with timing of proof of loss requiredunder the insurance policies and the potential adverse effect such timingcould have on the payment of stabilization, decontamination, and cleanupcosts. By specifying a mechanism in the rule by which the NRC can approvestabilization, decontamination, and cleanup cost estimates, these problemscan be avoided. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>1Primary insurance covering the first $500 million in damagesis offered by NML or ANI/MAERP. Insurance in excess of the first $500 millionin damages is offered by NEIL-II ($825 million) and ANI/MAERP ($400 million).One of the primary policies and both excess policies may be combined fortotal coverage of $1.725 billion. <T3>NRC Response </T3>NRC ResponseAlthough the NRC is not convinced that petitioners' proposed amendmentsare essential to the efficient payment of stabilization, decontamination,and cleanup costs, petitioners' recommendations in this area are beingproposed by the NRC because they are consistent with NRC policy as expressedin the August 5, 1987 rulemaking. As stated in that rulemaking (52 FR 28963at 28970),<ITAG tagnum="21">Obviously, the NRC would not interpret a priority in so rigid a manneras to preclude prudent practices necessary to an orderly decontamination,such as equipment purchases, stabilization activities, etc. The decontaminationpriority was not meant to be applied sequentially in that all expenditureson cleanup would have to be made before any others. The priority has beenworded to allow licensee flexibility, particularly after a reactor hasbeen stabilized after an accident. Despite possible utility reluctance,the priority should be compatible with the broadest range of actions necessaryto protect public health and safety. Further, the decontamination priorityis meant to be invoked only when there would be serious concern over theavailability of funds for decontamination.</ITAG>The NRC has proposed modifying petitioners' suggested amendatory languageso that NRC responsibilities and concerns are more clearly presented.C. A change in the terminology of the required insurance from ``propertyinsurance'' to ``decontamination liability'' insurance so as to betterforestall claims to insurance proceeds by a licensee's bondholders andother possible creditors.Petitioners' ConcernsPetitioners continue to believe that the NRC decontamination priority directlyconflicts with indenture language that requires ``property'' insuranceto be maintained for the benefit of those owning the indentures issuedto finance the facility. To effect this requirement, bondholders are tobe named the ``loss payee'' of any property insurance held on the bondedproperty. Thus, NRC's requirement for ``property'' insurance directly conflictswith provisions to protect bondholders' interests in the mortgage indentures.The insurers believe that this conflict places them in a position of havingto choose to whom to pay the proceeds with the result that they will likelymake any insurance proceeds payable jointly to the independent trusteerepresenting the NRC interest in protecting public health and safety andthe trustee representing bondholders' interests. Such action could resultin extensive litigation and delay in cleanup. Petitioners recommend a way out of this dilemma. They propose that NRCrequire ``hybrid'' insurance policies similar to those currently offeredby NEIL-II. A hybrid policy combines a licensee's obligation to stabilize,decontaminate, and clean up its reactor facility with the physical damageloss coverage of traditional property insurance. Because the hybrid policywould incorporate a stabilization and decontamination priority in the amountrequired by the NRC and because bondholders would not be entitled to proceedsunder the stabilization and decontamination obligation portion of the coverage,petitioners believe that claims would be paid for stabilization and decontaminationexpenses without being challenged by bondholders. Although this hybridpolicy currently is in effect only for NEIL-II excess coverage, representativesfor ANI/MAERP and NML indicate that they would be willing to offer similarcoverage.NRC ResponseNRC has been aware that a hybrid policy similar to that offered by NEIL-IIwould eliminate the potential problem of claims by bondholders againstthe stabilization and decontamination portion of insurance proceeds. NRChad been informed of this possibility in comments submitted in the 1984rulemaking (see particularly comment number 12 from the NYC Bar, (49 FR44645)). However, the NRC's expressed policy has been not to mandate theterms and conditions of insurance policies unless agreed to by insurers.At the time of the 1987 rulemaking it was not clear that insurers otherthan NEIL-II and perhaps NML would be willing to offer a hybrid policy.Further, NRC believed that the preamble of the 1987 rule made it clearthat it was decontamination insurance that was being required, notwithstandingthe general reference to ``property'' insurance. Thus, the NRC declinedto require it explicitly. However, because hybrid insurance polices now apparently will be availablefrom all insurers and offer a reasonable likelihood of sheltering proceedsfor stabilization and decontamination expenses from bondholders' claims,the NRC proposes to clearly require insurance to cover stabilization anddecontamination of the reactor and the reactor station site. Hybrid policiesdiscussed above would satisfy this requirement. D. Rescission of the requirement that proceeds of the required insuranceare to be paid to an independent trustee, who will disburse the proceedsfor decontamination and cleanup of the facility before any other purpose.Petitioners' ConcernsPetitioners believe that the trustee provision contained in 10 CFR 50.54(w)(4)is ``unworkable, unnecessary, ineffective and will likely be counterproductive''(PRM-50-51A, p. 5.) (Other petitioners expressed similar thoughts.) Accordingto petitioners, by requiring that insurance proceeds for decontaminationand cleanup be disbursed by a bondholders' trustee, NRC is adding a furtherburden to an already complex process. As explained in II.C. above, because of mortgage indenture provisions andbecause petitioners construe NRC as requiring ``property'' insurance, theindependent trustee could be in conflict with the bondholders' trusteeand might be reluctant to pay out funds for decontamination and cleanupuntil such conflict is resolved. Avoiding this conflict_one primary purposefor the trustee (i.e., to protect against claims by bondholders)_wouldbe accomplished by NRC's requiring a hybrid policy. In its comments, the NYC Bar indicated that it no longer recommends thatNRC require an independent trustee. (The NRC relied extensively on NYCBar's comments in the 1987 rulemaking.) Rather, a combination of the hybridpolicy, explicit procedures for payment of claims, and recent decisionsin bankruptcy cases may more effectively protect decontamination and cleanupexpenses from competing claims. Short of bankruptcy, the hybrid insurancepolicy by itself will protect proceeds for use for stabilization, decontamination,and cleanup. The NYC Bar believes, along with other petitioners, that insurance policyproceeds can be protected from claims of creditors in a bankruptcy or pre-bankruptcysituation if_<ITAG tagnum="21">(1) the insurance policy contains a priority for the payment of decontaminationexpenses, (2) the policy provides coverage for decontamination expensesonly as they are incurred, and (3) the policy requires the utility to usethe proceeds received for payment of the decontamination expenses it hasincurred. The utility would then have a contractual obligation to use theinsurance proceeds for decontamination and not for other purposes. Theserestrictions should only apply to the extent necessary to protect publichealth and safety. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In a pre-bankruptcy situation, the licensee would be bound by theterms of its insurance contract. If the policy contains a decontaminationpriority, it will not be possible to divert the insurance proceeds to otherpurposes. In addition, if the policy so provided the proceeds for decontaminationwould not be payable until decontamination expenses were actually incurred,thus the licensee would need to make suitable arrangements for the workto be done before submitting its claim for insurance. Finally, once itwere to receive the insurance proceeds, the licensee would be requiredby its contract to use the proceeds to pay the expenses which form thebasis of its insurance claim. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In the post-bankruptcy situation, the trustee in bankruptcy or itsequivalent may, subject to court approval, assume or reject executory contractssuch as the insurance policy * * *. Once the trustee assumes the insurancecontract (Since the trustee's right to receive up to $1.06 billion of insuranceproceeds would depend upon an assumption of the contract, we regard itas unlikely that any trustee would reject it.), it too would be bound bythe terms of the insurance agreement and would be required to use the insuranceproceeds in a manner consistent with that agreement * * *. Creditors ofthe bankrupt licensee would have no claim on the insurance proceeds sincethe utility's right to the proceeds would be conditioned both on its incurringdecontamination expenses and on its using the proceeds to pay the expenseswhich form the basis of its claim * * *. (We do not think, particularlyin the pre-bankruptcy situation, that it is likely third party contractorswould be concerned about reimbursement for work undertaken by them. Asnoted above, payment of the proceeds would be conditioned upon their useto pay the expenses on which the insurance claim is based. It is also likelythat a licensee would assign its interest in the insurance proceeds toa contractor, in advance of the bankruptcy, in exchange for the contractor'sagreement to perform the cleanup work. The assignment should effectivelyremove the insurance proceeds from the estate of the bankrupt.) (See commentnumber 36, 49 FR 44645, pp. 11-13. Parenthetical statements are footnotesin the original text.)</ITAG>Petitioners also cite recent decisions by bankruptcy courts that tend tosupport the view that, notwithstanding the procedural remedies outlinedabove, expenditures to protect public health and safety would take priorityover many other types of claims. In a memorandum attached to PRM-50-51A,petitioner argues that:<ITAG tagnum="21">A debtor in possession or a trustee may make expenditures to complywith an agency's regulations or orders if the expenditure is necessaryto comply with an action by the agency to enforce its police or regulatorypower * * *. Agency enforcement actions to protect public health and safetyor the environment constitute valid police powers, and such actions areexempt from the automatic statutory stay of proceedings against the debtor* * *. Moreover, the Supreme Court has made it clear that a debtor in possessionor trustee may not abandon its obligations to comply with laws which arereasonably designed to protect public health or safety * * *. Proceedsof property insurance are normally part of the bankrupt estate and aretreated like any other cash collateral. (Memorandum, pp. 2-3.)</ITAG>Finally, petitioners maintain that it may be impossible to find someoneto act as trustee. Petitioners have assured the NRC that they have madea good-faith effort to obtain trustees but have been unsuccessful. Theybelieve that the reason for their lack of success is twofold. First, trusteeswith sufficient expertise and resources to manage over $1 billion in insuranceproceeds are currently acting as bondholders' trustees. This situationresults in a conflict of interest in which potential trustees would beethically constrained from engaging. Second, trustees are apparently averseto assuming responsibility for disbursing potentially over $1 billion ininsurance proceeds and the resulting exposure to possible litigation forwrongful disbursement. Because the trust would only be funded in the eventof an accident and because trustees' fees are usually based in part onthe amount of assets under management, trustees would only be eligiblefor modest fees. These fees apparently would be insufficient to compensatetrustees for the risk they believe they would be assuming.NRC ResponseThe NRC has no evidence to contradict petitioners' assertions that theycannot find persons both willing and able to act as trustees. The NRC alsoacknowledges that in most, but perhaps not all, situations, the need fora trustee would be mitigated by using a hybrid insurance policy and byrecent developments in bankruptcy case law. At the same time, however, the NRC notes that, if the other proposed changesto 10 CFR 50.54(w) are adopted, some of the potential trustees' concernsshould be reduced. For example, the hybrid policy, if it operates as petitionerssuggest, would largely eliminate questions of whom to pay and thus shouldlower the risk of wrongful disbursement. Although for some potential trusteesthe problems of conflict of interest and inadequate fees would remain,the proposed changes might encourage others to assume the duties of trustee.The NRC is not as sanguine as petitioners that recent developments in bankruptcylaw have eliminated all likelihood of competing claims to insurance proceeds.For example, the recent decision of ``In re Smith-Douglass, Inc.'' (Nos.87-1683, -1684 (4th Circuit, September 6, 1988)) allowed unconditionalabandonment of a hazardous waste site that violated State environmentallaws because the estate had no unencumbered assets and the site did notpose any serious public health and safety risks. The court did indicatethat it would have found differently if unencumbered assets were available.But the decision does raise again the issues of whether insurance proceedswould be considered unencumbered assets and whether a court would takeit upon itself to decide what level of accident cleanup constitutes a ``less-than-serious''public health and safety risk. The NRC concludes that requiring an independent trustee to hold and disburseinsurance proceeds may still be warranted in some circumstances. Nevertheless,given the reality of lack of trustee availability, the NRC proposes toeliminate, at least temporarily, the trustee requirement. The Commissionretains the authority to impose such requirements in individual cases,if warranted. At the same time, the NRC will seek authority to receiveand retain such funds itself. If the NRC obtains such authority, it willconsider whether to exercise such authority and the best method of implementingsuch authority. The NRC may reinstitute the trusteeship requirement. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Level of Insurance </ITAG>Although not raised by petitioners, the NRC staff believes that this ruleshould also address the issue of how much insurance should be required.Chairman Carr and Commissioner Rogers agree with the staff proposal andconsequently request public comment on this issue. In the 1987 rulemaking, the NRC concluded that it found no effective wayto determine future costs of accident stabilization, decontamination, andcleanup other than by periodic updates of the study from which the current$1.06 billion requirement was derived.2<NOTE/> The Commission believed that a general index of inflationsuch as the Consumer Price Index or even the Handy-Whitman constructioncost index was too general for escalating the cost of accident cleanup.Subsequent to the 1987 amendments to 10 CFR 50.54(w), the Commission hasissued its final decommissioning regulations (53 FR 24018, June 27, 1988).Those regulations, in part, adopted formulas for estimating decommissioningcost based on reactor size and type and future decommissioning costs basedon a weighted index of three major decommissioning cost components_labor,energy, and waste burial costs. Inflation estimates for the labor and energycomponents will be derived from producer price indices published annuallyby the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor. Wasteburial charge estimates will be derived from an NRC-published report. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>2``Technology, Safety and Costs of Decommissioning ReferenceLight Water Reactors Following Postulated Accidents,'' (NUREG/CR-2601)Pacific Northwest Laboratory, November 1982. This report is available forpurchase from the U.S. Government Printing Office, P.O. Box 37082, Washington,DC 20013-7082. Although decommissioning costs and accident cleanup costs are not strictlyequivalent, many activities are common to both. The precise formula adoptedfor estimating future decommissioning costs may not be appropriate foraccident cleanup costs; nevertheless, the staff concludes that the methodologyused in the decommissioning inflation formula may be appropriate for accidentcleanup inflation. Although no specific formula is being proposed at thistime, Chairman Carr and Commissioner Rogers are requesting comments onthe appropriateness of the methodology and any suggestions for the factorsand weights that could be used. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Environmental Assessment and Finding of No Significant EnvironmentalImpact </ITAG>If adopted, these proposed amendments would (1) clarify the sequence ofevents covered by required accident cleanup insurance during the periodof stabilization and decontamination after an accident; (2) make explicitthe requirement for a combined accident decontamination obligation andphysical damage loss insurance policy; and (3) rescind the existing requirementthat insurance proceeds be paid to and disbursed by an independent trustee.In addition, this notice of proposed rulemaking seeks comments on establishinga methodology for estimating future accident cleanup costs. This actionis required to increase the effectiveness of the accident cleanup insurancerequired under 10 CFR 50.54(w) so that public health and safety is notadversely affected during the cleanup process. The alternative to thisaction is to maintain the existing rule without change. Neither this action nor its alternative has any significant impact on theenvironment. Although changes in insurance requirements may affect thefinancial arrangements of licensees and may have economic and social consequences,they will not, if adopted, alter the environmental impact of the licensedactivities. The alternative to the proposed action likewise would not haveany significant impact on the environment. Accordingly for the foregoingreasons, the Commission has determined under the National EnvironmentalPolicy Act of 1969, as amended, and the Commission's regulations in subpartA of 10 CFR part 51, that this rule, if adopted, would not be a major Federalaction significantly affecting the quality of the human environment, andtherefore an environmental impact statement is not required. No other agenciesor persons were contacted for this proposed action, and no other documentsrelated to the environmental impact of this proposed action exist. Theforegoing constitutes the environmental assessment and finding of no significantimpact for this proposed rule. <ITAG tagnum="84">V. Paperwork Reduction Act Statement </ITAG>This proposed rule amends information collection requirements that aresubject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.).This rule will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget forreview and approval of the paperwork requirements. <ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Regulatory Analysis</ITAG>On August 5, 1987, the NRC published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>(52 FR 28963) a final rule amending 10 CFR 50.54(w).The rule increased the amount of onsite property damage insurance requiredto be carried by NRC's commercial power reactor licensees. The rule alsorequired these licensees to obtain insurance policies that prioritizedinsurance proceeds for stabilization and decontamination after an accidentand provided for payment of proceeds to an independent trustee who woulddisburse funds for decontamination and cleanup before any other purpose.Subsequent to publication of the 1987 rule, the NRC received three petitionsfor rulemaking that sought clarification of the stabilization and decontaminationpriority provisions and rescission of the trusteeship provision. The petitionsfurther stated that the trusteeship provisions may actually have an effectcounter to their intended purpose by delaying the payment of claims andthus possibly the cleanup process. The proposed rule developed in responseto the petitions for rulemaking should help clarify the mechanism by whichaccident cleanup funds may be assured to be used for their intended purpose.Even without formal stabilization and decontamination priority and trusteeshipprovisions, NRC has authority to take appropriate enforcement action toorder cleanup in the unlikely event of an accident. Chairman Carr and Commissioner Rogers request public comment on the appropriatenessand need for developing formulas that would both base the required amountofaccident cleanup insurance on reactor size and type and establish a mechanismfor changing future insurance amounts to reflect changes in major accidentcleanup cost components. Although the effect of these formulas, if developedand adopted, would be to increase the required amount of insurance forsome licensees, there should be little impact on insurance costs to licenseesbecause almost all licensees buy the maximum amount of insurance available.Additionally, by rescinding the trusteeship requirement, the Commissionwould be eliminating licensees' costs to obtain trustee services. Thus,the proposed rule will not create substantial costs for licensees. The proposed rule will not have significant impacts on state and localgovernments and geographical regions, on the environment, or create substantialcosts to the NRC or other Federal agencies. The foregoing discussion constitutesthe regulatory analysis for this proposed rule. <ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Regulatory Flexibility Certification </ITAG>As required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, 5 U.S.C. 605(b),the Commission certifies that this rule, if adopted, will not have a significantimpact upon a substantial number of small entities. The proposed rule affectsapproximately 113 power reactor licenses. None of the holders of theselicenses could be considered small entities. <ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Backfit Analysis </ITAG>The NRC has determined that the backfit rule, 10 CFR 50.109, does not applyto this proposed rule because the proposed rule, if adopted, would notimpose a backfit as defined in andSection; 50.109(a)(1). Therefore, a backfitanalysis is not required for this proposed rule. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 10 CFR Part 50 </ITAG>Antitrust, Classified information, Fire protection, Incorporation by reference,Intergovernmental relations, Nuclear power plants and reactors, Penalty,Radiation protection, Reactor siting criteria, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements. For the reasons set out in the preamble and under the authority of theAtomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, the Energy Reorganization Act of1974, as amended, and 5 U.S.C. 553, the NRC is proposing to adopt the followingamendment to 10 CFR part 50. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 50_ DOMESTIC LICENSING OF PRODUCTION AND UTILIZATION FACILITIES</ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 50 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 102, 103, 104, 105, 161, 182, 183, 186, 189,68 Stat. 936, 937, 938, 948, 953, 954, 955, 956, as amended, sec.234, 83Stat. 1224, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2132, 2133, 2134, 2135, 2201, 2232, 2233,2236, 2239, 2282); secs. 201 as amended, 202, 206, 88 Stat. 1242, as amended1244, 1246 (42 U.S.C. 5841, 5842, 5846). Section 50.7 also issued underPub. L. 95-601, sec. 10, 92 Stat. 2951 (42 U.S.C. 5851). Section 50.10also issued under secs. 101, 185, 68 Stat. 936, 955, as amended (42 U.S.C.2131, 2235); sec. 102, Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat. 853 (42 U.S.C. 4332). Sections50.13 and 50.54(dd) also issued under Sec. 108, 68 Stat. 939 as amended(42 U.S.C. 2138). Sections 50.23, 50.35, 50.55, and 50.56 also issued undersec. 185, 68 Stat. 955 (42 U.S.C. 2235). Sections 50.33a, 50.55a and AppendixQ also issued under sec. 102, Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat. 853 (42 U.S.C. 4332).Sections 50.34 and 50.54 also issued under sec. 204, 88 Stat. 1245 (42U.S.C. 5844). Sections 50.58, 50.91, and 50.92 also issued under Pub. L.97-415, 96 Stat. 2073 (42 U.S.C. 2239). Section 50.78 also issued undersec. 122, 68 Stat. 939 (42 U.S.C. 2152). Sections 50.80 through 50.81 alsoissued under sec. 184, 68 Stat. 954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2234). Section50.103 also issued under sec. 108, 68 Stat. 939, as amended (42 U.S.C.2138). Appendix F also issued under sec. 187, 68 Stat. 955(42 U.S.C. 2237).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the purposes of sec. 223, 68 Stat. 958, as amended (42 U.S.C.2273); andSection;andSection; 50.46(a) and (b), and 50.54(c) are issued undersec. 161b, 68 Stat. 948, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2201(b)); andSection;andSection;50.7(a), 50.10 (a)-(c), 50.34 (a) and (e), 50.44 (a)-(c), 50.46 (a) and(b), 50.47(b), 50.48 (a), (c), (d), and (e), 50.49(a), 50.54 (a), (i),(i)(1), (1)-(n), (p), (q), (t), (v), and (y), 50.55(f), 50.55a (a),(c)-(e),(g), and (h), 50.59(c), 50.60(a), 50.62(c), 50.64(b), and 50.80 (a) and(b) are issued under sec. 161i, 68 Stat. 949, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2201(i));and andSection;andSection; 50.49 (d), (h), and (j), 50.54 (w), (z), (bb), (cc),and (dd), 50.55(e), 50.59(b), 50.61(b), 50.62(b), 50.70(a), 50.71 (a)-(c)and (e), 50.72(a), 50.73 (a) and (b), 50.74, 50.78, and 50.90 are issuedunder sec. 161o, 68 Stat. 950, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2201(o)). </ITAG>2. Section 50.54 is amended by revising paragraph (w) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 50.54 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conditions of licenses. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(w) Each electric utility licensee under this part for a production orutilization facility of the type described in andSection; 50.21(b) or andSection;50.22 shall take reasonable steps to obtain insurance available at reasonablecosts and on reasonable terms from private sources or to demonstrate tothe satisfaction of the Commission that it possesses an equivalent amountof protection covering the licensee's obligation, in the event of an accidentat the licensee's reactor, to stabilize and decontaminate the reactor andthe reactor station site at which the reactor experiencing the accidentis located, Provided that: (1) The insurance required by paragraph (w) of this section must have aminimum coverage limit for each reactor station site of either $1.06 billionor whatever amount of insurance is generally available from private sources,whichever is less. The required insurance must clearly state that, as andto the extent provided in paragraph (w)(4) of this section, any proceedsmust be payable first for stabilization of the reactor and next for decontaminationof the reactor and the reactor station site. If a licensee's coverage fallsbelow the required minimum, the licensee shall within 60 days take allreasonable steps to restore its coverage to the required minimum. The requiredinsurance may, at the option of the licensee, be included within policiesthat also provide coverage for other risks, including, but not limitedto, the risk of direct physical damage. (2)(i) With respect to policies issued or annually renewed on or after[insert a date one year after the effective date of the rule] the proceedsof such required insurance must be dedicated, as and to the extent providedin this paragraph, to reimbursement or payment on behalf of the insuredof reasonable expenses incurred or estimated to be incurred by the licenseein taking action to fulfill the licensee's obligation, in the event ofan accident at the licensee's reactor, to ensure that the reactor is in,or is returned to, and maintained in, a safe and stable condition and thatradioactive contamination is removed or controlled such that personnelexposures are consistent with the occupational exposure limits in 10 CFRpart 20. These actions must be consistent with any other obligation thelicensee may have under this chapter and must be subject to paragraph (w)(4)of this section. As used in this section, an ``accident'' means an eventthat involves the release of radioactive material from its intended placeof confinement within the reactor or on the reactor station site such thatthere is a present danger of release offsite in amounts that would posea threat to public health and safety. (ii) The stabilization and decontamination requirements set forth in paragraph(w)(4) of this section must apply uniformly to all insurance policies requiredunder paragraph (w) of this section. (3) The licensee shall report to the NRC on April 1 of each year the currentlevels of this insurance or financial security it maintains and the sourcesof this insurance or financial security. (4)(i) In the event of an accident at the licensee's reactor, wheneverthe estimated costs of stabilizing the licensed reactor and of decontaminatingthe reactor and the reactor station site exceed $100 million, the proceedsof the insurance required by paragraph (w) of this section must be dedicatedto and used, first, to ensure that the licensed reactor is in, or is returnedto, and can be maintained in, a safe and stable condition so as to preventany significant risk to public health and safety and, second, to decontaminatethe reactor and the reactor station site in accordance with the licensee'scleanup plan as approved by order of the Director of the Office of NuclearReactor Regulation. This priority on insurance proceeds shall remain ineffect for 60 days or, upon order of the Director, for such longer periods,in increments not to exceed 60 days except as provided for activities underthe cleanup plan required in paragraphs (w)(4) (iii) and (iv), as the Directormay find necessary to protect the public health and safety. Actions neededto bring the reactor to and maintain the reactor in a safe and stable conditionmay include one or more of the following, as appropriate: (A) Shutdown of the reactor; (B) Establishment and maintenance of long-term cooling with stable decayheat removal; (C) Maintenance of sub-criticality; (D) Control of radioactive releases; and (E) Securing of structures, systems, or components to minimize radiationexposure to onsite personnel or to the offsite public or to facilitatelater decontamination or both. (ii) The licensee shall inform the Director of the Office of Nuclear ReactorRegulation in writing when the reactor is and can be maintained in a safeand stable condition so as to prevent any significant risk to the publichealth and safety. Within thirty (30) days after the licensee informs theDirector that the reactor is in this condition, or at such earlier timeas the licensee may elect or the Director may for good cause direct, thelicensee shall prepare and submit a cleanup plan for the Director's approval.The cleanup plan must identify and contain an estimate of the cost of eachcleanup operation that will be required to decontaminate the reactor sufficientlyto permit the licensee either to resume operation of the reactor or toapply to the Commission under andSection; 50.82 of this part for authorityto decommission the reactor and to surrender the license voluntarily. Cleanupoperations may include one or more of the following, as appropriate: (A) Processing any contaminated water generated by the accident and bydecontamination operations to remove radioactive materials; (B) Decontamination of surfaces inside the auxiliary and fuel handlingbuildings and the reactor building to levels consistent with the Commission'soccupational exposure limits in 10 CFR part 20, and decontamination ordisposal of equipment; (C) Decontamination or removal and disposal of internal parts and damagedfuel from the reactor vessel; and (D) Cleanup of the reactor coolant system. (iii) Following review of the licensee's cleanup plan, the Director willorder the licensee to complete all operations that the Director finds arenecessary to decontaminate the reactor sufficiently to permit the licenseeeither to resume operation of the reactor or to apply to the Commissionunder andSection; 50.82 for authority to decommission the reactor and tosurrender the license voluntarily. The Director shall approve or disapprove,in whole or in part for stated reasons, the licensee's estimate of cleanupcosts for such operations. Such order may not be effective for more than1 year, at which time it may be renewed. Each subsequent renewal order,if imposed, may be effective for not more than 6 months. (iv) Of the balance of the proceeds of the required insurance not alreadyexpended to place the reactor in a safe and stable condition pursuant toparagraph (w)(2)(i) of this section an amount sufficient to cover the expensesof completion of those decontamination operations that are the subjectof the Director's order shall be dedicated to such use. Provided that,upon certification to the Director of the amounts expended previously andfrom time to time for stabilization and decontamination and upon furthercertification to the Director as to the sufficiency of the dedicated amountremaining, policies of insurance may provide for payment to the licenseeor other loss payees of amounts not so dedicated, and the licensee mayproceed to use in parallel (and not in preference thereto) any insuranceproceeds not so dedicated for other purposes. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 27th day of October, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Samuel J. Chilk, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-25808 Filed 11-3-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-D</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>