<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89802-0085 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-02-89.f2.A1084</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[AA-230-09-6310-02]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Deferral of Payments on High-Priced Timber Sales </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Bureau of Land Management, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice; adoption of final policy.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The Bureau of Land Management hereby gives notice ofadoption of a final policy on the modification of payment procedures forcertain high-priced timber sales. Under this policy, the terms of paymenton a qualifying timber sale may be modified to allow the purchaser to deferpayments in an amount equal to the difference between the average currentcontract value and the value of sales at current average bid rates on thatBureau of Land Management District at time of modification plus $50 perthousand board feet (MBF). The deferred amount will be paid with interestover a 5-year period under the terms of a fully secured promissory note.The procedure is authorized only for high-priced sales bid prior to January1, 1982. The 5-year deferral period will allow purchasers an opportunityto improve their cash flow by deferring large immediate payment obligationsand to mix a portion of their high-priced sales with lower-priced salesin their portfolios and, thus, obtain a more economical operating base.The intended effect is to encourage purchasers to perform high-priced salesrather than to default them.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE:</T2> This policy is effective August 2, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Questions about this policy shouldbe addressed to Lyndon Werner, Division of Forestry, Bureau of Land Management,Department of the Interior, 1800 `C' Street, NW., Washington, DC 20240,telephone (202) 653-8864.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> <ITAG tagnum="84">Background and Need for Policy </ITAG>On August 2, 1988 [53 FR 31965], the Bureau of Land Management publishedan interim policy to allow holders of certain high-priced timber salesto defer payments to avoid sale defaults. Public comment was invited priorto adoption of the final policy on deferred payments. During the late 1970's,a combination of strong demand for timber, predicted price trends basedon levels of inflation at that time, and predictions of a softwood timbersupply shortage resulted in unprecedented prices for Federal timber salesparticularly in California, Oregon, and Washington. Before this timbercould be harvested, lumber prices fell dramatically in response to a collapsein the housing market precipitated by a general economic recession. Recognizing the dilemma, the Department of the Interior granted grace periodextensions beginning in November 1981; further extensions were grantedin August 1983 on contacts bid period to January 1, 1982, under the President's5-year extension program, which extended the currently uncompleted contractsto 1988 and 1989. And, the Timber Contract Payment Modification Act waspassed in 1984 permitting the return to the Government of 274 Bureau ofLand Management contracts totalling 1.28 billion board feet valued at $430million. These actions and substantially improved forest products marketshave all eased the financial burden of many timber purchasers and lessenedthe risk of default on remaining high-priced contracts. However, some purchasers in Oregon still hold substantial volumes in high-pricedsales bid prior to 1982. As of April 1989 there were about 270 millionboard feet of high-priced timber under contract in 87 sales. This volumeremains under contract primarily because the amounts held by purchasersat the time of buy-out application exceeded the volume entitlement underthe Federal Timber Contract Payment Modification Act. Purchasers have extendedthese sales under the extension authorizations. The majority of these remainingcontracts are due to expire on December 31, 1989. A small number of contractswere further extended into 1991 through the purchase of extension-creditfire salvage sales. The Federal government's exposure to default on thesesales will increase substantially if market conditions deteriorate. Seventypercent of the high-priced sale value is held by purchasers consideredto be in a high-risk situation. The Government could lose $20 million ifthe high-priced sales in these portfolios are defaulted. It is important that the agency have procedures in place to try to avoidsignificant default, because default-delayed harvest results in many adverseeconomic, resource management, and environmental effects. The economiesof many communities particularly in the West are heavily dependent uponthe employment generated by the harvest and manufacture of timber fromthe Bureau of Land Management's forest land. Timber sale defaults interruptthe flow of timber and, thereby, interrupt employment. Employment impactsof default affect not only loggers and mill workers, but also affect othersdependent upon the income of timber workers. Defaults also reduce receiptsto the Federal Treasury and, thus, the revenue sharing payments to localcounties which are based on those receipts. The liability for damages due the Government arising from default couldresult in a number of timber firms seeking bankruptcy. Under bankruptcyprocedures, the United States would become an unsecured creditor. Usuallyfew or no assets are available for payment after all the secured creditorsare satisfied in the proceedings. Even if the firms do not declare bankruptcy,default collection activities are expensive and can result in small dollarreturns compared to the amount of damage payments due the Government. Inshort, contract performance of these high-priced sales provides the besteconomic return to and protection for Federal, State, and local governmentsas well as to timber dependent communities. Accordingly, the Bureau ofLand Management is implementing a procedure to encourage holders of high-pricedpre-1982 volume to perform contracts rather than to default them. An interim policy to allow deferral of payments on these high-priced saleswas published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on August 22, 1988; the policy was implementedon September 1, 1988. <ITAG tagnum="84">Response to Public Comments </ITAG>The Bureau of Land Management received comments on the interim policy from13 individuals and entities. Comments came from a Federal Agency Office,individual timber sale purchasers, a consulting forester, a timber salepurchaser association, attorneys, a surety representative, and local citizensof communities affected by the policy. Most of the responses came fromthe Pacific Northwest. Seven of the respondents supported the policy eitherin its entirety or with suggested modifications. Five of the respondentswere not in favor of the policy. Most of those against the policy providedadditional suggestions for consideration should the policy be finally adopted.Most of the comments against the policy rejected the idea that the Governmentshould provide additional relief for purchasers who have not performedon the high-priced contracts. The following summarizes the major comments and suggestions received andthe agency's response to these in the final policy. The final policy reflectsfull consideration of all comments received. A number of minor changeswere made to procedurally clarify the policy.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Comments </ITAG>A major issue raised by several respondents was whether the proposal providedadditional contract relief. Those holding contracts and in need of additionaltime to amortize the high values were in support of the procedures. Othersfelt that the relief afforded to purchasers from the 1984 buy-out legislationand the agency's 5-year extension program was sufficient and that holdersof the remaining high-priced contracts should be required to complete themfully in the current contract term or default them and suffer the consequences.Some respondents felt that any change in contract terms at this date wouldnot be fair to purchasers who did perform their high-priced contracts andwould reward irresponsible bidding practices and erode the concept thatcontracts must be performed as specified under their terms and conditions.The Bureau of Land Management has given much consideration to whether thisdeferred payment policy rewards poor bidding practices or erodes the fundamentaltenets of contracting. The agency is confident that the deferred paymentpolicy does neither. Experience clearly demonstrates that default of salesleads to losses by the Government and economic disruption; avoiding defaultis clearly in the public interest. In summary, the Bureau of Land Managementhas decided that performance of the remaining high-priced sales providesthe greatest benefit to the public. The policy requires purchasers to performcontracts removing the entire volume and paying the full contract price.There is no relief from payments due the United States granted under thepolicy. The policy changes only the schedule of when full payment willbe received, requiring interest for any period the payment is delayed,and a fully secured promissory note. <ITAG tagnum="84">Comments on Specific Features of the Policy</ITAG>Promissory Note ProceduresThe interim policy stated the deferred payment modification was to be authorizedonly after receipt of a properly prepared and executed promissory note,on a form provided by the Bureau of Land Management, for the total amountof the deferred stumpage value. The note must be fully secured by a formof security acceptable to the Bureau of Land Management and allow for unconditionedpayment upon demand by the Bureau of Land Management. The note requiresquarterly payments to amortize the amount of the note. Interest is assessedagainst the accrued amount of deferral or the remaining note balance, whicheveris less. The interest rate is equal to the average market yield of outstandingtreasury obligations with 5 years remaining to maturity. The note periodis generally for 5 years. The provision for selection of the Treasury rate of interest received themost comments of any feature of the interim policy. The respondents indicatedthat the rate was too low and, thereby, was a subsidy to qualifying purchasers.This was stated to be particularly unfair to purchasers who had performedcontracts and to competitors who must pay the commercial rate of interestto borrow current working funds. Six respondents indicated that such asubsidy was not warranted and that rates for the program should be at thecorporate borrowing rate, prime rate, or higher. The Bureau of Land Managementhas analyzed this issue and concurs that the interest rate should be increased.It was not the agency's intent to provide a low-cost borrowing alternativefor firms that are capable of securing funds from commercial sources. TheBureau of Land Management utilized a Forest Service survey of the banksin the Pacific Northwest and the results of Forest Service discussionswith Federal Reserve Bank representatives. Based on inputs received, thefinal policy raises the rate of interest charged under the promissory noteto the prime rate of interest as determined by the Federal Reserve. The prime rate of interest listed in the Federal Reserve Statistical ReleaseH. 15, Selected Interest Rates, Instrument, Back Prime Loan will be used.The Selected Interest Rates (H.15) release for February, May, August, andNovember will be used as the basis for the promissory note quarterly interestcharges. The rate used from the Selected Interest Rates sheet will be theaverage monthly rate listed respectively for the months of January, April,July, and October. This revised rate basis is determined to be at leastequal to commercial bank rates for a fully secured loan. The prime raterequirement will be required as of the effective date of the final policy.Two respondents indicated that the 10-year term for the promissory notewas too long, that firms should be capable of amortizing the deferred amountin 5 years. There was further comment that the criteria for granting theadditional term which was to be based on ``compelling need'' were not adequatelyspecified. The Bureau of Land Management has established explicit criteriafor the determination of compelling need. These criteria have been usedsince implementation of the interim policy and are being incorporated inthe final policy. The following information is needed to support the granting of additionalpromissory note term beyond 5 years: Purchaser must provide a financialprojection for the deferral period beyond 5 years. The projection mustbe examined by an independent Certified Public Accountant (CPA), with anaccompanying report. The CPA's examination and report must comply withprofessional pronouncements issued by the American Institute of CertifiedPublic Accountants (AICPA)_Auditing Standards Board ``Statement on StandardsFor Accountants' Services On Prospective Financial Information''_specificallythe 1985 pronouncement entitled ``Financial Forecasts and Projections''and the related ``Forecast/Projections Guide'' and ``Forecast/ProjectionStatement.'' The CPA will produce all reports referred to in the pronouncementincluding the Statement of Financial Position, Results of Operations, Statementof Cash Flows (in accordance with FASB 95 the Projected Financial Statementswill include a ``Statement of Cash Flows'' (direct method) in place ofthe Statement of Changes in Financial Position'') and Summaries of SignificantAssumptions and Accounting Policies. This projection must disclose projectedcash flow and working capital balances for the period required. The deferralperiod beyond 5 years can only extend to the point where either the cumulativecash flow or working capital become positive, taking into account the deferralpayments. One respondent indicated that the Bureau of Land Management should allowuse only of corporate sureties, irrevocable letters of credit, or securitiesof the United States as security for bonding on the promissory note. Therespondent felt the use of assets as security for the note could leavethe Government with an asset that is subject to depreciation or a lossin value due to a change in market. The agency does not agree that forms of security should be limited. Accordingly,the final policy allows consideration of all forms of security specifiedin the Bureau of Land Management timber sale regulations. However, personalor other new forms of security would only be approved after full analysisof their value and determination of collection potential. The Bureau ofLand Management is not going to accept ``at risk'' security, but believesit reasonable to retain the capability to consider alternative forms ofsecurity, if such forms meet the test of securing the government's interests.One respondent was concerned that the Bureau of Land Management was requiringthe purchasers to maintain the sale performance bond until final paymentof the promissory note. The Bureau of Land Management has not changed theperformance bond requirements; the bond may be reduced as currently prescribedin the contact based on payment of the non-deferred portion of the unpaidbalance of the purchase price and the value of other contract requirements.Four respondents wanted the Bureau of Land Management to permit the useof the performance bond as security for the payment obligation under thepromissory note. This option is within the discretion of the AuthorizedOfficer subject to the current contractual obligations against the performancebond and the requirement for full security for the promissory note.Sales Eligible for Modification Under the interim policy, to be eligible for payment deferral, timber salesmust meet the following criteria: (1) The bid date must be prior to January1, 1982; (2) the remaining stumpage must have an average value per MBFthat exceeds the average bid value for the previous 6-calender months onthe Bureau of Land Management District where the sale is located by atleast $50; and the contract must have sufficient contract period remainingto allow for removal of remaining timber prior to expiration of the contract.Some of the respondents objected to the procedure of allowing sales tobe deferred on a categorical basis. They agreed that the pre-1982 saleswere uneconomic to harvest but disagreed that all purchasers holding pre-1982inventories should be granted a modification for deferred payments. Onerespondent indicated that purchasers who recently acquired sales throughthird party agreements (assignment) were aware of the potential lossesresulting from the high-priced sales. The respondent stated that allowinga purchaser to defer payment on sales that were recently acquired wouldnot be necessary because the liability of the high-priced timber was consideredin the business transaction and compensated for in the price for the assumptionof the contracts. Two respondents indicated that purchaser need, as wellas sales criteria, should be considered in granting the deferral. Theserespondents felt that only purchasers that had a financial necessity forthe deferral should be allowed to defer payment. It was suggested thata case-by-case approach that looks at the total financial condition ofthe applicant would be fairer and more equitable to the responsible firmsof the industry that have completed their high-priced sales. All of the programs to resolve the economic problems created by the high-pricedbidding expectations of the late 1970's and early 1980's were categorical.The various extension procedures, the legislative initiative, and the FederalTimber Contract Payment Modification Act, were applied to selected sales;sales bid prior to January 1, 1982. All purchasers holding sales were allowedto participate. The Bureau of Land Management will continue to apply selectioncriteria in the same manner established for previous initiatives for resolvingthe high-priced sale situation. The primary reason the respondents requestedadditional purchaser selection criteria was to eliminate the perceivedfinancial advantage afforded by the low cost borrowing rate in the interimpolicy. The decision to use the prime rate of interest in the promissorynote for the final policy eliminates any financial advantage associatedwith borrowing funds at the lower Treasury obligations rate of interest.Therefore, there is no need for additional screening criteria for applicants.The final policy will continue to use only the categorical sales selectioncriteria. Two respondents suggested that the determination of high-priced sales usingthe average District bid value plus $50 established a floor rate that wastoo low. There was concern that the prices currently paid for low-valuesalvage material would produce an average bid value that was too low andallow sales that were not actually high-priced to qualify for deferral.A review of the sales sold during the past 6 months reveals all fire salvagesales were  previously sold. In addition, the past 6 months' sales containeda lower percentage of salvage volume than normally sold due to the reducedquantity of ``old-growth'' sales. Therefore, the use of the most recent6-month average District bid plus $50 does not establish a floor rate thatis too low relative to the quality of timber contained in the high-pricedsales. The final policy will continue to use the 6-month average Districtbid plus $50 as the floor rate for qualification and for computing thevalue which may be deferred. Three respondents indicated that purchasers should not be allowed to selectindividual sales for deferral but rather should be required to submit theirentire high-priced portfolios for deferral. This suggestion was made toensure that a purchaser did not elect for deferral on the more profitablesales and be allowed to default on the less profitable offerings. The Bureauof Land Management feels that the individual sale selection process shouldbe allowed as indicated in the interim policy. Due to changing market demands,a purchaser has no way of determining whether sales can be logged in futuremarkets. The decision to defer payment is market driven and is dependenton dollar margins resulting from prices received for lumber. It would beextremely difficult for a purchaser to make an aggregate decision affectingsales that will be logged in future years. Moreover, exposing suretiesand banks to a purchaser's total liability for the entire high-priced salesportfolio would make it virtually impossible for a firm to get the neededsecurity for the program. Modification of Payments Under the interim policy payment specifications for timber stumpage removedunder the contract can be modified to allow payment deferral. The deferredpayment rate per MBF is determined at the time of modification. The deferredvalue will be the difference between the average current contract valuein MBF and the current average bid value of the District sales plus $50.The Authorized Officer determines the District sales average value usingsales sold in the 6-calendar months immediately prior to the request formodification. Modification of the contract is contingent on the prior executionof a promissory note for the estimated amount of payment to be deferred.The comments from respondents on the procedures for modification of paymentssuggested the Bureau of Land Management should consider a species pricingcriterion for determining high-priced sales rather than average tract value.The Bureau of Land Management intends to use the average remaining valuein MBF and average bid value in MBF as criteria for determining both qualifyingsales and the amount of the deferral. The actual deferral is accomplishedon an individual cutting area basis for those cutting areas that have averageremaining value per MBF above the average District bid per MBF plus $50.Species bids on individual sales result from a variety of purchaser biddingstrategies; a wide range in values and the lump-sum type of contract usedmake it very difficult to determine a meaningful average species price.The Bureau of Land Management feels that an average tract value determinationis more representative for the high-priced value determination and computationof the deferral amount.One respondent suggested that rather than being $50 per MBF in all cases,the additional value to be added to the District average bid value shouldbe determined on a percentage basis. All but two of the remaining pre-1982sales are in western Oregon. Review of the 6-month average bid rates forOregon indicates that a 10 percent add-on would produce a floor rate of$233 per MBF. The floor rate calculated with the $50 increment gives anaverage of $262 per MBF. The high-priced sale definition used by the agencyfor Oregon sales previously was sale values in excess of $225 per MBF.However, since the effective date of the interim policy improving marketconditions have raised the average bid by over $50 per MBF, thereby revisingthe definition to $250-$275 per MBF. This analysis indicates that the $50add-on gives the better approximation of high-priced sales. Accordingly,the final policy retains the $50 add-on. Modification of Payment Guarantee Requirements of the Contract No comments were received from respondents on this section. Limitation on Application on Deferred Payment Modifications Under the interim policy, retroactive payment deferral is not allowed forpreviously harvested volumes. Moreover, the performance bond cannot bereduced under the deferred payment procedures. The use of the term ``harvested'' in the interim policy prompted one respondentto suggest that the Bureau of Land Management should consider that alltimber cut but not yet removed should be eligible for inclusion in thepayment deferral program. The respondent indicated that inclusion in thedeferral program of as much eligible timber as possible can serve onlyto further the goal of encouraging contract performance. The final policynow specifies that payments cannot be retroactively modified for previouslybilled volumes. The deferred rates will be effective for all applicablevolume removed during the initial billing period. All volume reported onthe initial monthly cutting report for billing for the monthly period duringwhich the modification becomes effective will be charged for under thedeferred rate procedures. Breach No comments were received on this section. Therefore, these provisionsof the interim policy are adopted in the final without change. <ITAG tagnum="84">Further Comments </ITAG>Four respondents provided suggestions that the Bureau of Land Managementprovide relief for high-priced timber sales contracts by adopting a ``testcase'' proposal offered by one of the lumber firms in southwest Oregon.The Secretary of the Interior reviewed this proposal and decided that itshould not be authorized. The proposal was declined on the basis of equityto those purchasers that have met their contractual obligations and thefair expectation of the Government to performance of valid contractualobligations. <ITAG tagnum="84">Key Features of the Final Policy </ITAG>Having considered the comments received, the Bureau of Land Managementis adopting a final policy on modification of timber sale contracts toallow payment deferral on high-priced sales with the changes noted in theforegoing discussion of comments. The key features of the final policyare listed below: Key Features of the Final Policy. Sales Eligible for Modification. To be eligible for payment deferral modifications, timber sale contractsmust meet the following criteria: 1. The bid date must be prior to January 1, 1982; 2. The remaining stumpage must have an average value per thousand boardfeet (MBF) that exceeds the average bid value for the previous 6 calendarmonths for the Bureau of Land Management District in which the sale islocated, plus $50 per MBF. 3. The contract must have sufficient contract period remaining to allowfor removal of the timber remaining in cutting areas included in a paymentdeferral modification prior to expiration of the contract. The January 1, 1982, date was selected because Congress has already inthe Federal Timber Contract Payment Modification Act identified the periodimmediately prior to this date as a bidding period when cumulative marketeffects resulted in excessive bidding for Federal Timber. Authorized officials of current holders of qualifying contracts must requestpayment deferral in writing. The current holder is the entity currentlyrecognized by the Bureau of Land Management as being legally responsiblefor contract performance. The Bureau of Land Management is not limitingthe procedure to companies who bid the sales. For contracts having multiple cutting areas, one or more cutting areasmay be included in a modification. However, the Bureau of Land Managementwill not approve modification requests where a default of cutting areasnot included in a modification would result in a non-viable resale opportunity.Requests for modification of a qualifying contract must be submitted priorto a billing date for timber covered by the modification. A deferred paymentagreement, promissory note, and additional securities must be fully executedprior to the due date for payment of non-deferred amounts for covered timber.<ITAG tagnum="84">Final Policy and Promissory Note Procedures </ITAG>The final policy for existing high-priced sales will provide guidance toAuthorized Officers in the exercise of their existing authorities to administerBureau of Land Management timber sale contracts. Modification of specifiedhigh-priced sales to implement this deferred payment policy will be inthe public interest. In accordance with the contract terms, the Governmentwill receive full contract value. The current holder of a timber sale contractdetermined by the Bureau of Land Management to be a high-priced contractwill pay for timber under that contract at the contract price. Under thispolicy, the terms of payment will be modified allowing the Government todefer an amount of payment equal to the difference between the currentaverage bid value for the Bureau of Land Management District in which thatsale is located at time of modification, plus $50, and the average currentcontract value per MBF. The difference between the average bid value, plus$50, and the current contract value (deferred payment) will be paid withinterest, over a maximum of 10 years under the terms of a fully securedpromissory note. In most cases note terms will be 5 years or less and maybe approved by the Authorized Officer. Application for note terms from6 to 10 years must show evidence of need based on compelling circumstances.Purchasers must provide the State Director with a financial projectionto support the need for a promissory note term beyond 5 years. The projectionmust be examined by an independent CPA with an accompanying report. The CPA examination and report must comply with professional pronouncementsissued by the AICPA_Auditing Standards Board ``Statement On Standards ForAccountants' Services On Prospective Financial Information''_specificallythe 1985 pronouncement entitled ``Financial Forecasts and Projections''and the related ``Forecast/Projections Guide'' and ``Forecast/ProjectionStatement''. A CPA must produce all reports referred to in the pronouncementincluding the Statement of Financial Position, Results of Operations, Statementof Cash Flows [in accordance with FASB 95 the Projected Financial Statementswill include a ``Statement of Cash Flows'' (direct method) in place ofthe Statement of Changes in Financial Position''] and Summaries of SignificantAssumptions and Accounting Policies. This projection must disclose projectedcash flow and working capital balances for the period requested. The deferralperiod beyond 5 years can only extend to the point where either the cumulativecash flow or working capital become positive, taking into account the deferralpayments. The State Director will coordinate the granting of the additional noteterm with the Regional Forester of the Forest Service if the purchaserhas Forest Service sales that meet qualifications for deferral under theForest Service policy for deferred payments. Interest on accruing deferred value will be paid quarterly following thedue date of non-deferred payment for the harvest of timber covered by adeferred payment agreement. The full amount of deferred payment, as estimatedby the Bureau of Land Management, specified in the promissory note willrequire equal quarterly payments to amortize the amount of the note withpayments to commence the first January 1 following the execution of thenote. The other quarterly payment due dates will be April 1, July 1, andOctober 1. Prior to the completion of harvest, interest paid will be calculatedon the total amount of accrued deferred value or the remaining balanceof the note, whichever is less, and billed quarterly. Upon completion ofharvest, interest paid will be calculated on the remaining balance of thenote. Thus, only the contract terms necessary to change the timing of paymentto the Government will be modified. The deferred payment modification willbe authorized only after receipt of a properly prepared and executed promissorynote, on a form approved by the Bureau of Land Management for the totalamount of the deferred stumpage value. The note must be fully secured bya form of security acceptable to the Bureau of Land Management on a formapproved by the Bureau of Land Management, and allow for the unconditionedpayment upon demand by the Bureau of Land Management. The security amount must be sufficient to cover the entire amount of thenote. The contract holder or surety, where applicable, may make pre-paymentof all or a portion of the outstanding remainder of the note on the dateof any quarterly payment. The amount of the bond security may be reducedto reflect the current amount of the promissory note obligation duringthe note period. The note payments may be assumed by the surety if theprincipal is unable to make the quarterly payments. The interest rate will be adjusted at each payment and will be equal tothe prime rate of interest listed in the Federal Reserve Statistical ReleaseH.15, Selected Interest Rates, Instrument, Bank Prime Loan. The SelectedInterest Rates (H.15) release for February, May, August, and November willbe used as the basis for the promissory note interest charges. The rateused from the Selected Interest Rates sheet will be the average monthlyrate listed respectively for the months of January, April, July and October.<ITAG tagnum="84">Modification of Payments </ITAG>Under the policy, the payments for stumpage will be reduced by a deferredamount covered by a promissory note. The deferred payment rate per thousandboard feet will be determined at the time of modification. The deferredvalue will be the difference between the current average bid value forthe Bureau of Land Management District in which the sale is located, plus$50 per thousand board feet, and the average current contract value inthousand board feet.The Authorized Officer will use the average for the 6 full calendar monthsimmediately prior to the request for modification in determining the amountof the payment deferred. Only high-priced timber within individual cuttingareas shown on the contract's Exhibit ``B'' having an average per thousandboard feet bid value that is above the current 6 month average per thousandboard feet bid value, plus $50 per thousand board feet, for the Bureauof Land Management District, will be eligible for payment deferral. Thetotal deferred payment amount allocated to each of such areas will be directlyproportional to the contract value of the areas. Amounts of deferred andnon-deferred payments will be computed by the Bureau of Land Managementat the time a purchaser requests a deferred payment modification. The determinationof the amount subject to deferral will be calculated based on unhauledvolumes as determined by the Bureau of Land Management to be on the contractarea at the time of the most recent billing date for the contract.More than one note per sale, executed annually, will be considered forsales expected to require more than one year for harvest. For the multiplenote procedure, the amount of the note will be based on the volume scheduledfor removal in an approved logging plan. A single note may be based uponnothing smaller than an individual cutting area or road right-of-way withina cutting area. The average current contract value for the estimated volumeto be removed will be used to determine the amount of payment deferralfor the multiple note procedure. This will allow the note and interestamount to reflect estimated seasonal removal volumes. This will precludehaving to charge for principal and interest on large volumes that haveto be scheduled for logging in successive years. For billing purposes,multiple notes can be consolidated. The $2 per thousand board feet fee for administration of extended contractswill be paid in conjunction with payment of the non-deferred value. <ITAG tagnum="81">Modification of the Payment Guarantee Requirements of the Contract</ITAG>The requirements of the contract related to advance installments and paymentguarantees in lieu of deposits will be satisfied by installments or paymentguarantees equal to the revised current payment amounts as establishedunder the formula for calculating deferred payments. The Government isprotected as to the amount of the deferred payment by the fully securedpromissory note. In the event of an overcut, advance cash installmentsor payment guarantee in lieu of installments must equal the total non-deferredand deferred value for cut timber specified in the deferred payment agreementbut not covered by the promissory note. This requirement will assure thatthe value of the volume harvested above the estimated volumes is coveredby payment guarantee. Full payment or revision of the promissory note mustbe made for the deferred value associated with the overcut.<ITAG tagnum="84">Limitation on Application of Deferred Payment Modifications </ITAG>Retroactive payment deferrals will not be allowed for previously billedvolumes under the policy. The performance bond amount will not be reducedunder the deferred payment procedures until the non-deferred value is paidin full at which time the contract provision for performance bond reductionwill apply. <ITAG tagnum="84">Breach </ITAG>Failure to make a note payment is a breach of the provision for deferredpayment and could result in suspension of operations. A defaulted notecould result in contract cancellation. <ITAG tagnum="84">Implementation of Final Policy </ITAG>The key change between the interim and final policy is the use of the primerate of interest for the promissory note interest requirement. To effectthe transition between the interim policy and the final policy on interestrate requirements for promissory notes, the date of postmark of the purchaser'srequest for modification of a sale will be used to determine the interestrate basis to be used in the promissory note. Requests postmarked on orafter the effective date of the final policy will be subject to promissorynote charges at the prime rate of interest as provided in the final policy.Sales modifications requested under the interim policy will be subjectto promissory note charges equal to the average market yield of outstandingTreasury obligations with 5 years remaining to maturity. However, to receive notes with the interest rate provided in the interimpolicy, purchasers must execute the modifications requested under the interimpolicy and applicable promissory notes prior to December 31, 1989. Allpromissory notes executed after December 31, 1989, will require note interestcharges at the prime rate of interest. These limitations are necessaryto avoid negating the higher interest requirements of the final policy.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Impact </ITAG>This action has been reviewed under U.S. Department of the Interior policyand procedures as well as submitted to the Office of Management and Budgetfor review pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 12291. It has been determinedthat this policy does not have the effects of a major rule as defined inE.O. 12291. The procedure implemented by this policy will not have an annualeffect on the economy of $100 million or more, will not result in majorincreases in costs for consumers, individual industries, Federal, State,or local government agencies or geographic regions, and will not have significantadverse effects on the ability of United States-based industries to competewith foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets. It does notchange the total amount a purchaser will pay for Bureau of Land Managementtimber, although it will affect the timing of when a purchaser will haveto pay the full price for stumpage under a Bureau of Land Management contract.The deferred payment will be made under the terms of a fully secured promissorynote. The note will require interest charges as consideration for paymentdeferral. The timing of payments to the Government will be delayed but the note interestwill compensate for the deferral. The risk of nonpayment will be avoidedby requiring a fully secured promissory note. Counties that share in revenuesgenerated from Bureau of Land Management timber sales will experience ashort-term deferral in receipts. However, the short-term effects are likelyto have far less adverse impact than if these sales were defaulted. Sincepurchasers will eventually pay the full contract value, the long term receiptsto affected counties will be far greater than will be received if the salesare defaulted and the timber resold. The proposed procedures will contributeto the economic well-being of timber-dependent communities, and the orderlyflow of timber to market and receipts to the Treasury will strengthen theorderly accomplishment of forest management objectives, and reduce administrativecosts associated with collection of claims against defaulting purchasers.It has also been determined that this policy will not have significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. The policy worksto preserve the long range revenues to affected counties and to maintainemployment in the area and, thus, reduces the certain adverse economicimpacts these entities will certainly experience in the event of defaultand bankruptcy of purchasers of these high-priced sales. Based on both past experience and environmental analysis, it has been determinedthat the final policy will have no significant effect on the human environment,individually or cumulatively. Therefore, it is categorically excluded fromanalysis in an environmental assessment or an environmental impact statement(40 CFR 1508.4). Furthermore, utilization of this policy is at a qualifying purchaser'sdiscretion and a written request is not required in any specified format.The policy would not result in additional procedures or paperwork as definedin the Paperwork Reduction Act and 5 CFR Part 1320.<ITAG tagnum="6">Hillary A. Oden,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Deputy Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-17991 Filed 8-1-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-84-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>