<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89331-0134 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-31-89.f2.A1133</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-245]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Consideration of Issuance of Amendment to Facility Operating Licenseand Proposed No Significant Hazards Consideration Determination and Opportunityfor Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. DPR-21, issuedto Northeast Nuclear Energy Company (NNECO), for operation of the MillstoneNuclear Power Station, Unit 1, located in Waterford, Connecticut.By letter dated January 24, 1989, NNECO proposed an amendment to the licensefor Millstone Unit 1. The proposed amendment will change Technical Specification(TS) 3.5.F.7(e) to clarify emergency core cooling system (EECS) availabilityand power requirements. This clarification was requested because of maintenanceactivities on 4160 volt busses to be conducted during the next refuelingoutage, which is scheduled to start April 1, 1989. In addition, editorialchanges are being made to delete references to TS 3.5.F.8, 3.7.C.1.c and3.7.C.1.d since these specifications were deleted in Amendment No. 1 tothe Millstone Unit 1 license.During the 1989 refueling outage, 4160 volt busses 14C and 14D are scheduledto be removed from service for extended periods of time (not concurrently)to conduct maintenance and inspections. The net effect of the licensee'sproposed change is that additional breaker manipulation by the operatorwill be required to permit injection from a second EECS subsystem witha separate power supply.Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The licensee provided the following evaluation ofthe above three criteria in their application.<ITAG tagnum="21">1. Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequencesof an accident previously evaluated. The clarification of power requirementsduring refueling will not impact the consequences of the reactor vesseldraining event since the means to ensure that adequate water level (andgreater;12inches) is maintained above the irradiated fuel in the vessel drainingevent due to the additional operator actions which would be needed to alignseparate power to ECCS equipment, is not significant. The other proposedchanges are administrative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">2. Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany previously analyzed. The proposed changes to Specification 3.5.F.7.(e)do not impact plant response to any event to the point where it shouldbe considered a new accident. No new failure modes are associated withthis change. Assurance that the fuel will remain covered will be maintained,even though additional breaker manipulation will be required to provideseparate power.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">3. Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. The basisfor the ECCS system requirements specified in Technical Specification 3.5.Fis to ensure that water to the vessel is available to maintain water levelabove the fuel during refueling operations. As specified in Technical Specifications2.1.1.D, at least 12 inches of water must remain above the top of activefuel with fuel in the vessel during refueling. This change will not decreasethe margin of safety as defined in the basis of any Technical Specification. </ITAG>The staff reviewed and agrees with the licensee's analysis provided above.Accordingly, the Commission proposes to determine that this change doesnot involve significant hazards considerations.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof the <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-216, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland,from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments received may beexamined at the NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions forleave to intervene is discussed below.By May 1, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Requests for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions arefiled during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at (800) 325-6000 (in Missouri (800) 342-6700). TheWestern Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737and the following message addressed to John F. Stolz: petitioner's nameand telephone number; date petition was mailed; plant name; and publicationdate and page number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Gerald Garfield, Esquire, Day, Berry andamp;Howard, Counselors at Law, City Place, Hartford, Connecticut 06103-3494,attorney for the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board designated to rule on the petition and/orrequest, that the petitioner has made a substantial showing of good causefor the granting of a late petition and/or request. That determinationwill be based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated January 24, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Documents Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 LStreet NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at the Local Public Document Room,Waterford Public Library, 49 Rope Ferry Road, Waterford, Connecticut 06385.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 27th day of March 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Michael L. Boyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate I-4, Division of Reactor ProjectsI/II, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7672 Filed 3-30-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>