<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891003-0044 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-03-89.f2.A1043</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">National Highway Traffic Safety Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 531 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. LVM 89-01; Notice 2] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Passenger Automobile Average Fuel Economy Standards; Proposed Exemptionsand Alternative Standards </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Proposed decision to grant exemptions from average fueleconomy standards and to establish alternative standards. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> This consolidated notice responds to individual petitionsfiled by three low volume manufacturers, Lamborghini, LondonCoach, andMaserati, each requesting exemption from the generally applicable passengerautomobile average fuel economy standards, and seeking establishment oflower alternative standards for each model year (MY) from which they seekexemption. This notice proposes to grant exemptions and establish alternativestandards as follows: Lamborghini of North America (Lamborghini) petitioned to be exempted forMYs 1983 and 1984. This notice proposes to exempt Lamborghini and establishan alternative standard of 13.7 mpg for MYs 1983 and 1984.London Coach Co., Inc. (LondonCoach) petitioned to be exempted for MYs1985 through 1987. This notice proposes to exempt LondonCoach and to establishan alternative standard of 21.0 mpg for MYs 1985 through 1987.Officine Alfieri Maserati S.p.A. (Maserati) petitioned to be exempted forMYs 1982-1985. In a separate notice published today, the agency deniesMaserati's request for MYs 1982 through 1983 because the Maserati petitionwas not timely filed for those years and good cause was not shown for thelate filing. This notice proposes to exempt Maserati for MYs 1984 and 1985,and to establish alternative standards of 17.3 mpg for MY 1984 and 16.6mpg for MY 1985.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES:</T2> Comments on the proposals in this notice must be receivedby NHTSA on or before November 17, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> Comments on this notice must refer to Docket No. LVM89-01; Notice 2 and should be submitted to: Docket Section, NHTSA, Room5109, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. Docket hours are from8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Mr Orron Kee, Office of MarketIncentives, NHTSA, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. Mr. Kee'stelephone number is (202) 366-0846.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> <ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>Title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (Cost SavingsAct), which is codified at 15 U.S.C. 2001-2002, provides for an automotivefuel economy regulatory program under which standards are established forthe corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) of the annual production fleetsof passenger automobiles and light trucks. Title V was added in 1975 tothe Cost Savings Act by the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (EPCA).Responsibility for the automotive fuel economy program was delegated bythe Secretary of Transportation to the Administrator of NHTSA. Section 502 specified CAFE standards for passenger automobiles of 18, 19,and 20 mpg for MYs 1978, 1979, and 1980, respectively, and 27.5 mpg formodel year 1985 and thereafter. The Secretary of Transportation was requiredto establish standards for MYs 1981 through 1984 by July 1, 1977. Section502(a)(3) requires that the standards for each of those model years beset at a level which (1) is the maximum feasible average fuel economy leveland (2) would result in steady progress toward meeting the standard forMY 1985. On June 30, 1977, NHTSA adopted CAFE standards for passenger automobilesfor MYs 1981 through 1984 (42 FR 33534). These standards were 22 mpg for1981, 24 mpg for 1982, 26 mpg for 1983, and 27 mpg for 1984. Title V provides that NHTSA has broad discretion to decide whether to amendthe standards. If NHTSA decides to amend the standards for MY 1985 andthereafter, however, the agency is required to comply with the AdministrativeProcedure Act (APA) (5 U.S.C 501 <T3>et seq.</T3>) and to set the amended standards at the ``maximum feasible''level of average fuel economy. Pursuant to that authority, the agency reducedthe MY 1986-88 standards to 26 mpg. Section 502(c) of the Cost Savings Act provides that a low volume manufacturerof passenger automobiles may be exempted from the generally applicableaverage fuel economy standards for passenger automobiles if those standardsare more stringent than the maximum feasible average fuel economy for thatmanufacturer and if NHTSA establishes an alternative standard for the manufacturerat its maximum feasible level. Under the Act, a low volume manufactureris one that manufactures (worldwide) fewer than 10,000 passenger automobilesin the model year for which the exemption is sought (the affected modelyear) and that manufactured fewer than 10,000 passenger automobiles inthe second model year before the affected model year. In determining maximumfeasible average fuel economy, the agency is required by section 502(e)of the Act to consider: (1) Technological feasibility; (2) Economic practicability; (3) The effect of other Federal motor vehicle standards on fuel economy;and (4) The need of the Nation to conserve energy. Selection of the Type of Alternative Standard The Act permits NHTSA to establish alternative average fuel economy standardsapplicable to exempted low volume manufacturers in one of three ways: (1)A separate standard may be established for each exempted manufacturer;(2) classes, based on design, size, price, or other factors, may be establishedfor the automobiles of exempted manufacturers, with a separate averagefuel economy standard applicable to each class; or (3) a single standardmay be established for all exempted manufacturers. If exemptions are granted to the petitioners for the model years coveredby their petitions, NHTSA believes it is appropriate to establish separatestandards for each manufacturer because the agency has already used thatapproach for other low volume manufacturers that petitioned for exemptionsduring MYs 1978-1989. NHTSA has reached final decisions on several exemptionpetitions filed by low volume manufacturers for the 1978 through 1989 modelyears; Avanti Motor Corporation for MYs 1978 through 1985 (49 CFR 531.5(b)(1)),Rolls-Royce Motors, Inc. for MYs 1978 through 1989 (49 CFR 531.5(b)(2)),Checker Motors Corporation for MYs 1978 through 1982 (49 CFR 531. 5(b)(3)),Aston Martin Lagonda, Inc. for MYs 1979 through 1985 (49 CFR 531.5(b)(4)),and Excalibur Automobile Corporation for MYs 1978 through 1985 (49 CFR531.5(b)(5)).Timing of Petitions Title 49 CFR part 525 sets forth the required contents of and proceduresfor processing petitions for exemption from the generally applicable passengerautomobile average fuel economy standards. 49 CFR 525.6(b) specifies thateach petition for exemption must be filed ``not later than 24 months beforethe beginning of the affected model year, unless good cause for later submissionis shown; * * *.'' The reasons for including this deadline in andSection;525.6 were to facilitate the low volume manufacturers' planning to complywith the alternative standards, and to ensure that the agency's analysisof those manufacturers' maximum feasible average fuel economy would notbe simply a ``rubber stamping'' of the individual manufacturer's plannedfuel economy, caused by insufficient leadtime for the manufacturer to makechanges. <T3>See</T3> 41 FR 53827, 53828; December 9, 1976. However, the agency recognized that there would be situations when goodcause existed for not filing 24 months before the start of the model year.NHTSA has recognized two situations as establishing good cause for failureto submit a timely petition. First, there are situations in which the necessarysupporting data for the petition were unavailable until after the due datehad passed. For example, a recently incorporated manufacturer might nothave adequate time to file an exemption petition 24 months prior to themodel year. Second, there are situations in which a legitimately unexpectednoncompliance occurs. An example is if a company providing a low volumemanufacturer with its engines goes out of business, and the manufactureris forced to make an unanticipated engine switch, resulting in lower thanexpected fuel economy. <T3>See</T3> 44 FR 21051 at 21055, April 9, 1979. Timing of Exemptions The agency has stated on several occasions that it interprets section 502as providing the agency broad discretion to decide whether an amendmentof an average fuel economy standard is warranted. (53 FR 15241, at 15243,April 28, 1988; 53 FR 39115, at 39116, October 5, 1988) In the absenceof explicit guidance in title V on the exercise of its discretion, NHTSAhas looked to the statutory scheme as a whole and the Administrative ProcedureAct (APA) to determine whether it should or could amend a CAFE standardfor a bygone year. The agency has concluded that for passenger automobilesproduced by other than low volume manufacturers, such retroactive amendmentis inconsistent with several aspects of the statutory scheme. (53 FR 15241,April 28, 1988) A recent Supreme Court decision, <T3>Bowen</T3> v. <T3>Georgetown University Hospital,</T3> 109 S.Ct. 468 (1988), confirmsthat an agency's ability to adopt retroactive rules is very limited. Indelivering the opinion of the Court, Justice Kennedy stated that ``a statutorygrant of legislative rulemaking authority will not, as a general matter,be understood to encompass the power to promulgate retroactive rules unlessthat power is conveyed by Congress in express terms.'' 109 S.Ct. at 471.While this decision provides additional support for NHTSA's determinationthat it would be inappropriate (if not illegal) to retroactively amendthe industry-wide CAFE standards, there are compelling reasons to distinguishlow volume exemptions from the general principle that retroactive rulemakingis prohibited. As an initial matter, while it is true that section 502(c) of the CostSavings Act provides that the Secretary may grant low volume exemptions``by rule,'' in fact, the agency's consideration of an application forsuch an exemption has more of the characteristics of a case-by-case adjudication.In this regard, although the Supreme Court concluded in <T3>Georgetown University Hospital</T3> that the Medicare Act, 42 U.S.C.1395 <T3>et seq.,</T3> does not provide authorization to retroactively adoptthe cost-limit rules at issue in that case, the Court recognized that ``case-bycase inquiry into the accuracy of reimbursement determinations for individualproviders'' was authorized. <T3>Id.</T3> at 472. Moreover, although Justice Scalia's concurrence expresses an extremelylimited view of an agency's authority to issue retroactive rules, his opinionrecognizes that ``implicit authorization of particular retroactive rulemakingcan be found in existing legislation.'' 109 S.Ct. at 480. As an example,Justice Scalia referred to a situation in which an agency misses a statutorydeadline. Here, the agency's failure to act upon timely applications forlow volume exemptions from the industry-wide CAFE standards would appearto fall within the exception noted by Justice Scalia, particularly sincethe manufacturers were in no way responsible for the agency's inaction.Similarly, this case seems to fit within the principle established by <T3>Addison</T3> v. <T3>Holly Hill Fruit Products, Inc.,</T3> 322 U.S. 607 (1944). As JusticeScalia recognized, <T3>Addison</T3> stands for the proposition that retroactive rulemakingis implicitly authorized where ``the Administrator would, by his inaction,have totally eliminated the congressionally prescribed * * * exemption.''109 S.Ct. at 479. If NHTSA could not issue exemptions from the industry-wideCAFE standards for low volume manufacturers after the commencement of amodel year, the agency also would, by inaction, have ``totally eliminatedthe congressionally prescribed'' low volume manufacturer exemption forthe manufacturers and years in question. These manufacturers filed timely applications for low volume exemptionsbecause they recognized that they could not meet the generally applicableCAFE standards. If the Act were read to preclude NHTSA from acting uponthose timely applications at this time, those manufacturers would be unfairlypenalized by agency inaction that was beyond their control. In order toavoid such a result, the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Actmust be construed to implicitly authorize the grant of retroactive lowvolume exemptions under these circumstances. <ITAG tagnum="84">Agency Response to Petitions </ITAG>Methodology Used to Project Maximum Feasible Average Fuel Economy Levelfor Petitioners In this particular proceeding, NHTSA is not conducting rulemaking in advanceof the model years for which the fuel economy standards are applicable.The vehicles which are the subject of this rulemaking have already beenproduced and tested by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). To determinethe fuel economy benefits of the technology incorporated on these vehicles,NHTSA relied on the EPA test figures to establish the fuel economy levelactually achieved by the petitioners. (45 FR 84108, December 22, 1980;47 FR 20639, May 13, 1982) NHTSA then considered whether there were anytechnological or other improvements that would have been technologicallyfeasible and economically practicable for the petitioners' cars, but werenot incorporated on those cars. NHTSA has interpreted ``technological feasibility'' as meaning that technologywhich was available for use in automobiles in a given model year and whichwould have improved the fuel economy for those  automobiles. (42 FR 33533,June 30, 1977) The areas examined for technologically feasible improvementswere weight reduction, aerodynamic improvements, engine improvements, driveline improvements, reduced rolling resistance, and mix shifts. The agency considered two methods of weight reduction: downsizing and materialssubstitution. The goal of downsizing is to reduce the exterior dimensionsand mass of the car without significantly reducing the interior passengerand luggage volume of the car. Materials substitution refers to the substitutionof lighter materials, such as aluminum, plastics, and high strength lowalloy steels, for currently used materials.Mix shifts refers to shifting the percentage of vehicles sold in each ofa manufacturer's model types for the purpose of increasing the manufacturer'saverage fuel economy. That is, the manufacturer can try to switch customersfrom its less fuel-efficient models to its more fuel-efficient models withoutreducing its total sales. ``Economic practicability'' has been interpreted as meaning the financialcapability of a manufacturer to improve its average fuel economy by incorporatingtechnologically feasible changes in its automobiles. (42 FR 33533 June30, 1977) <ITAG tagnum="84">Lamborghini </ITAG>Background Information on Lamborghini Lamborghini is a very small manufacturer of high performance sports cars.Lamborghini itself manufactures the engines, transmissions, and many othercomponents used in its vehicles. The company underwent a reorganization in bankruptcy during 1978 and 1979.It produced no more than 75 cars for worldwide sales in any model yearbetween 1979 and 1982 and did not export any cars to the United Statesduring MYs 1978 through 1982. Lamborghini sold 7 cars in the United Statesduring MY 1983 and 9 during MY 1984. Lamborghini's total production in1983 was 178 vehicles, and in 1984 it was 231. By letter dated December15, 1980, Lamborghini filed a petition for exemption for MY 1983. On November17, 1981, this petition was amended to include MY 1984. Methodology used to project maximum feasible average fuel economy levelfor Lamborghini The cars sold by Lamborghini in MYs 1983 and 1984 were all one vehicleconfiguration, the Countach, with a fuel economy of 13.7 mpg. This figurewas used as a baseline and any changes found technologically feasible andeconomically practicable were added thereto to arrive at a proposed determinationof Lamborghini's maximum feasible average fuel ecconomy for MYs 1983 and1984. Throughout this analysis, NHTSA has considered only those improvementswhich would be compatible with the basic design concepts of Lamborghiniautomobiles. Lamborghini automobiles have traditionally been high performancesports cars with luxury features in the interior. Design changes whichwould significantly reduce the cars' performance or eliminate items traditionallyoffered on these types of vehicles, such as air conditioning, were notexamined in consideration of the economic practicability criterion. Suchchanges to the basic design might well significantly reduce the demandfor these cars, thereby reducing sales and causing a serious economic injuryto the low volume manufacturer. Weight reduction In determining whether Lamborghini could have made weight reductions onits 1983 and 1984 cars, the agency considered two options: downsizing andmaterials substitution. The Lamborghini is already a very short two seaterautomobile with relatively small exterior dimensions. Accordingly, NHTSAhas tentatively concluded that downsizing would not have been economicallypracticable for 1983 and 1984 Lamborghini cars. The other primary means of weight reduction is materials substitution.Taking this step would have required a change of suppliers and some vehicledesign by Lamborghini. Again, considering the company's economic positionat the time it manufactured its MY 1983 and 1984 cars, NHTSA has tentativelyconcluded that weight reduction by materials substitution would not havebeen economically practicable for Lamborghini in those model years. Aerodynamic Improvements The 1983 and 1984 Lamborghini automobiles had a relatively small frontalarea, which gives less wind resistance and greater fuel economy than alarger frontal area. Generally speaking, Lamborghini and those vehiclesit considers as its competition have already been designed with much attentionto the aerodynamics of the vehicles. Consequently, for these Lamborghinicars to have shown fuel economy gains as a result of aerodynamic improvements,a complete redesign of the vehicles would have been necessary. After consideringthe financial position of the company at the time, NHTSA has tentativelyconcluded that fuel economy improvements as a result of improved aerodynamicswould not have been economically practicable for the MY 1983 and 1984 Lamborghinicars. Engine improvements NHTSA also considered whether Lamborghini could have improved the fueleconomy of its MY 1983 and 1984 cars by either reducing the engine displacementor by using an alternative engine. The engine used in those vehicles hada displacement of 4754 cubic centimeters, or roughly 290 cubic inches.The company stated that a reduction in the size of its engines would resultin its vehicles not offering comparable performance to that of its competitors,thereby reducing sales of Lamborghini cars. Additionally, Lamborghini designs and builds its own engines. Thus, a reductionin the size of the engine would have required extensive design and testingof a smaller engine at a time when the company was coming out of a majorfinancial reorganization. For both these reasons, NHTSA nas tentativelyconcluded that a reduction of engine size would not have been economicallypracticable for MY 1983 and 1984 Lamborghini cars. NHTSA believes the only opportunity for engine improvements would havebeen to increase the efficiency of the existing engine. In order to judgethe feasibility of such action, NHTSA compared the fuel economy of theLamborghini to cars of similar market intent. The fuel economy of the Lamborghiniwas compared to the Ferrari 308, the Lotus Turbo Esprit, and other similarvehicles. After ``normalizing'' for characteristics important to fuel efficiency,the Lamborghini's fuel economy was 3.9-5.0 mpg higher than the Ferrariand Lotus, and 0.4-1.2 mpg below that of high-volume models such as theChevrolet Corvette, Porsche 928, and Alfa Romeo GTV6. Thus, the agencyhas tentatively concluded there is little opportunity to improve the fuelefficiency of the existing engine without sacrificing the performance necessaryin Lamborghini's segment of the market. Drive Line Improvements The primary drive line improvements to enhance achievable fuel economyare transmission improvements and the use of a lower axle ratio. Lamborghinialready uses a manual five-speed transmission, with the fifth gear functioningas an overdrive. This is the most fuel-efficient type of transmission currentlyavailable. Accordingly, NHTSA tentatively concludes that it would not havebeen technologically feasible for Lamborghini to have improved its 1983and 1984 fuel economy by means of transmission improvements. The 1983 and 1984 Lamborghini cars used a 4 09 axle ratio. While this isa relatively high axle ratio, the company stated in its petition that anysignificant reduction in the axle ratio would considerably worsen the cars,drivability, and hurt sales. In addition, acceleration performance necessaryto compete in this segment of the market would suffer. Thus, NHTSA hastentatively concluded that it would not have been economically practicableto change the axle ratio. Mix Shifts Since Lamborghini sold only one vehicle configuration in the 1983 and 1984model years, no fuel economy improvement could have been achieved by meansof mix shifts. Impacts of Other Federal Standards Lamborghini claimed that its MY 1983 and 1984 models which complied withU.S. vehicle standards showed fuel economy values 5 to 10 percent lowerthan for those same models wnich did not comply with U.S. standards. However,the agency has already accounted for that fuel economy difference by usingEPA's fuel economy figures for the U.S. standard vehicles as the baselinein its analysis. Those figures reflect whatever impact compliance withthe U.S. vehicle standards has on the fuel economy of those vehicles. Therefore,for the purposes of the Lamborghini petition for the 1983 and 1984 modelyears, NHTSA has tentatively assumed that there is no unaccounted-for negativeimpact on fuel economy caused by applicable Federal standards. The Need of the Nation to Conserve Energy The agency recognizes there is a need to conserve energy to promote energysecurity and to improve balance of payments. However, as stated above,NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have been technologicallyfeasible or economically practicable for Lamborghini to achieve an averagefuel economy above a level of 13.7 mpg in the 1983 and 1984 model years.Denying an exemption to Lamborghini or setting higher alternative standardsthan the 13.7 mpg level in both affected model years would not, therefore,have resulted then and would not result now in any additional fuel consumptionor in any effect on the need of the Nation to conserve energy.Proposed Alternative Standards This agency has tentatively concluded that it would not have been technologicallyfeasible or economically practicable for Lamborghini to have improved thefuel economy of its 1983 and 1984 model year cars above an average of 13.7mpg, that compliance with other Federal automobile standards did not adverselyaffect achievable fuel economy, and that the national effort to conserveenergy would not then have been and would not now be affected by grantingthe requested exemptions and establishing alternative standards. Consequently,this agency tentatively concludes that the maximum feasible average fueleconomy for Lamborghini was 13.7 mpg in the 1983 model year and 13.7 mpgin the 1984 model year. Therefore, NHTSA proposes to exempt Lamborghinifrom the generally applicable standards of 26.0 mpg and 27.0 mpg for MYs1983 and 1984, respectively, and to establish alternative standards of13.7 mpg for Lamborghini for both years. <ITAG tagnum="84">LondonCoach </ITAG>Background Information About LondonCoach On September 6, 1985, LondonCoach Co., Inc. petitioned the agency for alternativestandards for MYs 1985-1987 for a taxicab known as the ``London Taxi''and a limousine known as the ``London Sterling.'' LondonCoach was organizedin May 1984 for the purpose of manufacturing and selling vehicles for hire,namely taxicabs and limousines. The body and chassis of the vehicles arepurchased from Carbodies Limited of Coventry, England. U.S. built Fordengines and transmissions are installed by LondonCoach. LondonCoach produced75 vehicles for combined MYs 1985 and 1986, and estimated production tobe 75 vehicles for MY 1987. Prior to 1985, LondonCoach did not manufactureor sell any vehicles in the United States. The fuel economy value for thesevehicles is 21.0 mpg. Accordingly, LondonCoach qualifies as a ``low volumemanufacturer'' and seeks an exemption from the CAFE standards for MYs 1985through 1987. Timeliness of LondonCoach's Petition LondonCoach was unable to file 24 months before the start of MY 1985 becausethe corporation was not organized until May 1984. LondonCoach had no fueleconomy data on which to base its petition until the conclusion of EPAtesting. EPA testing of the vehicle was completed in August 1985. LondonCoachfiled its petition for the 1985 through 1987 model years on September 6,1985. Accordingly, pursuant to 49 CFR andSection; 525.6(b), NHTSA has tentativelyconcluded that LondonCoach has shown good cause for late filing of itspetition for the affected model years. Methodology Used to Project Maximum Feasible Average Fuel Economy Levelfor LondonCoach Based on an EPA test conducted on August 7, 1985, the combined city andhighway fuel economy value for the LondonCoach vehicle was 21.04 mpg. Thepetitioner contemplated that the maximum feasible fuel economy level formodel years 1985 through 1987 would be no less than 21.0 mpg. LondonCoachpurchases the body and chassis from Carbodies Limited of Coventry Englandand installs U.S. Ford engines and transmissions. No immediate changeswere contemplated by LondonCoach which would enhance the feasible fueleconomy for these vehicles. Under the Act, this agency considered whetherany technical or other improvements would have been feasible for the 1985through 1987 model year LondonCoach vehicles, regardless of whether thecompany had any actual plans to incorporate any improvements. Throughout this analysis, NHTSA has considered only those improvementswhich would have been compatible with the basic design concepts and intendeduses of LondonCoach vehicles. NHTSA assumes that LondonCoach will continueto produce the taxicab and limousine versions of the automobiles. The automobile'sintended purpose is as a vehicle for hire to provide passengers with anexceptionally large passenger compartment allowing easy accessibility tothe vehicle. LondonCoach expected its taxis to fill a void left by the 1982 terminationof production by the Checker Cab Co. by providing the public with vehiclesdesigned primarily for taxicab purposes. The petitioner also anticipatedthat the vehicles will be used by handicapped and elderly persons as analternative mode of transportation that is more accommodating than conventionaltaxi vehicles. Hence, design changes which would have made the cars unsuitablefor multiple passengers or removed features that are necessary to preservethe unique characteristics of the LondonCoach vehicles were not examined.Further, these vehicles are designed to be operated up to 60,000 milesper year, have an average service life of 10 years, and to be extremelymaneuverable on city streets. Therefore, these vehicles must remain highlydurable. Any changes that would alter the basic uses of the vehicle, orwhich could significantly reduce the demand for these automobiles werenot considered because of the economic hardship that would result to thelow volume manufacturer. Baseline Fuel Economy The MY 1985 LondonCoach vehicles were measured by the EPA as achievinga CAFE of 21.0 mpg. No change to the vehicle's specifications were plannedby the manufacturer for MY 1986 or MY 1987. Therefore, the 1985 fuel economyrating is valid for the MY 1986 and 1987 vehicles. LondonCoach offers a single body style vehicle with two variations forthe taxicab and the limousine. The two versions have an equivalent testweight of 3875 pounds and each achieves 21.0 mpg. Therefore, both the LondonTaxi and the London Sterling can be considered to be identical for fueleconomy purposes. Accordingly, the fuel economy rating of 21.0 mpg was used as the baseline.The agency has considered whether any possible changes would be technologicallyfeasible and economically practicable in order to determine LondonCoach'smaximum feasible average fuel economy for MYs 1985 through 1987. Weight Reduction A reduction in the size of the vehicle would not be feasible since LondonCoachpurchases the body and chassis structure of the automobile as an assemblyfrom Carbodies. This arrangement allows little opportunity for significantweight reductions in the body and chassis of the vehicle. Further, LondonCoachintends to offer the public the use of distinctive London taxis on streetsin the United States. A smaller version of the London taxi would alterthe intended market and demand for the vehicles.LondonCoach intended to produce a vehicle specifically designed with alarge passenger compartment allowing easy entrance and exit from the vehicle,as well as providing a large luggage compartment. LondonCoach vehicleshave a combined EPA passenger and cargo volume that is greater than anyU.S. passenger automobile except Ford and General Motors large stationwagons. The passenger volume alone is greater than any automobile offeredfor sale in the U.S. The Checker Cab, which was also designed for taxicab service, had a passengervolume of 100 cubic feet and CAFE of 19.1 mpg in its final year of production,model year 1981. LondonCoach's passenger volume is 144 cubic feet withits average fuel economy of 21.0 mpg. The agency determined that the fuelconsumption per cubic foot of passenger volume for the LondonCoach automobilesis between 16 and 43% more efficient when compared with other vehiclesused for taxicab service. These other taxi vehicles achieve either equivalentor only slightly better fuel economies than the LondonCoach vehicle. Therefore,LondonCoach vehicles achieve fuel economy comparable to that of other vehiclesthat are typically used for taxicab services. The other primary means to achieve weight reduction is by materials substitutionThe petitioner is not in a position to change the materials used in constructingthe body and chassis of the vehicle because it purchases the assembledbody and chassis from Carbodies. It would not be economically practicablefor Carbodies to retool its facilities to produce a vehicle using lightermaterials because LondonCoach buys such a small number of vehicles fromCarbodies. The exact percentage of Carbodies' taxi body and chassis productionthat was purchased by LondonCoach is not known. The LondonCoach automobiles are constructed from steel. Although the useof aluminum could produce significantly lighter automobiles, this couldreduce the durability of the cars. The need to provide a durable, long-lifestructure for taxi service militates against weight reduction in this manner.The materials currently used by Carbodies have a proven record of durability,safety, and structural integrity with its 29 year history in the UnitedKingdom. In an effort to comply with the average fuel economy standards, the petitionerhas selected a Ford Motor Co. 2.3 liter engine which is approximately 350pounds lighter and considerably more efficient than the engine used inthe vehicle manufactured by Carbodies and sold in the United Kingdom. Theuse of the Ford engine and automatic transmission yields a weight reductionof approximately 8% of the total weight of the vehicle. The petitionerstated that the engine and transmission that it selected are the lightestavailable that comply with EPA emission standards. The agency has determinedthat this is among the smallest engines that could be used in such a heavyautomobile. Given the limited resources of the petitioner as a low volume manufacturerand the substantial expense and engineering effort required to redesignin order to downsize or substitute materials while remaining in compliancewith other Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS), NHTSA has tentativelyconcluded that further weight reduction would not have been economicallypracticable for LondonCoach MY 1985-1987 vehicles. Aerodynamic Improvements Since LondonCoach has an arrangement with Carbodies to purchase the bodyand chassis, it would not be feasible for LondonCoach to make any immediateaerodynamic design improvements to increase fuel economy. In addition,LondonCoach intended to market the distinctive London taxis for use inthe United States. These automobiles are recognized in the United Statesas being the large London taxis. The large frontal area, boxy proportionsand unique shape of the vehicles give rise to the recognition and the marketfor these cars. While these features may not be aerodynamically efficient,they are necessary to meet the intended demand for this specific vehicle.Alterations in the shape of the vehicle for aerodynamic improvements couldresult in a decrease of the passenger or luggage areas, or alter recognitionof the automobile as a London taxi. These changes would significantly reduceLondonCoach's intended market and cause economic harm to the low volumemanufacturer. Significant improvements in aerodynamics would require majoralterations requiring substantial development, testing and leadtime inaddition to the expense. Additionally, these vehicles would not be operatedat highway speeds as often as the average passenger car, making aerodynamicimprovements unnecessary as a practical matter. Due to these factors, NHTSAhas tentatively concluded that it would not have been economically practicablefor LondonCoach to implement aerodynamic improvements to increase the fueleconomy of its automobiles for MYs 1985 through 1987. Engine Improvements This agency has examined the question of whether LondonCoach could haveimproved the fuel economy of its 1985 through 1987 automobiles by usinga different engine than the one currently used. The petitioner specificallychose to substitute the Ford Motor Co. 2.3 liter OHC, 4 cylinder in-linegasoline engine for the one that is installed in the vehicle manufacturedand sold in the United Kingdom. The Ford engine is 350 pounds lighter andmore efficient than the one used in the United Kingdom. It has been usedin Ford vehicles. especially in the Ford LTD and Mustang, which have compliedwith EPA standards for the past 10 years. The engine selected has amongthe lowest horsepower offered by a manufacturer of vehicles intended foruse as taxis or limousines. Because of the low volume of production, it is impractical for London-Coach to consider producing its own engine. LondonCoach considered usingthe diesel engine Carbodies uses in the UK version of the automobile, butthis engine does not meet U.S. emissions standards. The small engine compartmentof the vehicle limits the selection of available U.S. certified dieselengines, and the manufacturer decided that there were no significant fueleconomy advantages to justify offering a diesel, considering the relativelylow cost of gasoline in the United States. Furthermore, all diesel passengercar engines of the appropriate size that were certified in MY 1985 wereimported, potentially creating another problem for a small company in developmentand production. Although the fuel economy could increase by using a dieselengine, the agency has determined that it would not have been economicallyfeasible for LondonCoach to choose such engines due to the overall highercost of diesel engines. LondonCoach does anticipate adopting the enginedesign improvements that Ford incorporates in its own cars which wouldresult in improved fuel economy in future years. A larger engine could improve fuel economy if it operated at more nearlyoptimum efficiencies on the EPA test cycle, but the extra weight wouldoffset any such improvement. Further, the vehicle is intended to be usedat low speeds in urban areas. Therefore, a larger, more powerful enginewould not enhance fuel economy at these low speeds. After considering thesefactors, NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have been technologicallyfeasible nor economically practicable for LondonCoach to improve its fueleconomy by using an alternative engine. Drive Line Improvements The primary drive line improvements to enhance achievable fuel economyare transmission improvements and the use of a lower rear axle ratio. Thetransmission chosen is a Ford C-3 3-speed automatic transmission that iscompatible with the Ford engine. Although an additional transmission gearor a lock up clutch on the torque converter could improve fuel economy,it would have been economically impractical for LondonCoach to match theengine with a different transmission. This would have required extensiveredesign beyond the economic capabilities of a low volume manufacturer.Further, there would have been little fuel economy improvement in actualservice from these changes for vehicles that are intended to be drivenprimarily at low speeds in urban traffic.The overall drive ratio of LondonCoach vehicles, N/V, (engine rpm/vehiclespeed in top gear) is 58.8 on air-conditioned models. Although this ratiois high, a lower value would have been impractical and would have penalizedperformance since the engine is so small in relation to the weight of theautomobiles. NHTSA has determined that such changes to the overall driveratio or to the transmission would have been economically impracticablefor LondonCoach. Based on this analysis, the agency has tentatively determinedthat it would not have been technologically feasible or economically practicablefor LondonCoach to improve its fuel economy by making drive line improvements.Mix Shifts The two versions of the LondonCoach vehicles are with different trim appointments.One is known as the London Taxi and the other is the London Sterling. Bothhave the same fuel efficiency of 21.0 mpg when equipped with air conditioning.The only configurations offered by LondonCoach with different fuel economiesare those same vehicles without air conditioning. This means that LondonCoachoffers four possible options: the London Taxi with air conditioning, theLondon Taxi without air conditioning, the London Sterling with air conditioning,and the London Sterling without air conditioning. The models without airconditioning attain a fuel economy of 22.4 mpg. Because there are basicallyonly two configurations, i.e., a model with air conditioning and a modelwithout air conditioning, there is little opportunity to affect fuel economythrough mix shifts. Further, since the intended use of the vehicles isto carry fare-paying passengers, it is unlikely that there would have beenany significant demand for the model without air conditioning. Therefore,the agency believes that it would not have been economically practicablefor Londoncoach to have made any significant increase in fuel economy throughmix shifts. Impacts of Other Federal Standards LondonCoach did not claim any negative impacts on its average fuel economyas a result of applicable Federal safety damageability, emission, or noisestandards. In the absence of a specific showing of fuel economy penaltyarising from those standards, NHTSA concludes that whatever fuel economywas lost as a result of compliance with Federal standards was built intothe EPA's fuel economy test results. With respect to the LondonCoach petition,the NHTSA has tentatively assumed that there is no unaccounted-for negativeimpact on fuel economy caused by applicable Federal standards. The Need of the Nation to Conserve Energy The agency recognizes there is a need to conserve energy to promote energysecurity and to improve balance of payments. However, as stated above,NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have been technologicallyfeasible or economically practicable for LondonCoach to achieve an averagefuel economy above the level of 21.0 mpg in the 1985 through 1987 modelyears. Since LondonCoach was producing such a small number of vehiclesand could not achieve higher average fuel economy than these levels inthe 1985 through 1987 model years, granting it an exemption and settingalternative standards at those levels for those model years would not thenhave resulted and would not now result in any additional fuel consumptionor have any effect on the need of the Nation to conserve energy. Proposed Alternative Standards This agency has tentatively concluded that it would not have been technologicallyfeasible or economically practicable for LondonCoach to achieve a higheraverage fuel economy than 21.0 mpg in MYs 1985 through 1987, that compliancewith other Federal automobile standards did not adversely affect achievablefuel economy, and that the national effort to conserve energy would notthen have been and would not now be affected by granting the requestedexemption and establishing an alternative standard. Consequently, thisnotice proposes to conclude that the maximum feasible average fuel economyfor LondonCoach in MYs 1985 through 1987 is 21.0 mpg. Therefore, the agencyproposes to exempt LondonCoach from the generally applicable standard of27.5 mpg for MY 1985, and 26.0 mpg for MYs 1986 through 1987. <ITAG tagnum="84">Maserati </ITAG>Background Information About Maserati Maserati's automobiles have traditionally been expensive high performancevehicles. According to its petition, Maserati's reputation is based ona combination of performance and luxury. The company experienced an extendedperiod of financial instability in the late 1970's and early 1980's. In1974, Citroen, then owner of Maserati, put Maserati into voluntary bankruptcy.This action resulted in Maserati totally ceasing all production for morethan a year during 1975 and 1976. The company produced very few cars throughMY 1981, and the models it did produce were simply continuations of itsolder models. However, a loan from the Italian government permitted Maseratito develop and introduce a new model, the Biturbo, in Europe in 1982. Thisnew model helped return Maserati to profitability. In fact, Maserati hadprojected sales of 4,100 vehicles in the United States in MY 1985, up fromsales of 52 vehicles in MY 1983. According to <T3>Ward's Yearbook, </T3>world wide production of all Maserati modelswas 6180 in 1984 and 5668 in 1985. Maserati produced two models during MYs 1982 through 1985. One of thesemodels, the Quattroporte, was the first ``new'' vehicle produced by Maseratiafter the company was reorganized in bankruptcy. However, this vehiclewas designed on very short notice, using as many components in Maserati'sinventory as possible. The company's management determined that they neededto generate revenue quickly to reverse the significant operating lossesMaserati had accumulated. The Quattroporte, according to Maserati's petition,``cannot play a leading role in the company s future.'' The other model is the Biturbo, which is primarily responsible for thecompany's improved financial status. The Biturbo was introduced in Europein 1982 and in the United States for MY 1984. It was a completely new designby Maserati that was not required to use components in the company's inventory.The Biturbo is much lighter and more aerodynamic than the Quattroporte.Further, the Biturbo is powered by a 152 cubic inch displacement (CID)V-6 engine with two turbochargers and 3 valves per cylinder, while theQuattroporte is powered by a 301 CID V-8 engine with only 2 valves percylinder. Methodology Used to Determine Maserati's Maximum Feasible Average FuelEconomy for the 1984 and 1985 Model Years Throughout this analysis, NHTSA has considered only those improvementswhich would have been compatible with the basic design concepts of Maseratiautomobiles. Design changes that would have made the cars something otherthan high performance luxury vehicles or remove items traditionally offeredon expensive, high-performance vehicles were not considered. Such changesto the basic design or performance might have significantly reduced thedemand for these automobiles, thereby reducing sales and causing additionaleconomic pressure on Maserati. Baseline Fuel Economy Table I shows the projected composition of Maserati's fleet and its EPAmeasured fuel economy for MYs 1984 and 1985:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>6,L2,i1,s10,r25,xs30,6,6,6 </C><T4>Table I</T4>_<T4>Composition of Maserati's U.S. Fleet </T4><H1>Model year </H1><H1>Model </H1><H1>Transmission type </H1><H1>Sales </H1><H1>Combined fuel economy (mpg) </H1><H1>CAFE (mpg)</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">1984 <D>Quattroporte </D><D>A3L </D><D>182 </D><D>10.0 </D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Biturbo </D><D>M5 </D><D>1,884 </D><D>18.7 </D><D>\1\ 17.3</D><P>\2\ 17.9 </P><ITAG tagnum="1">1985 <D>Quattroporte </D><D>A3L </D><D>143 </D><D>10.0</D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="22"> Biturbo </ITAG><D>M5 </D><D>505 </D><D>18.7</D><D> </D><ITAG tagnum="22">  </ITAG><D>Biturbo (no-light-off catalyst) </D><D>M5 </D><D>675 </D><D>17.7 </D><D>  </D><ITAG tagnum="22">  </ITAG><D>Biturbo </D><D>A3 </D><D>678 </D><D>15.7 </D><D>\1\ 16.6</D><P>\2\ 16.8  </P><F>\1\ Unadjusted CAFE for actual sales. </F><F>\2\ Actual EPA adjusted figure.</F></ITAG>Maserati expected its sales to more than double between MYs 1984 and 1985.The sales in both years are substantial when compared with MY 1983, whenMaserati sold only 52 cars in the United States. The configurations ofthe Biturbo model increased from one for MY 1984 to three in MY 1985. Theone Biturbo configuration available in 1984 was carried forward unchangedto 1985. This was planned as the Biturbo configuration that would be certifiedas complying with the California emissions standards in the 1985 modelyear. The ``no-light-off catalyst'' configuration of the Biturbo eliminatedthe catalysts near the exhaust manifold. Maserati did this to reduce itscosts for the Biturbo, by saving the cost of the additional catalyst. Maserati'soriginal intention was to offer this less costly, single catalyst versionof the Biturbo as the 49-State version, and continue to offer the Biturbowith the additional ``light-off'' catalyst as the California version. However,when Maserati finished its compliance testing for the no-light-off catalystversion of the Biturbo, it learned that this version also complied withthe California emissions standards. Thus, both versions of the Biturbowere offered as 50-State models in the 1985 model year. Finally, Maseratiintroduced a configuration of the Biturbo with a 3-speed automatic transmissionfor MY 1985. This change allowed Biturbo purchasers to order the car withan automatic transmission For the purposes of this proposed determination of Maserati's maximum feasibleaverage fuel economy, 17.9 mpg was used as the baseline for MY 1984 and16.8 mpg was used as the baseline for MY 1985. Any changes found technologicallyfeasible and economically practicable were added to these levels to arriveat these proposed determinations of Maserati's maximum feasible averagefuel economy for MYs 1984 and 1985. Weight Reduction In analyzing this area, there are significant differences between the twoMaserati models. The older Quattroporte has a curb weight of 4,740 pounds.This is heavy even when compared with other high performance vehicles.However, the newer Biturbo model has a curb weight of 2,600 pounds, whichis at the lower end of the weight range for high performance vehicles.For example, the Biturbo weighed less during MYs 1984 and 1985 than theChevrolet Corvette and the Nissan 300 ZX. The agency has examined two means by which Maserati could have reducedthe weight of its MY 1984/85 vehicles. The first is downsizing, which requiresa complete redesign of a vehicle. In the case of the Quattroporte, Maseratistated in its petition that this model could not play a leading role inthe company's future. Instead, the company chose to concentrate its financialand engineering efforts to improving fuel economy on the newer Biturbomodel. Recognizing the limited capital and engineering resources availableto Maserati, NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have beeneconomically practicable for Maserati to downsize its Quattroporte modelin the affected model years. With respect to the Biturbo, Maserati introduced that model in the UnitedStates in MY 1984. Its fuel economy was 77 percent higher than the Quattroporte,and it was a lightweight high performance sedan. Since Maserati had justmade the necessary investments to introduce this model in MY 1984, NHTSAtentatively determines that it would have been neither economically practicablenor technologically feasible for Maserati to have downsized the Biturbofor MYs 1984 and 1985. The other means examined for achieving weight reduction was materials substitution.In the case of the Quattroporte, Maserati did not attempt to use materialssubstitution to reduce its weight. While weight reduction for this modelwould have been technologically feasible had Maserati made use of materialssubstitution, such a capital investment appears to have been beyond thefinancial capabilities of Maserati for MYs 1984 and 1985. This is particularlytrue in view of the company's large investment in its new Biturbo model.Therefore, NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have beeneconomically practicable for Maserati to have used materials substitutionto reduce the weight of its Quattroporte during MYs 1984 and 1985. Maserati seems to have been very conscious of vehicle weight when designingthe Biturbo. As noted above, the Biturbo has a curb weight of 2600 pounds,which is lower than the curb weight of high-performance vehicles producedby Nissan and General Motors. NHTSA has tentatively concluded that it wouldnot have been technologically feasible for Maserati to have further reducedthe weight of its Biturbo by means of materials substitution. Accordingly,NHTSA tentatively determines that it would not have been technologicallyfeasible or economically practicable for Maserati to have improved theaverage fuel economy of its 1984/85 vehicles by means of weight reduction.Aerodynamic Improvements The Quattroporte has a relatively large frontal area. Aerodynamic improvementswould have probably increased the fuel economy of this model during theaffected model years. However, aerodynamic improvements to this model,whether achieved by redesigning the body or using add-on devices, wouldhave required considerable development and testing. Since Maserati wasdevoting its limited resources to developing and introducing its Biturbomodel, NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have been economicallypracticable for Maserati to have improved the fuel economy of the Quattroporteby means of aerodynamic improvements. The Biturbo model has a frontal area more than 10 percent less than theQuattroporte. Since it was a new model for MY 1984, further reductionsof the frontal area or aerodynamic improvements would not be practicaluntil a major redesign is done for a future model year. The Biturbo wasdesigned under severe financial constraints, precluding the extensive developmentrequired to optimize aerodynamics. NHTSA tentatively determines that itwould not have been technologically feasible or economically practicablefor Maserati to have improved the fuel economy of its Biturbo by meansof aerodynamic improvements. Engine Improvements The Quattroporte was equipped with a 301 CID V-8 engine during the affectedmodel years. As noted above, this engine was carried over from past modelyears. Maserati achieved some fuel economy gains from the engine by usinga leaner carburetion mix. However, the most significant fuel economy gainswould have been achieved by reducing the size of the engine, or redesigningit to accommodate more advanced technology. Any such course of action wouldhave required Maserati to have diverted its resources from designing andintroducing the Biturbo model. NHTSA has tentatively determined that sucha diversion of resources to improve the engine of the Quattroporte wouldnot have been economically practicable for Maserati for the affected modelyears. The Biturbo was equipped with a 152 CID V-6 engine during the affectedmodel years. To increase the thermal efficiency and maintain a high levelof performance, the engine includes two turbochargers. A third valve wasalso added to each cylinder to promote complete combustion of the fuelmixture. All Maserati models meet 50-state emissions standards. The 1985Biturbo ``no-light-off catalyst'' model was intended to be a 49-state certificationmodel. It turned out, however, that despite the elimination of the catalystsnear the exhaust manifold, this model also met California emissions standards.If Maserati had included the ``light off catalyst'' on all 1985 models,its CAFE would be somewhat higher. For the reasons stated below in thediscussion of drive line improvements, this was not an economically practicablealternative. NHTSA has therefore tentatively determined that it would nothave been technologically feasible and economically practicable to haveimproved the fuel economy of the Biturbo by means of engine improvements.Drive Line Improvements The primary drive line improvements to enhance achievable fuel economyare transmission improvements and the use of a lower rear axle ratio. TheQuattroporte used a 3-speed automatic transmission with a lockup torqueconverter made by Chrysler in both affected model years. A 5-speed manualtransmission would probably increase fuel economy for the Quattroporte.However, the vehicle is marketed as a high-performance luxury car. Thesetypes of cars are traditionally equipped with automatic transmissions.If the Quattroporte were offered only with a manual transmission, it couldloss potential customers who would demand an automatic transmission. Giventhis risk and Maserati's need to generate revenue in the wake of its thenrecent financial difficulties. NHTSA has tentatively determined that itwould not have been economically practicable for Maserati to have usedmanual transmissions on its Quattroporte during the affected model years.A 4-speed automatic transmission with a lockup torque converter would havealso probably improved the fuel economy achieved by the Quattroporte. However,it is not clear that any available 4-speed automatic transmission witha lockup torque converter would have had adequate capacity for the horsepowerrating (288) of the Maserati 301 CID engine. General Motors offers a 4-speedautomatic transmission with a lockup torque converter on the Corvette,but that engine has a horsepower rating of 230. Even if it were technologicallyfeasible to equip the Quattroporte engine with a 4-speed automatic transmission,it would have required substantial development and certification costsfor Maserati. These costs would have diverted Maserati's resources fromthe development of its Biturbo. After considering this, NHTSA has tentativelydetermined that it would not have been technologically feasible and economicallypracticable for Maserati to have used a 4-speed automatic transmissionwith a lockup torque converter on the Quattroporte for the affected modelyears. The majority of the Biturbo models are sold with a manual five-speed transmissionwith overdrive, which is a very efficient transmission. For 1984, the Biturbowas offered only with a 5-speed manual transmission, so NHTSA tentativelydetermines that no transmission improvements were technologically feasiblefor the Biturbo during the 1984 model year. For 1985, the Biturbo was offeredwith a 5-speed manual transmission and a 3-speed automatic transmissionwithout a lockup torque converter. A small part of the MY 1985 productionused a Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen (ZF) three-speed automatic transmission.Maserati investigated other available automatic transmissions, but noneexisted with adequate torque capacity for the Biturbo engine and that wouldfit the packaging constraints of this small car. A major redesign of thebody structure to accommodate a more efficient automatic transmission wouldhave been expensive and would have delayed the introduction of the automatictransmission in the U.S. market, where it was an important option. Until recently, Maserati was operating at a very low level of production.The second catalyst was removed from some of the 1985 Biturbos, with theintention of reducing production costs for the 49 State vehicles and improvingperformance without reducing demand for those vehicles. This was an actiontaken to reduce production costs and improve its sales potential as a highperformance car. While this action did lower the fuel economy of thesevehicles, the concept of economic practicability is broad enough to recognizethe severe recent financial crises experienced by Maserati when determiningthe maximum feasible average fuel economy for that company. After consideringMaserati's critical need to earn profits in light of its recent financialdifficulties, NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have beeneconomically practicable for Maserati to have increased its 1985 fuel economyby installing two catalysts on all manual transmission versions of itsBiturbo model. The overall drive ratios on both Maserati models during the affected modelyears were fairly high, but very similar to those of other high performancevehicles, both domestic and imported. While fuel economy could have beenincreased by reducing these drive ratios, the performance of the vehicleswould have been reduced as a result of these reductions. Such reductionswould very likely have reduced the demand for Maserati vehicles. NHTSAhas previously stated that it does not consider such changes to be economicallypracticable, especially given the then recent difficulties of Maserati.Accordingly, NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have beentechnologically feasible and economically practicable for Maserati to haveimproved its 1984 and 1985 fuel economy by means of drive line improvements.Mix Shifts In Maserati's case, this would primarily involve shifting purchasers fromits Quattroporte to its Biturbo model. More than 90 percent of Maserati'ssales in MY 1984 were Biturbos, and more than 92 percent of its sales inMY 1985 were Biturbos. Further mix shifts to reduce the sales of Quattroporteswere not feasible because of the already dominant position of the Biturbo.Therefore, NHTSA has tentatively determined that it would not have beentechnologically feasible and economically practicable for Maserati to haveimproved its 1984 and 1985 fuel economy through mix shifts. Impacts of Other Federal Standards Compliance with emissions standards has made fuel economy improvementsdifficult for Maserati. As a low volume, financially-troubled manufacturer,Maserati has been slow to develop and introduce technology that would permitbetter optimization of emissions and fuel economy. However, Maserati didnot claim any negative impacts on its average fuel economy as a resultof applicable Federal safety, damageability, emission, or noise standards.In the absence of a specific showing of fuel economy penalty arising fromthose standards, NHTSA will assume that whatever fuel economy was lostas a result of compliance with Federal standards was built into the EPA'sfuel economy test results. With respect to the Maserati petition, NHTSAhas tentatively assumed that there is no unaccounted-for negative impacton fuel economy caused by applicable Federal standards. The Need of the Nation to Conserve Energy The agency recognizes there is a need to conserve energy to promote energysecurity and to improve balance of payments. However, as stated above,NHTSA has tentatively determined that it was not technologically feasibleor economically practicable for Maserati to attain an average fuel economyabove the level of 17.9 mpg for MY 1984 and 16.8 mpg for MY 1985. SinceMaserati was producing such a small number of vehicles and could not achievehigher average fuel economy than these levels in the 1984 and 1985 modelyears, granting Maserati an exemption and setting alternative standardsat those levels for those model years would not then have resulted andwould not now result in any additional fuel consumption or in any effecton the need of the Nation to conserve energy. Proposed Alternative Standards This agency has tentatively concluded that it would not have been technologicallyfeasible or economically practicable for Maserati to achieve a higher averagefuel economy than 17.9 mpg for MY 1984 and 16.8 mpg for MY 1985, that compliancewith other Federal automobile standards did not adversely affect achievablefuel economy, and that the national effort to conserve energy would notthen have been and would not now be affected by granting the requestedexemption and establishing an alternative standard. Consequently, thisnotice proposes to conclude that the maximum feasible average fuel economyfor Maserati is 17.9 mpg for MY 1984 and 16.8 mpg for MY 1985. Therefore,the agency proposes to exempt Maserati from the generally applicable standardof 27.0 mg for MY 1984, and 27.5 mpg for MY 1985.NHTSA has analyzed this proposal and determined that neither ExecutiveOrder 12291 nor the Department of Transportation regulatory policies andprocedures apply, because the proposal would not establish a ``rule,''which term is defined as ``an agency statement of general applicabilityand future effect.'' The exemptions are not generally applicable, sincethey apply only to the manufacturers discussed in this notice. If the ExecutiveOrder and the Departmental policies and procedures were applicable, theagency would have determined that this proposed action is neither majornor significant. The principal impact of this proposal is that the exemptedcompanies would not be required to pay civil penalties for achieving whatthe agency has tentatively determined to be their maximum feasible averagefuel economy for the models years in question. Since this proposal setsan alternative standard at the level determined to be each company's maximumfeasible level, no fuel would have been or would now be saved by establishinga higher alternative standard. The impacts for the public at large willbe minimal. In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq.,</T3> the Regulatory Flexibility Act, I certify that this proposedrule would not, if promulgated, have a ``significant economic impact ona substantial number of small entities.'' The rationale for this certificationis that this proposal applies specifically to three low volume manufacturersand not to industry in general. The agency has also considered the environmental implications of this proposalin accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act. As an initialmatter, this is not a ``major Federal action.'' Moreover, this proposal,if adopted, would not significantly affect the human environment. Regardlessof the fuel economy of the exempted vehicles, they were required to meetthe emissions standards which measure the amount of emissions per miletraveled. Thus, the quality of the air is not affected by the proposedexemptions and alternative standards. Further, since the exempted passengerautomobiles cannot achieve better fuel economy than is proposed herein,granting these proposed exemptions would not affect the amount of fuelavailable. This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteriacontained in Executive Order 12612, and it has been determined that theproposed rulemaking does not have sufficient federalism implications towarrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. Interested persons are invited to submit comments on the proposal. It isrequested but not required that 10 copies be submitted. If applicable,it is requested that two copies of films, tapes, and other similar materialsbe provided. All comments must not exceed 15 pages in length. (49 CFR 553.21). Necessaryattachments may be appended to these submissions without regard to the15-page limit. This limitation is intended to encourage commenters to detailtheir primary arguments in a concise fashion. If a commenter wishes to submit certain information under a claim of confidentiality,three copies of the complete submission, including purportedly confidentialbusiness information, should be submitted to the Chief Counsel, NHTSA,at the street address given above, and seven copies from which the purportedlyconfidential information has been deleted should be submitted to the DocketSection. A request for confidentiality should be accompanied by a coverletter setting forth the information specified in the agency's confidentialbusiness information regulation. 49 CFR Part 512. All comments received before the close of business on the comment closingdate indicated above for the proposal will be considered, and will be availablefor examination in the docket at the above address both before and afterthat date. To the extent possible, comments filed after the closing datewill also be considered. Comments received too late for consideration inregard to the final rule will be considered as suggestions for furtherrulemaking action. Comments on the proposal will be available for inspectionin the docket. The NHTSA will continue to file relevant information asit becomes available in the docket after the closing date, and it is recommendedthat interested persons continue to examine the docket for new material.Those persons desiring to be notified upon receipt of their comments inthe rules docket should enclose a self-addressed, stamped postcard in theenvelope with their comments. Upon receiving the comments, the docket supervisorwill return the postcard by mail. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 49 CFR Part 531 </ITAG>Energy conservation, gasoline, imports, motor vehicles.In consideration of the foregoing, it is proposed that 49 CFR part 531be amended to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 531_[AMENDED] </ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 531 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 15 U.S.C. 2002, delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.</ITAG>2. Sections 531.5 would be amended by revising paragraphs (b)(7) and addingparagraphs (b)(8) and (b)(9) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 531.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Fuel economy standards. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) * * * (7) <T3>Maserati</T3>.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s20,xl20</C>  <H1>Model year </H1><H1>Average fuel economy standard (miles per gallon)</H1> <ITAG tagnum="21">1984 <D/>17.9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">1985 <D/>16.8</ITAG></ITAG> (8) <T3>Lamborghini</T3>.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s20,xl20</C> <H1>Model year </H1><H1>Average fuel economy standard (miles per gallon)</H1> <ITAG tagnum="21">1983 <D/>13.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">1984 <D/>13.7</ITAG></ITAG> (9) <T3>LondonCoach</T3>.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s20,xl20</C> <H1>Model year </H1><H1>Average fuel economy standard (miles per gallon)</H1> <ITAG tagnum="21">1985 <D/>21.0 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">1986 <D/>21.0 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">1987 <D/>21.0</ITAG></ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on September 26, 1989.    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Barry Felrice,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Administrator for Rulemaking. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-23089 Filed 10-2-89; 8:45am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>