<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89406-0090 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-06-89.f2.A1089</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-331]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Iowa Electric Light and Power Co. et al.; Consideration of Issuanceof Amendment to Facility Operating License and Proposed No SignificantHazards Consideration Determination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. DPR-49, issuedto the Iowa Electric Light and Power Company, the Central Iowa Power Cooperativeand the Corn Belt Power Cooperative (the licensee), for operation of theDuane Arnold Energy Center (DAEC), located in Linn County, Iowa.The amendment would revise the DAEC Technical Specifications (1) to conformto the Inservice Testing (IST) Program for Pumps and Valves, and (2) tocorrect a typographical error. The licensee's summary of the changes areas follows:<T4>Change (1): </T4>The requirements of 10 CFR 50.55a(g)(4)(ii) statethat the inspection program for pumps and valves shall comply with SectionXI of the edition of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code incorporatedinto NRC regulations 12 months prior to the start of the 120-month inspectioninterval. The second 10-year Inservice Testing Program for Pumps and Valvesbegan February 1985; however, the technical specification pages were notrevised to reflect the use of the 1980 Edition (Winter 1981 Addendum) ofSection XI of the ASME Code. Under the previously applicable Code (1974Edition, Summer 1985 Addendum), Paragraph IWP-3400, ``Frequency of InserviceTests,'' a monthly test was required to be conducted on pumps and valves.The 1980 Edition requires quarterly tests of pumps and valves. Since theDAEC Inservice Testing Program now uses the later 1980 Code Edition, revisionto the technical specifications is required.<T4>Change 2: </T4>A typographical error has been corrected which changesthe word ``continous'' (sic) to ``continuous.''Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the probability of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The basis for this proposed determination is providedbelow.The licensee has determined that the proposed changes do not involve asignificant hazard based, in part, on the following statements: ProposedChange 1 does not involve a significant increase in the probability orconsequences of an accident previously evaluated. Revising the surveillancerequirements for pumps and valves from once per month to once per 3 monthsmay, however, present a very small increase in the possibility of an accidentpreviously evaluated in the Duane Arnold Energy Center Updated Final SafetyAnalysis Report (UFSAR). The small increase in probability is acceptableas the testing program for the pumps and valves follows requirements ofASME Section XI. Paragraph IWP-3400, ``Frequency of Inservice Tests,''and still meets General Design Criterion 37, ``Testing of Emergency CoreCooling System,'' the guidance of the NRC Standard Technical Specifications(Specification 4.0.5), and the NRC Standard Review Plan 3.9.6, ``InserviceTesting of Pumps and Valves.''Proposed Change 1 does not create the possibility of a new or differentkind of accident from any accident previously evaluated. Extension of thepump and valve surveillance frequency, to be in accordance with ASME SectionXI Code requirements, continues to be enveloped by existing accident analysesdescribed in Chapter 15 of the UFSAR.Proposed Change 1 does not involve a significant reduction in the plantmargin of safety; however, as explained previously, revising the surveillancerequirements for the pumps and valves may present a slight increase inrisk. The risk, if any, is acceptable as the testing requirements embodiedin Paragraphs IWP-3000 and IWV-3000 of ASME Section XI of the Boiler andPressure Vessel Code are met.In the April 6, 1983 <T4>Federal Register</T4>, the NRC published examples of amendments thatare not likely to involve a significant hazards consideration. The examplesinclude:(i) A purely administrative change to technical specifications: for example,a change to achieve consistency throughout the technical specifications,correction of an error, or a change in nomenclature.(vi) A change which either may result in some increase to the probabilityor consequences of a previously-analyzed accident or may reduce in someway a safety margin, but where the results of the change are clearly withinall acceptable criteria with respect to the system or component specifiedin the Standard Review Plan: for example, a change resulting from the applicationof a small refinement of a previously used calculational model or designmethod.(vii) A change to make a license conform to changes in the regulations,where the license change results in very minor changes to facility operationsclearly in keeping with the regulations.Change 1 falls within the scope of examples (vi) and (vii). Change 2, thecorrection of a typographical error, is a purely administrative changethat falls within the scope of example (i). Since Changes 1 and 2 are encompassedby the criteria for no significant hazards consideration and examples forwhich no significant hazards consideration exists, the staff has made theproposed determination that the application involves no significant hazardsconsideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof the <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-216, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland,from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments received may beexamined at the NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions forleave to intervene is discussed below.By May 8, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to particate as a party in the proceeding must file a written petitionfor leave to intervene. Requests for a hearing and petitions for leaveto intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions arefiled during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1 (800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1 (800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to John N. Hannon: petitioner'sname and telephone number; date petition was mailed; plant name; and publicationdate and page number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Jack Newman, Esq. and Kathleen H. Shea, Esq.,Newman and Holtzinger, 1615 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20036, attorneysfor the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer, or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or request, shouldbe granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated October 13, 1986, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW. Washington, DC 20555, and at the Cedar Rapids Public Library, 500 FirstStreet, SE., Cedar Rapids, Iowa 52401.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 30th day of March 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John N. Hannon,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate III-3, Division of Reactor Projects-IIIIV, V and Special Projects Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-8170 Filed 4-5-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>