<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89606-0037 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-06-89.f2.A1036</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 107 / Tuesday, June 6, 1989 /Proposed Rules <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Food and Drug Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">21 CFR Parts 606 and 610 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 88N-0413]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 0905-AC92 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Current Good Manufacturing Practice for Blood and Blood Components;Proficiency Testing Requirements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Food and Drug Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing toamend the regulations concerning blood products to require that each establishmentor laboratory, responsible for performing FDA-required tests for hepatitisB surface antigen (HBsAg) and evidence of Human Immunodeficiency Virus(HIV), participate in an approved program to demonstrate proficiency inperforming these tests. This proposed rule is part of an FDA program toprovide increased assurance of the quality of laboratory performance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments by July 6, 1989. FDA proposes that the effectivedate of any final rule be 60 days after the date of its publication inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA-305),Food and Drug Administration, Rm. 4-62, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD20857.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>JoAnn Minor, Center for BiologicsEvaluation and Research (HFB-130), Food and Drug Administration, 8800 RockvillePike, Bethesda, MD 20892, 301-295-8188.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>FDA is proposing to amend the regulationsconcerning blood and blood components intended for transfusion or for furthermanufacture (hereafter referred to as blood and blood components) to requirethat laboratories performing required tests for evidence of HIV or hepatitisB surface antigen participate in approved proficiency testing programs.The proposed regulations would require these laboratories to perform successfullyin such programs to be considered qualified to conduct required HIV orHBsAg testing. <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background </ITAG>Because blood, blood components, and blood products have the potentialto transmit HIV (the causative agent of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome(AIDS)) and the virus that causes hepatitis B, FDA has required each donationof blood or blood components to be tested appropriately to detect evidenceof HIV or HBsAg (21 CFR 610.40 and 610.45). Units testing reactive or repeatablyreactive to these tests are not to be shipped or used in manufacturingbiological products except under specified narrowly limited circumstances(21 CFR 610.40 (b) and (d) and 610.45(c)). As part of this procedure designed to help protect the public against theseserious and life-threatening diseases, it is important that the testingfor evidence of HIV and for HBsAg be adequately and accurately performed.FDA regulations currently require such testing to be performed by the collectionfacility, by personnel of an establishment licensed to manufacture bloodor blood derivatives under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act(42 U.S.C. 262), or by a clinical laboratory that meets the standards ofthe Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act of 1967 (CLIA) (42 U.S.C. 263a),provided that the establishment or laboratory is qualified to perform thetest (21 CFR 610.40(b) and 610.45(b)). FDA requires that tests approvedfor this purpose be used, and the specific method for carrying out eachlicensed test is described in the labeling accompanying the test's reagents.Recently, questions have been raised concerning the controls over performanceof these required tests by testing facilities. The Presidential Commissionon the HIV Epidemic (the Commission) has recommended the use of proficiencytesting programs to help ensure high quality performance by testing laboratories.(Report of the Presidential Commission on the Human Immunodeficiency VirusEpidemic (June 1988), pp. 80-81). On August 5, 1988, in response to theCommission's recommendations, the President directed the Department ofHealth and Human Services (DHHS) to take steps to improve the quality ofHIV antibody laboratory testing. (Memorandum for the Secretary of Healthand Human Services from President Ronald Reagan dated 8/5/88, p. 1.) FDA is issuing this proposed rule as an additional step in a continuingprogram to improve laboratory quality. FDA has accelerated its inspectionprogram so that every blood establishment in the United States was inspectedin 1988. A  number of problems were found related to the interpretationof test results and the disposition of products that had not met all testingrequirements. FDA assured that appropriate corrective actions were taken,including recalls of a number of blood products and changes in laboratoryprocedures. The problems encountered demonstrate that a complete programof quality assurance should be in place to prevent deficiencies in laboratorytesting. Proficiency testing is commonly used for many testing procedures to assurethat test accuracy is being maintained. Many State and private organizationsoffer proficiency testing programs. In general, the organization conductingthe proficiency testing program periodically pretests samples and distributesthem to participating laboratories. The laboratories' supervisory staffknows that the test samples come from the proficiency testing program,but the laboratory is expected to test the proficiency samples as it wouldany patient or donor sample. The results are reported back to the organizationconducting the program, which scores the results and reports them to eachlaboratory. Repeated unsuccessful participation in the proficiency testingprogram would indicate that the laboratory should reevaluate its operationsand take corrective action, as necessary, to improve the quality of thelaboratory's testing program. Thus, proficiency testing serves as a qualityassurance tool for use by the laboratories.As part of a DHHS-wide program to accomplish the goal of improving thequality of laboratory testing, FDA is proposing to amend the regulationsconcerning blood and blood components to require proficiency testing. Anotherpart of this departmental initiative is the regulation proposed by theHealth Care Financing Administration (HCFA) on August 5, 1988 (53 FR 29590).Under this proposed regulation, HCFA would require laboratories seekingapproval for Medicare or Medicaid reimbursement or licensing under theClinical Laboratories Improvement Act of 1967 (CLIA) to enroll in an approvedproficiency testing program. (See proposed 42 CFR 493.21 (53 FR 29590 at29611)). Although many laboratories testing blood and blood components would besubject to HCFA's proposed regulations, some laboratories performing HIVantibody or HBsAg testing would not be. These include establishments thatdo not receive Medicare or Medicaid reimbursement, as well as those thatdo not engage in testing in interstate commerce. (See proposed 42 CFR 493.1(53 FR 29590 at 29610)). FDA's proposed regulation would assure that laboratoriesnot covered by HCFA's proposed regulations will participate in proficiencytesting programs. (Recent amendments to the Clinical Laboratory ImprovementAct will expand HCFA's authority, beginning January 1, 1990, to includethe regulation of laboratories that engage solely in testing in intrastatecommerce.) FDA's proposed regulations are intended to supplement, not supersede, theregulations proposed by HCFA, so that all blood and blood product testinglaboratories in the United States would be subject to proficiency testing.In the future, however, FDA may consider issuing its own regulations toestablish specific requirements for these proficiency testing programs.Such FDA regulations would be considered if development of the HCFA finalrule is substantially delayed or if the HCFA final rule does not providespecific assurance that a laboratory testing blood or blood products isqualified to conduct the required HIV or HBsAg testing. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Highlights of the Proposed Rule </ITAG>FDA is proposing to require that any laboratory or other facility thatperforms either the FDA-required test for HBsAg or for evidence of HIV(currently, the test for antibody to HIV) participate successfully in anapproved program to demonstrate proficiency in performing the tests. Theproposed rule would apply to any laboratory performing such testing onbehalf of, or as part of, any registered blood establishment, whether licensedor unlicensed, and including any plasmapheresis center. (Registered, unlicensedblood establishments may collect and process blood and blood componentssolely for intrastate distribution.) Laboratories would be required to participate in a proficiency testingprogram approved by FDA; however, programs already approved by HCFA wouldbe viewed as meeting FDA requirements. A laboratory that fails to performsuccessfully, as defined by the organization directing the program at thetime of enrollment, would be required to notify FDA immediately by phoneor other means, with a followup notification in writing required within30 days after the laboratory is so notified. The written notification toFDA would include a description of the problem believed to have resultedin the failure and a description of any plans of corrective action. Afternotification, FDA would initiate appropriate action to assure the adequateperformance of the laboratory and the continued protection of the publichealth. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Provisions of the Proposed Rule </ITAG>A. Requirement to Participate in a Proficiency Testing Program FDA's proposed amendments to the blood and blood product regulations areintended to help assure that every establishment or laboratory performingFDA-required tests for evidence of HIV or HBsAg is qualified to performsuch tests, as evidenced in part by successful participation in an approvedproficiency testing program. Proposed 21 CFR 606.145(a) would require laboratoriesperforming either of the tests required under 21 CFR 610.40 (HBsAg) or21 CFR 610.45 (HIV) to participate in a proficiency testing program. Throughout this proposed rule, FDA is using the term ``test for evidenceof HIV'' rather than ``test for antibody to HIV,'' so that, if a test otherthan the test for antibody for HIV is approved by FDA as appropriate fortesting in accordance with 21 CFR 610.45, participation in proficiencytesting for the new test would be required without necessitating additionalrulemaking. FDA is not proposing to require that laboratories performing the WesternBlot test for detecting HIV participate in a proficiency testing program.The Western Blot test is not used for assuring product safety under FDA'srequirements but is routinely used by blood establishments to gather additionalevidence of infection with HIV before the donor is notified of positivetest results. The Western Blot test is also used as part of a testing algorithmto determine whether a donor who has previously tested reactive to therequired test for HIV tested ``false positive'' and therefore may reenteras a donor of blood and blood components. The Western blot test is usedin clinical settings as part of determining whether a patient is infectedwith HIV. FDA is not aware of any proficiency testing programs that currentlyhave the ability to conduct proficiency testing for the Western Blot test.FDA invites comment on whether proficiency testing for the Western Blottest should be required and, if so, the scope of such a requirement. Proficiencytesting for the Western Blot test could be required only for blood establishmentsregulated by FDA or the scope could be expanded to include all laboratoriesregulated by HCFA who conduct Western Blot testing in a clinical setting.The comments received will be considered by both FDA and HCFA in preparingtheir respective final rules. The term ``laboratories'' as used in proposed 21 CFR 606.145 is intendedto include any entity which performs either the HBsAg test or the testfor evidence of HIV pursuant to FDA's regulations. B. Standards for Acceptable Proficiency Testing Program Proposed 21 CFR 606.145(b) and (c) address the criteria for acceptableproficiency testing programs. The general standards, as set forth in proposed21 CFR 606.145(b), would provide that the program must be adequate to demonstrateand evaluate the laboratory's performance of the HBsAg and evidence ofHIV tests. A proficiency testing program is most useful when it measuresthe laboratory's performance under the laboratory's usual practice. Therefore,the proposal would require that proficiency samples be tested (1) Underroutine conditions, (2) as part of the laboratory's regular workloads,(3) by the personnel who routinely perform the tests, and (4) using thelaboratory's usual methods. Proposed 21 CFR 606.145(c) would require that a laboratory enroll in aproficiency testing program that has been approved by the Director, Centerfor Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) in FDA. FDA recognizes thatmany laboratories are regulated both by FDA and HCFA and would want toenroll in one proficiency testing program to meet the requirements of bothagencies. FDA is cooperating closely with HCFA to assure that proficiencytesting programs conforming with HCFA's final rule will be appropriatefor complying with FDA's requirements. Proposed 21 CFR 606.145(c) wouldprovide that proficiency testing programs approved by HCFA will be approvedby FDA upon the submission of the written approval by HCFA of the proficiencytesting program for the test category that includes the tests for HBsAgand evidence of HIV. FDA is proposing to require its approval of programsalready approved by HCFA so that FDA can identify the criteria for unsuccessfulperformance consistent with each program and instruct the program organizationconcerning the obligations for laboratories to notify FDA of unsuccessfulperformance in the proficiency testing program. The proficiency testingprogram would be expected to notify each laboratory upon enrollment ofits obligation to notify FDA in the event that the laboratory fails toparticipate successfully. By not identifying the exact circumstances forFDA notification in the regulations, FDA will have the flexibility to selectappropriate notification procedures for each type of proficiency testingprogram. (See proposed 21 CFR 606.145(d) and the discussion below.) A proficiency testing program seeking FDA approval under proposed 21 CFR606.145(c) that has not already been approved by HCFA would be requiredto submit a complete description of the program to FDA for review and approval.Proficiency testing programs seeking FDA approval, but not participatingunder HCFA's regulations, would not necessarily be required to meet HCFA'sregulations. For example, criteria applicable to specialties and subspecialtiesmay not be necessary to meet FDA's requirements. However, FDA intends toassure that any proficiency testing programs under its regulations areat least equivalent to those programs meeting HCFA's standards in demonstratingthe proficiency of laboratories in performing the required tests. Beforepublication of any final rule resulting from this proposal, FDA intendsto provide additional guidance concerning the information that should besubmitted when requesting approval of a proficiency testing program notalready approved by HCFA. FDA is proposing that each proficiency testing program request FDA approval,rather than proposing that each laboratory request approval of the programin which it elects to participate, as the least burdensome means for allconcerned of assuring that each laboratory will participate in a programacceptable to FDA and that each laboratory is aware of its specific notificationobligations under proposed 21 CFR 606.145(d). FDA is not proposing at this time to include specific standards, otherthan those in 21 CFR 606.145 (b) and (c), concerning the criteria for approvaland structure of proficiency testing programs and the criteria for successfulperformance for laboratories participating in proficiency testing. Thoseproficiency testing programs and laboratories regulated both by HCFA andby FDA would be required to meet the criteria set forth in HCFA's regulations,when they become final. HCFA's standards apply to groups of related tests,rather than individual tests as do FDA's regulations. Because the applicableHCFA regulations also reference many other tests unrelated to this proposedrule, FDA is not repeating the applicable HCFA regulations in proposed21 CFR 606.145. If standards specific for the tests for HBsAg and anti-HIVare included in HCFA's final regulations, FDA would consider cross-referencingthem in 21 CFR 606.145 for the convenience of those laboratories that mustmeet both FDA's and HCFA's regulations. Under the proposed HCFA proficiency testing program (42 CFR 493.111), atleast two samples per test procedure must be tested each quarter. To participatesuccessfully, a laboratory may not (1) For each test event (e.g., eachquarter) have a test for which all results have been unacceptable; and(2) for two consecutive test events have an unsatisfactory result on oneof the two challenges. In addition, for all tests in the ``General Immunology''subspecialty, which includes the tests for anti-HIV and HBsAg, a scoreof 80 percent of acceptable results must be obtained for each testing event.(See HCFA's proposed 42 CFR 493.47.) Laboratories failing to meet these criteria must enroll in an ``enhancedproficiency testing program'' (42 CFR 493.22(b)). In an enhanced proficiencytesting program, a laboratory must participate successfully in three consecutivetesting events, occurring quarterly or more frequently. Six samples aretested on each event. A laboratory must obtain an overall score for eachevent of at least 80 percent and must achieve correct results on 5 of 6samples for the first testing event; 10 of 12 samples for the first andsecond testing events; and 15 of 18 samples for all three testing events(21 CFR 493.25(a)). (For example, if a laboratory achieves correct resultson all six samples in the first testing event, the laboratory must thenachieve correct results on at least four of the six samples in the secondtesting event.) These proposed HCFA requirements are subject to changeas a result of public comment on the proposed rule and because of recentlegislation affecting that agency's proficiency testing rules. FDA is cooperatingclosely with HCFA to assure that proficiency testing programs conformingto HCFA's final rule will be appropriate for complying with FDA's requirements.However, FDA is not proposing to require that laboratories otherwise notregulated by HCFA must follow HCFA's proficiency testing requirements.FDA is proposing that laboratories participating successfully in a proficiencytesting program in accordance with HCFA's requirements would also meetFDA's proposed requirements. FDA considered whether to propose more stringent standards than those proposedby HCFA for demonstrating proficiency in tests that are performed for assuringthe safety of the blood supply, particularly for the test for anti-HIV.HCFA's proposed requirement that clinical laboratories obtain a score of80 percent acceptable results for all tests in the ``General Immunology''subspecialty is intended to identify possible problems in performing arelated group of tests that often use similar equipment and methodology.The other criteria for successful performance are intended to identifypossible problems in any specific test procedure listed under the subspecialty.FDA considered whether to set a more stringent standard than 80 percentacceptable results, such as 90 percent acceptable results, for the FDArequired tests for HBsAg and anti-HIV, thereby providing a criterion moredirectly applicable to these specific tests. In the proficiency testingprograms currently in existence, from two to five samples per test procedureare tested each quarter. Many small laboratories affiliated with bloodestablishments perform only the tests for HBsAg and anti-HIV and wouldtest only 4 to 10 proficiency testing samples per quarter. The settingof a more stringent and more specific criterion would mean that a singleincorrect test result could result in unsuccessful performance. FDA believesthat a laboratory should be concerned about any incorrect test result andshould determine the cause of the error and, if appropriate, take correctiveaction. However, FDA wishes to inquire whether isolated errors should resultin regulatory action, such as required enrollment in an enhanced proficiencytesting program or required notification of FDA. The proposed proficiencytesting program would be only part of the system for assuring the continuedquality of the testing of blood and blood components. In accordance withthe instructions provided with each test kit, positive and negative controlsamples are included with each test run. In accordance with 21 CFR 606.140(b),each laboratory must have control procedures for routinely monitoring thereliability, accuracy, precision and performance of laboratory test proceduresand instruments. FDA believes that these quality assurance measures, consideredtogether, are adequate to assure the continued quality of the testing ofblood and blood components. Therefore, at this time, FDA does not believethat standards more stringent than those proposed by HCFA for demonstratingproficiency are needed.In some cases, a proficiency testing program currently ships samples toeach laboratory for testing; in other cases, the samples are hand deliveredby a representative of the program, usually as part of an overall inspectionof the laboratory under HCFA's standards. (The samples are customarilynot ``blinded''; that is, proficiency testing samples are usually identifiedas such to the laboratories that are being tested.) FDA considered whetherto initiate its own mandatory proficiency testing program as part of itsproficiency testing initiative. As part of its routine inspection of bloodestablishments, FDA could provide quality control test samples and monitorthe testing of the samples during the inspection. In this manner, FDA couldmore closely monitor the testing of proficiency testing samples as performed.However, FDA does not currently have the resources for the routine collection,testing, handling, and distribution of appropriate samples and the routineprocessing of test results. Such a program would require specialized trainingfor FDA investigators who would administer the program and additional facilities,expertise, and equipment would be necessary for preparing and handlingtest samples. For most laboratories, an FDA administered on-site proficiencytesting program would be duplicative of current on-site programs conductedunder HCFA's requirements. Thus, FDA believes at this time that the proposedproficiency testing requirements, along with other quality control measuresdescribed elsewhere in this document, will adequately assure continuedaccurate testing by laboratories. Accordingly, FDA does not believe atthis time that the limited benefits that would be derived from conductingits own proficiency testing program justify the increased resource demandsthat would be placed on the agency to initiate and administer such a program.FDA particularly invites comments on the following issues: (1) WhetherHCFA's regulations should be cross-referenced in FDA's regulations concerningproficiency testing; (2) whether FDA should provide in FDA's regulationsspecific stringent standards for performing successfully in proficiencytesting, particularly for the test for anti-HIV, and what those standardsshould be; (3) whether specific standards should be included in FDA's regulationsfor the structure of proficiency testing programs intended to meet FDA'srequirements; (4) whether isolated errors should result in regulatory actions,such as required enrollment in an enhanced proficiency testing programor required notification of FDA; (5) whether FDA should consider blindtesting and how such testing could be made operational; and (6) whetherFDA should provide quality control samples for testing during inspectionas part of its mandatory proficiency testing programs. C. Notification to FDA of Unsuccessful Participation in Proficiency TestingProgram Because FDA will not itself be conducting the proficiency testing programs,it is important that laboratories be required to notify FDA when they havefailed to meet the performance standards of the program in which they areenrolled. Only if FDA is informed of such failures can the agency assessthe significance of the unsatisfactory performance and assure that appropriatesteps are taken to improve the performance of the laboratory or otherwiseprotect the public health. Therefore, proposed 21 CFR 606.145 would require a laboratory that failsto meet the standards of the applicable proficiency testing program tonotify FDA immediately by phone or other rapid means of communication,such as by facsimile electronic transmission (FAX). A followup writtenreport would be required within 30 days after the laboratory received noticeof such failure. A laboratory would be required to include in the writtennotification the laboratory's evaluation of the problem that resulted inunsuccessful performance and a description of its plan, including any actionalready taken, for correcting the problem. To ensure that no problems ofunsuccessful performance are missed, the agency also proposes that an approvedproficiency testing program notify FDA within 30 days of a failure by anyof its participants. FDA is requiring the laboratory to report a proficiency testing failureto FDA, because only the laboratory can quickly provide the informationneeded to assess the nature of the testing failure and to determine whatappropriate followup action should be taken. FDA is requiring the proficiencytesting program to report the failure as an added insurance that FDA ismade aware of all testing failures. The criteria for unsuccessful performance that would trigger the FDA notificationrequirement would be established at the time of approval of the program.Each laboratory would be instructed by the entity conducting the proficiencytesting program of the criteria for ``unsuccessful performance'' and fornotifying FDA at the time of enrollment in the program. FDA also proposes in 21 CFR 606.145(d) to provide specifically that laboratoriesmake the results of their proficiency tests available to FDA upon request,including, for example, during FDA inspection of the laboratory. FDA is not proposing that laboratories or proficiency testing programsroutinely submit proficiency testing results to FDA. HCFA proposed to requirethat each proficiency testing program issue reports on each laboratory'sperformance to the State survey agency responsible for inspecting the laboratoryand issue cumulative reports on Medicare-approved and CLIA-licensed laboratoriesto DHHS. See HCFA's proposed 42 CFR 493.93. FDA does intend to monitorproficiency testing, including by examining test results, as part of itsroutine inspection of blood establishments. Other than in conjunction withan FDA inspection, a laboratory would be required to report test resultsonly when the laboratory fails to perform successfully in its proficiencytesting program. FDA invites comment on whether the proposed system ofreporting results only upon unsuccessful performance will be adequate toassure the continued quality of laboratory testing. D. Potential Ramifications of Unsuccessful Participation in ProficiencyTesting Program The purpose of the notification requirement, as discussed above, is toallow FDA to evaluate the situation and, if necessary, take appropriateaction. Any laboratory that fails its proficiency testing program willbe closely monitored by FDA regarding the safety of the laboratory's bloodproducts. In order for such a laboratory to continue to perform FDA-requiredtests on blood and blood components, it must demonstrate to FDA's satisfactionthat its staff and procedures are adequate to assure the safety of itsproducts.Proposed 21 CFR 606.145(e) is intended to make clear some likely consequencesof failure to perform successfully in proficiency testing programs. Paragraph(e) of 21 CFR 606.145 would authorize FDA to take any appropriate action,including (1) requiring changes in laboratory procedures or staffing, (2)requiring the laboratory to enroll its staff in suitable training programs,and (3) FDA inspection of the laboratory. The appropriate actions takenby the laboratory and FDA will depend on the nature of the proficiencytesting failure, i.e. equipment failure, clerical failure, deficienciesin technical expertise of laboratory personnel, and problems related tothe sample (and not to the laboratory's testing system). If, based on the available information, FDA determines that the laboratory'stesting program is not adequate to assure the continued safety of the bloodor blood components being tested, the agency may decide that the laboratoryis not qualified to perform FDA-required tests on blood and blood components.Then, until adequate performance has been demonstrated to FDA's satisfaction,the laboratory would be deemed unqualified to perform FDA-required tests.Similar procedures have been relied on in the past when FDA inspectionshave revealed serious shortcomings in laboratory practices. These procedureshave proved successful in assuring the continued availability of safe andeffective blood and blood products. In order to emphasize that the proposed proficiency testing requirementsare directly related to the requirements that the HIV antibody and HBsAgtests be performed by qualified laboratories, the agency is also proposingto revise 21 CFR 610.40 and 610.45. These proposed revisions state thata laboratory performing an FDA required test for HBsAg or evidence of HIV,respectively, must participate successfully in a proficiency testing programconsistent with proposed 21 CFR 606.145.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Environmental and Economic Impacts </ITAG>The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(c)(10) that this proposedaction is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively have a significanteffect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessmentnor an environmental impact statement is required. The agency has examined the economic impact of this final rule and hasdetermined that it does not require either a regulatory impact analysis,as specified in Executive Order 12291, or a regulatory flexibility analysis,as specified in the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96-354). Most laboratories would already be required to perform proficiency testingin accordance with any final rule resulting from the HCFA proposed ruleof August 5, 1988. Thus, this FDA proposal affects only the estimated 80to 100 laboratories that are not covered by the HCFA proposal but are regulatedby FDA. Although some of these laboratories may incur costs to achievethe required compliance with proficiency testing standards, these costsare expected to be relatively small. According to the economic analysis that was published in the HCFA proposal,HCFA's proposed rule would not have a significant economic impact. HCFA'sproposal, if finalized, would affect approximately 12,000 Federally-regulatedlaboratories located in hospitals and independent settings. Since FDA'sproposal would affect a much smaller number of laboratories (80 to 100),FDA has determined that the final rule will not be a major rule as definedby Executive Order 12291. Further, if promulgated, FDA certifies that theproposed rule will not have a significant impact on a substantial numberof small entities, as defined in the Regulatory Flexibility Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Paperwork Reduction Act </ITAG>Section 606.145 of this proposed rule contains information collection requirementsthat are subject to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approvalunder the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3504, <T3>et seq.</T3>). Organizations and individuals desiring to submit commentson the information collection requirements should direct them to FDA'sDockets Management Branch (address above) and to the Office of Informationand Regulatory Affairs, OMB, Rm. 3208, New Executive Office Bldg., Washington,DC 20503, Attn: Desk Officer for FDA. <ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Comments </ITAG>Because of the importance to the public health of having this new requirementin place expeditiously, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs finds, in accordancewith 21 CFR 10.40(b)(2), that good cause exists for shortening the commentperiod on this proposed rule to 30 days. Therefore, interested personsmay, on or before July 6, 1989, submit to the Dockets Management Branch(address above) written comments regarding this proposal. Two copies ofany comments are to be submitted, except that individuals may submit onecopy. Comments are to be identified with the docket number found in bracketsin the heading of this document. Received comments may be seen in the officeabove between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>21 CFR Part 606Blood, Labeling, Laboratories, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.21 CFR Part 610Biologics, Labeling, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Public HealthService Act, and the Administrative Procedure Act, it is proposed thatParts 606 and 610 be amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 606_CURRENT GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICE FOR BLOOD AND BLOOD COMPONENTS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 21 CFR Part 606 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 201, 501, 502, 505, 510, 701, 52 Stat. 1040-1042as amended, 1049-1051 as amended by 76 Stat. 780, 1052-1053 as amended,1055-1056 as amended, 76 Stat. 794 as amended, and sec. 301 of Pub. L.87-781 (21 U.S.C. 321, 351, 352, 355, 360 and note, 371), the Public HealthService Act (secs. 351 and 361, 58 Stat. 702 and 703 as amended (42 U.S.C.262 and 264)), and the Administrative Procedure Act (secs. 4, 10, 60 Stat.238 and 243, as amended (5 U.S.C. 553, 702, 703, 704)); 21 CFR 5.10 and5.11.</ITAG>2. Section 606.145 is added to Subpart H to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 606.145 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Proficiency testing. </ITAG>(a) Laboratories performing a test for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)required by andSection; 610.40 of this chapter or a test for evidence ofHuman Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) required by andSection; 610.45 of thischapter shall participate in a proficiency testing program as describedin this section. (b) The proficiency testing program for the Food and Drug Administration(FDA) required tests for HBsAg and evidence of HIV shall be adequate todemonstrate and evaluate the performance of the laboratory in requiredtesting for HBsAg or evidence of HIV under routine conditions of testing,with the proficiency samples tested as part of the laboratory's regularworkload by personnel who routinely perform testing, using the laboratory'susual methods. (c) For the tests described in paragraph (a) of this section, a laboratoryshall enroll in a proficiency testing program that is approved in writingby the Director, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, as appropriatefor fulfilling the requirements of this section. Proficiency testing programsapproved by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) will be approvedby FDA upon submission to the Director, Center for Biologics Evaluationand Research, of the written approval by HCFA of the proficiency testingprogram for the applicable tests. (d) A laboratory failing to meet the standards for adequate performancefor the tests described in paragraph (a) of this section shall notify theDirector, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, as soon as possibleby phone (301-295-8191) or other means of rapid communication such as byfacsimile transmission (FAX) (FAX 301-295-8197). Written notification shallbe submitted by the laboratory to the Director, Center for Biologics Evaluationand Research, 8800 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20892 within 30 daysafter the laboratory is notified of such a failure. The written notificationshall include an evaluation of the problem and a description of the laboratory'splan for corrective action. The laboratory shall make the results of itsproficiency tests available to FDA upon request, including during FDA inspectionof the laboratory. The criteria for unsuccessful performance and for reportingto FDA under this paragraph will be established at the time of enrollmentin the proficiency testing program. In addition to notification by thelaboratory, an approved proficiency testing program shall notify FDA within30 days of a failure by any of its participants. (e) When notified of a failure under paragraph (d) of this section, FDAmay take such action as it deems appropriate. For example, the agency mayinspect the laboratory, require the laboratory to enroll its staff in suitabletraining programs, or require changes in laboratory procedures or staffing.If, based on the available information, FDA determines that the laboratoryhas not demonstrated that its testing program is adequate to assure thecontinued safety of the blood and blood components being tested, FDA maydetermine that the laboratory is no longer qualified to perform FDA-requiredtests on blood and blood components until adequate performance is demonstratedto FDA. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 610_GENERAL BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS STANDARDS </ITAG>3. The authority citation for 21 CFR Part 610 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 201, 501, 502, 505, 510, 701, 52 Stat. 1040-1042as amended, 1049-1051 as amended by 76 Stat. 780, 1052-1053 as amended,1055-1056 as amended, 76 Stat. 794 as amended, and sec. 301 of Pub. L.87-781 (21 U.S.C. 321, 351, 352, 355, 360 and note, 371), the Public HealthService Act (secs. 351 and 361, 58 Stat. 702 and 703 as amended (42 U.S.C.262 and 264)), and the Administrative Procedure Act (secs. 4, 10, 60 Stat.238 and 243, as amended (5 U.S.C. 553, 702, 703, 704)); 21 CFR 5.10 and5.11.</ITAG>4. Section 610.40 is amended by redesignating paragraph (f) as (g) andadding a new paragraph (f) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 610.40 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Test for hepatitis B surface antigen. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(f) <T3>Proficiency testing. </T3>Laboratories performing tests for hepatitisB surface antigen required by this section shall participate successfullyin a proficiency testing program consistent with andSection; 606.145 of thischapter. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>5. Section 610.45 is amended by adding a new paragraph (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 610.45 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) requirements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) <T3>Proficiency testing. </T3>Laboratories performing tests for evidenceof HIV, including tests for antibody to HIV, as required by this sectionshall participate successfully in a proficiency testing program consistentwith andSection; 606.145 of this chapter. <ITAG tagnum="6">Frank E. Young, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Commissioner of Food and Drugs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Otis R. Bowen, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 19, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-13340 Filed 6-5-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>