<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89626-0028 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-26-89.f2.A1027</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Agricultural Marketing Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Part 1040</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. AO-225-A39; DA-88-047]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Milk in the Southern Michigan Marketing Area; Decision on ProposedAmendment to Marketing Agreement and to Order</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This decision changes the plant location adjustmentsto prices under the Southern Michigan order. The amendments were proposedby four dairy farmer cooperatives that supply about 87 percent of the market'smilk.The changes would replace the current seven pricing zones with just threezones (zero, minus five cents, and minus seven cents) and increase therate of adjustment at plants outside the zones from one cent to 2.25 centsper hundredweight per 10 miles or fraction thereof. The zone and locationadjustments apply to Class I milk prices to handlers and to uniform pricesto producers.Also, a larger direct-delivery differential payment of 10 cents per hundredweightwould be required for milk delivered to pool plants in a three-county area(metropolitan Detroit). Currently, two rates are applicable in portionsof two counties.Another change would use 0.115 rather than 0.113 as the factor that ismultiplied times a specified butter price to determine the butterfat differentialused for pricing milk under the order.The amendments are based on industry proposals and a record of a publichearing held at Romulus, Michigan, on May 24, 1988. The amendments arenecessary to reflect current marketing conditions and to maintain orderlymarketing in the Southern Michigan marketing area. Cooperative associationswill be polled to determine whether producers favor issuance of the amendedorder.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Richard A. Glandt, MarketingSpecialist, USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968,South Building, P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-4829.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This administrative action is governedby the provisions of Sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291.The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires the Agency toexamine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to 5U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The amended order will promotemore orderly marketing of milk by producers and regulated handlers.Prior documents in this proceeding;<T3>Notice of Hearing:</T3> Issued April 29, 1988; published May 4, 1988(53 FR 15851).<T3>Extension of Time for Filing Briefs:</T3> Issued July 19, 1988; publishedJuly 22, 1988 (53 FR 27699).<T3>Recommended Decision: </T3>Issued February 21, 1989; published February24, 1989 (54 FR 7938).<T3>Correction to Recommended Decision:</T3> published March 10, 1989 (54FR 10214).<T3>Extension of Time for Filing Exceptions:</T3> Issued March 16, 1989;published March 21, 1989 (54 FR 11545).<ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>A public hearing was held upon proposed amendments to the marketing agreementand the order regulating the handling of milk in the Southern Michiganmarketing area. The hearing was held, pursuant to the provisions of theAgricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674),and the applicable rules of practice (7 CFR Part 900), at Romulus, Michigan,on May 24, 1988. Notice of such hearing was issued on April 29, 1988 andpublished May 4, 1988 (53 FR 15851).Upon the basis of the evidence introduced at the hearing and the recordthereof, the Administrator, Agricultural Marketing Service, on February21, 1989, filed with the Hearing Clerk, United States Department of Agriculture,his recommended decision containing notice of the opportunity to file writtenexceptions thereto.The material issues, findings and conclusions, rulings, and general findingsof the recommended decision are hereby approved and adopted and are setforth in full herein, subject to the following modifications:1. Under the heading ``1. Changing the location adjustment and direct-deliverydifferential zones in the order.'', seventeen new paragraphs are addedafter paragraph 74.2. Under the heading ``2. The location adjustment rate applicable to plantslocated outside location adjustment zones.'':a. Two new paragraphs are added after paragraph 32.b. Eight new paragraphs are added after paragraph 41.The material issues on the record of the hearing relate to:1. Changing the location adjustments and direct-delivery differential zonesin the order.2. Changing the rate used to determine location adjustments at locationsoutside the zoned area.3. Changing the factor used in the computation of the butterfat differential.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof:1.<T3> Changing the location adjustment and direct-delivery differentialzones in the order.</T3> The order should be amended to provide a singledirect-delivery zone and three zones for pricing milk at Class I and uniformprices.The Producers' Equalization Committee (PEC) proposed changing the structureof the existing pricing zones and direct-delivery differential zones.The PEC is composed of four cooperative associations, namely, IndependentCooperative Milk Producers Association, Michigan Milk Producers Association(MMPA), National Farmers Organization, and Southern Milk Sales. Together,these four associations market approximately 87 percent of the milk pooledon Order 40 and supply about 87 percent of the market's fluid milk sales.The PEC proposed that the present seven zones, all in the lower portionsof Michigan, be replaced with three zones.The lower portion of Michigan is currently divided into seven geographicallyspecified zones consisting of bands of countries grouped essentially onthe basis of distance from the heavily populated corridor which encompassesDetroit, Flint and Bay City. The above pricing structure has been in effect for the Southern Michiganmarket since September 1, 1977. The Class I price to handlers and the uniformprice to producers is adjusted as follows. <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,5,r100</C> <H1>Zone </H1><H1>Adjustment</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">1<D>No adjustment. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2<D>Minus 5 cents. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3<D>Minus 7 cents. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4<D>Minus 9 cents. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5<D>Minus 11 cents. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6<D>Minus 14 cents. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">7<D>Minus 17 cents. </D></ITAG></ITAG>The PEC proposed that the lower portion of Michigan be comprised of threezones, as follows: Zone 1, a large southeastern segment, would containthe counties of Clinton, Genesee, Gratiot, Hillsdale, Huron, Ingham, Jackson,Lapeer, Lenawee, Livingston, Macomb, Monroe, Oakland, Saginaw, Sanilac,St. Clair, Shiawassee, Tuscola, Washenaw, Wayne, and Bay (except Gibson,Mount Forest, Pinconning, Garfield and Fraser townships)Zone 2, a large southwestern segment, would include Allegan, Barry, Berrien,Branch, Calhoun, Cass, Eaton, Ionia, Kalamazoo, Kent, Montcalm, Muskegon,Ottawa, St. Joseph, and Van Buren Counties; andZone 3, north of Zones 1 and 2, would be comprised of Bay County (all townshipsexcluded from Zone 1), and the counties of Alcona, Alpena, Antrim, Arenac,Benzie, Charlevoix, Cheboygan, Clare, Crawford, Emmet, Gladwin, Grand Traverse,Isabella, Iosco, Kalkaska, Lake, Leelanau, Manistee, Mason, Missaukee,Mecosta, Midland, Montmorency, Newaygo, Oceana, Ogemaw, Osceola, Oscoda,Otsego, Presque Isle, Roscommon and Wexford. The Class I prices to handlersand the uniform price to producers would be adjusted as follows: <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,5,r100</C> <H1>Zone </H1><H1>Adjustment</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">1<D>No adjustment. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2<D>Minus 5 cents. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3<D>Minus 7 cents. </D></ITAG></ITAG>  The PEC also proposed expanding the area in which the direct-delivery differentialis applicable from two counties (Wayne and Oakland Counties) to includeMacomb County. The rate of the direct-delivery differential would be 10cents in all three counties. At the present time, a 10-cent rate appliesto milk received at pool plants in Wayne County and parts of Oakland County.A 4-cent rate presently applies to most of Oakland County.  Also proposed by the PEC was a proposal to increase the location adjustmentrate from one cent to 2.25 cents applicable at plants located outside themarketing area. Both the direct-delivery differential and the locationadustment rate applicable to distant plants will be discussed followinga discussion dealing with the restructure of the present location adjustmentzones.  A witness for the PEC testified that the proposed changes to the pricingstructure of the Southern Michigan order are necessary because of the substantialchanges that have occurred in the past decade. He said that a 21-cent difference(17 cents for Zone 7 plus a 4-cent direct-delivery differential) was createdin September 1977 to facilitate the movement of milk from western Michiganto southeast Michigan. Also a 27-cent difference was created at that time(17 cents for Zone 7 plus a 10-cent direct-delivery differential) to movemilk from northern Michigan to southeast Michigan. In 1977, he said, thesedifferences in prices fairly reflected the cost of transporting milk toa market (Detroit metropolitan area) that was considered to be a deficitproduction area.  The PEC spokesman said that packaged milk sales by handlers located inthe proposed Zone 1 (21 counties) was approximately 156.0 million poundsand that milk production for this same area was about 160 million pounds.He said that handlers also require milk for non-fluid milk products suchas cottage cheese and yogurt. This 21-county area in 1977, he said, includedfour supply plants at Adrian, Ovid, Chesaning and Sebewaing, Michigan,which processed reserve milk supplies for Class III products.  The witness for the PEC said that the period from 1977 to 1987 can be describedas a period of deteriorating packaged fluid milk sales by Order 40 poolplants. Fluid milk sales for this period, he said, decreased from approximately2.218 billion pounds per year to 1.976 billion pounds or a decrease of242 million pounds.  Proponent's spokesman testified that this decline in sales can be attributedto a depressed economy, declining population, and declining per capitaconsumption. Local plants today, he said, are not distributing fluid milkproducts into as many distant markets as in the past.  The witness for the PEC said that the distribution of fluid milk saleswithin Southern Michigan has also changed. Exhibit No. 9, for example,shows that in 1977, plants located in the two counties where the direct-deliverydifferential applies, accounted for 57 percent of Order 40's sales. Plantslocated within the present base zone and the minus 5-cent zone accountedfor 25 percent of the total sales and the balance of sales (18 percent)were by plants in the minus 9-cent, minus 11-cent and beyond zones. ByDecember 1987, he said, for these same zones, the percentages were 41,27 and 32, respectively.  Proponent's witness testified that during this 10-year period, annual salesvolume in the area now comprising the plus 10-cent direct-delivery differentialdeclined by 445 million pounds whereas sales in the minus 9-cent and beyondzones increased by 217 million pounds resulting in a net loss of 242 millionpounds of fluid milk sales for the entire market. He said that this redistributionof the local market's fluid milk sales represents a reversal of the previoustrend in sales. Less packaged milk is being supplied to other in-statemarkets by Detroit metropolitan handlers, via distributors, and more ofthe packaged sales in the Detroit metropolitan area is being supplied byplants located outside the plus 10-cent direct-delivery differential area.The closing of two large distributing plants during the last 10 years,he said, has also contributed to the reduced fluid milk sales by plantslocated in the plus 10-cent direct-delivery differential area.  The PEC witness testified that milk production for the entire SouthernMichigan market and by county has also changed during the last 10 years.He said that Exhibit 15 shows that for December 1987, milk production inthe proposed Zone 1 area was within one percent of the production levelof December 1977 and that in the proposed minus 5- and minus 7-cent zones,production had increased 14 percent when compared to 1977. He indicatedthat although milk production has remained fairly constant in the countiesproposed for Zone 1, the monthly fluid milk needs of this area have decreasedby almost 39 million pounds since 1977.  The spokesman for the PEC testified that more of the milk production inthe proposed Zone 1 area is available to supply the fluid market todaythan there was in 1977. In his view, this is because of the closing oftwo manufacturing plants located in Sebewaing and Chesaning, Michigan.These two facilities, he said, acquired the majority of their milk supplyfrom farms located in the central zone. His belief is that the centralzone should no longer be considered a deficit production area and therefore,the spread in prices paid to customers located in different areas of themarket should be reduced.  The PEC witness indicated that the change in the location adjustment ratesshould also be made to more properly align Class I prices between adjoiningmarkets. Furthermore, it is his belief that prices within the market shouldbe aligned to ensure comparable pricing treatment for plants which aresimilarly located but regulated by another Federal order.   The spokesman for the PEC expressed the view that because of the dailyand monthly fluctuation in sales, it is necessary to design location adjustmentsso that the seasonal and operating reserves of the fluid market can behandled in an efficient manner with the least cost to those producers whoare balancing the market. The PEC witness indicated that the location adjustment rate for the proposedZone 2 of minus 5 cents results in a Class I differential of $1.70 thatapplies to regulated handlers in the northern zone of the Indiana market(Order 49). He said that a minus 5-cent location adjustment also more closelyaligns the producer uniform prices for Orders 40 and 49 in southwest Michigan.A minus 7-cent location adjustment in Zone 3, he said, recognizes the factthat the plants are located further from the major consumption areas ofLansing, Flint, and Bay City-Saginaw. The PEC proposal, in the witness' view, would expand the central zone toinclude the cities of Lansing and Jackson in order to recognize the overlappingof route distribution and the competition for fluid milk sales among plantslocated in Lansing and Jackson with other plants presently included inthe central zone. In his view, a zero location adjustment for Lansing andJackson better aligns the Class I price among the competing handlers inthe local markets and also better aligns the Order 40 Class I differentialat these locations with the Order 33 (Ohio Valley) Class I differentialof $1.80 for northwest Ohio. The witness for the PEC testified that, in his opinion, the proposed reductionin the location adjustment rates for the more distant zones acknowledgesthat there is an increasing demand for milk by processing plants locatedin those areas which were previously considered secondary markets. The PEC, he said, believes that these location adjustment rates shouldbe designed so that producer supplies will move to plants when needed inthe most efficient way. The proposed minus 5-cent location adjustment ratefor Zone 2 will provide better inter-market price alignment. Furthermore,the witness said, the historical price relationship between Order 40 andsurrounding markets was altered when the Class I differentials were changedpursuant to the Food Security Act of 1985. The PEC proposal, in his view,will result in more equity among fluid milk plants. On cross-examination the PEC witness stated that this organization is notsaying that the cost of transportation is any cheaper today than it wasin 1977. He said that milk is not being moved into the central zone ona routine basis from outside this zone. The plants located in the minus7-cent zone, he said, would have a fairly local procurement area and theydo not utilize all the milk produced in the counties that would make upthe minus 7-cent zone. Furthermore, he said, some of the milk producedin this area will move either to a fluid milk plant in the central zoneor to the minus 5-cent zone or it may move to the MMPA balancing plantat Ovid, Michigan. The PEC witness on cross-examination testified that the population westof Lansing has grown whereas the population in the Detroit metropolitanarea as well as in Flint, Bay City-Saginaw has declined because of theirreduced employment associated with the auto industry. On cross-examination, the spokesman for the PEC indicated that a manufacturingplant under construction at Allendale (Ottawa County) that will be suppliedby MMPA, would become operational late in 1989. He said that MMPA willstill have a commitment to supply the local fluid milk plants. The PEC Proposal was supported at the hearing by a witness for the BordenCompany that operates a fluid milk plant located at Madison Heights, Michigan.This witness said that the proposal would not affect their costs and thatnone of their competitors would have their costs lowered. A witness for Kraft, Inc. (Kraft), testified in opposition to the proposal.He said that Kraft operates supply plants at Pinconning and Clare, Michigan.The Clare plant, he said, now is subject to a minus 11-cent location adjustmentand the Pinconning plant currently is subject to a minus 7-cent locationadjustment. The Kraft witness said that the two supply plants qualify as fully regulatedsupply plants because of the unit system of pooling administered by MMPA.The Pinconning plant, he said, receives milk from nonmember producers,one-third of whom are located in Huron, Tuscola and Sanilac Counties, Michigan,and the remaining two-thirds of the producers are located in counties northof Pinconning. He said the milk supply for the Clare plant comes from thecentral part of the state from Traverse City to Lansing. Kraft's witness expressed the view that the current pricing structure ofOrder 40 reflects the sound principles applied throughout the milk ordersystem such as: (1) The location price for milk should be reduced in directproportion to the distance from the primary market, (2) the price of milkin major milk production areas should be lower than the price in principalconsuming areas and, (3) similar prices should apply to similarly situatedhandlers. The witness for Kraft testified that the proposal as it relates to theirPinconning plant would put their plant at a competitive disadvantage. This,he says, is because the producer pay price in Sanilac County would increaseby 7 cents in a county where a competing supply plant is located at Marlettethat would have a zero location adjustment. Kraft's witness said that the proposal would do nothing to encourage themovement of milk from Sanilas or Huron Counties to the metropolitan Detroitarea. He said that the proposal would discourage such shipments since theprice difference between the ``thumb'' area and the Detroit metropolitanarea would be reduced from 17 cents (10 cent direct-delivery differentialplus 7 cents) to 10 cents. The Kraft witness testified that the proposal would eliminate the incentiveto move milk from the ``thumb'' area to distributing plants located atPort Huron, Flint, Saginaw and Bay City. This, he says, is because a zeroprice difference is proposed between the production area and these plantsin contrast to a 7-cent incentive that now exists. Kraft's witness said that the proposal would provide the MMPA butter-powderplant at Ovid, Michigan, with an ability (7 cents) to attract milk supplieslocated in the ``thumb'' area away from Kraft's Pinconning plant. He saidthat the proposal will make Kraft the only purchaser of milk in the ``thumb''area with a minus location adjustment and that this additional expenseof 7 cents will cost Kraft approximately $33,000 per year. The witness for Kraft expressed the view that the proposal will be disruptivein the western part of the State between manufacturing plants. He saidthat in Ottawa County the blend price would increase 6 cents (minus 11to minus 5 cents) and the impact will apply to a cheese plant being builtby Leprino Foods, (Leprino) at Allendale, Michigan (Ottawa County). Theplant when completed, he said, will have a capacity to manufacture two-to two-and-a-half million pounds of milk per day and that this price increaseof 6 cents on this volume of milk will reduce the pool about $500,000 peryear. Furthermore, he said, the blend price at Allendale would be 2 centshigher than the blend price at Clare. At the present time, he said, thetwo locations are priced the same. He said that the two cents on the expectedvolume at Allendale would result in a $144,000 procurement advantage peryear to Leprino. Kraft's witness said that the proposal is contrary to the historical policyand recent decisions by the Secretary. In his view, the proposal does lessto reflect the cost of transporting milk from the production areas to theconsuming areas than do the current provisions of the order. He said thatthe Secretary should be consistent and not adopt the proposal because itwould increase prices in the State's major production areas in order toprovide a competitive advantage for one manufacturing plant. At the hearing and in their brief, Lansing Dairy, located at Lansing, Michigan,opposed the PEC proposal. Their spokesman said that transportation costshave gone up in the six counties surrounding Detroit. He said that theproposal would cost their plant about half a cent per gallon and, on theirvolume of sales, about $1,500-$1,600 per week. He said that the proposalwill help MMPA's relationship with the Leprino cheese plant at Remus, Michigan,and with the Leprino plant under construction at Allendale.Frigo Cheese Corporation (Frigo) opposed the proposal. The Frigo witnesstestified that Frigo operates three supply plants pooled on Order 40 thatare located at Carney, Michigan, and at Lena and Wyocena, Wisconsin. Hesaid that Frigo has been associated with Order 40 for over 18 years throughthe unit pooling provisions adminstered by Dean Foods Company (Dean). Thewitness said that the PEC proposal would be disruptive to producers locatedin the Upper Peninsula and, therefore, Frigo was proposing a modificationto the proposals.The spokesman for Frigo proposed adding to the PEC proposals two more zonesapplicable to the Upper Pensinsula with fixed location adjustments. Hewould add a Zone 4 with a minus 20-cent location adjustment and a Zone5 with a minus 40-cent location adjustment. He said that Zone 4 would includethe area outside of the marketing area but located in the Upper Peninsulathat contains the counties of Alger, Baraga, Chippewa, Houghton, Keweenaw,Luce, Mackinac, Marquette and Schoolcraft. Zone 5, he said, would includethe area outside the marketing area but located in the Upper Peninsulaand would include the counties of Delta, Dickinson, Gogebic, Iron, Menomineeand Ontonagon. Although offered as a modification of proposal No. 1, thisproposal must be considered as more directly related to the PEC proposalto change the rate for computing location adjustments at plants outsidethe specified zones.As indicated previously, the PEC proposed adding Macomb County to the areanow subject to the direct-delivery differential. The proposed direct-deliverydifferential rate would be 10 cents and would apply to all of Wayne, Oaklandand Macomb Counties.The PEC witness testified that the proposal would increase the cost toone fluid milk plant located in Novi Township of Oakland County. He saidthat approximately 20 miles separates the Novi plant that is subject toa plus 4-cent direct-delivery differential from three large fluid milkplants located in the plus 10-cent area and that this minor differencein distance does not justify a 6-cent difference in the location valueof producer milk.The spokesman for the PEC said that the plus 10-cent direct-delivery differentialis needed to induce needed milk deliveries to the present plants or anyfuture plant that may be built in this three-county area. This expansion,he says, parallels the extension of the residential Detroit metropolitanarea since the order was amended in 1977.Proponent's witness testified that rapid urban development in Oakland andMacomb Counties has virtually eliminated milk production in these counties.He noted that within a 60-mile radius of the Detroit area, in the countiesadjacent to the tri-county area, milk production in December 1977 was 40million pounds and that by December 1987 milk production within the sameradius had decreased to about 35 million pounds.The PEC witness expressed the view that the direct-delivery differentialsfor this market have, over time, helped to provide milk supplies for milkplants located in the Detroit metropolitan area. He said that the additional10 cents still fairly reflects the additional hauling cost paid on themajority of the milk moving to the Detroit area versus the cost of movingmilk to other local markets in the central zone.The changes in the plant location adjustment zones proposed by the PECshould be adopted. These changes will produce a flatter Class I and uniformprice structure within the marketing area that will better reflect theneed to move less milk under current market conditions. Instead of twodirect-delivery zones (plus four cents and plus ten cents) and seven locationadjustment zones (ranging from no adjustment to a minus 17 cents adjustment),there should be one direct-delivery zone (plus ten cents) and three locationadjustment zones (ranging from zero to minus seven cents).The current zone pricing structure has been in place since 1977. Sincethen, numerous changes have occurred in the market that warrant fewer zonesand less incentive to move milk toward the Detroit metropolitan area fromthe outlying production areas. These changes include population shifts,plant closings, and increased milk production.The metropolitan Detroit area (principally Macomb, Oakland and Wayne Counties)is still the market's largest single population center. However, populationin Wayne County declined more than 12 percent (300,000) from July 1976to July 1986.\1\<NOTE/> Although the population in Oakland and Macomb Counties increasedduring this period, the three-county area combined had 5.5 percent fewerinhabitants as of July 1986 than there were in July 1976. These three countries,which make up the proposed direct-delivery differential zone, contained46.8 percent of the marketing area population in July 1976, but only 44.0percent in July 1986. The net decline for the three counties combined wasmore than 225,000 persons.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Official notice is taken of the following sources of populationdata:<ITAG tagnum="28">Press Release, CB 87-116, released July 24, 1987, by the Bureau ofthe Census, United States Department of Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">Estimates of the Population of Michigan Counties and Metropolitanareas: July 1, 1976 (Revised) and 1977 (Provisional), Current PopulationReports, Series P-26, No. 77-22, Issued September 1978 by the Bureau ofthe Census, United States Department of Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">Provisional Estimates of the Population of Counties: July 1, 1986,Current Population Reports, Series P-26, No. 86-A, Issued August 1987 bythe Bureau of the Census, United States Department of Commerce.</ITAG>Data in exhibits show that annual Class I packaged milk dispositions fromplants located in the direct-delivery differential zone (Wayne and OaklandCounties_there are no milk plants in Macomb County) declined by 35.5 percent,from 1.255 billion pounds in 1977 to 810.3 million pounds in 1987. Thedifference, 455.2 million pounds, represents the annual average milk productionof nearly 500 Michigan dairy farms in 1987, based on daily deliveries perfarm of 2,500 pounds of milk. This number simply serves to emphasize howmuch less Class I milk is currently used by plants in this zone than wasneeded ten years ago.Milk production in the direct-delivery differential zone dropped by over44 percent (from 4.8 million to 2.6 million pounds) between December 1977and December 1987. However, within this zone, two large distributing plantshave closed. To the extent that there is a need for milk at plants in thedirect-delivery differential zone, the 10-cent differential, which is paiddirectly to producers and therefore is not pooled, is viewed by the supplyingcooperatives as adequate to cover the additional cost of delivering milkto plants located in the three-county areas. No one opposed expanding thedirect-delivery differential zone to include all three counties and fixinga uniform rate of 10-cents per hundredweight for the direct-delivery differential.The direct-delivery differential has no impact on the pooled value of milkand thus no impact on the uniform price.The balance of the proposed ``zero'' zone consists of all or a portionof 18 counties, covering approximately the southeastern one-third of thelower portion of the State of Michigan. In this larger area, populationincreased slightly (2.2 percent) between 1976 and 1986, while milk productionincreased 0.8 percent (1.26 million pounds) over the same period of time.This zone includes several population centers, including Flint, Lansing,Saginaw and Bay City, all of which are Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA's)as defined by the Bureau of the Census. Two of these MSA's, Flint and Lansing,experienced population declines from 1976 to 1986, while the Saginaw andBay City area population increased by over 16 percent, or more than 57,000persons.The population of the entire zero zone (which includes the direct-deliverydifferential zone) overall dropped by 2.75 percent (175,200) from 1976to 1986. Three supply plants and four distributing plants (including thetwo mentioned earlier in the direct-delivery differential zone) have closedin the zero zone since 1977. Slightly more than 70 percent of the market'spopulation resides in these 21 counties. Plants located in this zone receivedtwo-thirds of the market's producer milk in December 1987 and accountedfor 68 percent of the market's Class I milk.Milk produced in the 21-county zero zone and pooled during December 1987amounted to 158.9 million pounds. Class I sales by plants located in thesecounties totaled 119.7 million pounds for the same month. Thus, Class Iuse amounted to about 75 percent of the milk that was produced in thesecounties. Overall, it appears that there is a good balance between productionand Class I use in this area. Nevertheless, there may be some need to attractlimited amounts of additional milk to plants in this zone from other zones.To this extent the proposed five cents Class I price difference betweenZones 1 and 2, and the seven cents difference between Zones 1 and 3, shouldbe adequate to attract such supplies.Zone 2, the minus five cents zone, had 21 percent of the marketing areapopulation in July 1986, an increase of 8.5 percent (146,400) from 10 yearsearlier. Milk production in this area in December 1987 was up about fourpercent from 10 years earlier. December 1987 pooled milk produced in countiesin this zone totaled 102 million pounds, while plants in the zone had ClassI uses of about 35 million pounds. Thus, there appears to be plenty ofmilk to serve this area. The two-cent Class I price difference betweenZones 2 and 3 would cover only movements of milk from a short distanceinto Zone 3.There are four MSA's in Zone 2. They include Battle Creek, Grand Rapids,Kalamazoo, and Muskegon. Of these, only the Grand Rapids MSA experiencedgrowth from 1976 to 1986. The others declined from 0.1 percent (Muskegon)to 25 percent (Battle Creek). Many of the counties in this proposed zonecurrently are in a minus nine-cent or minus 11-cent zone. Such lower pricesmay encourage milk to move to higher-priced areas where it is not now needed.Another consideration of the proposed five-cent lower Class I price inthis zone is that it will improve price alignment with the northern tierof counties in the Indiana Federal milk order. The Class I price differentialin the no-adjustment zone of the Indiana order is $2.00 per hundredweight.However, the four Michigan counties that are in the Indiana Federal ordermarketing area, along with other counties in northern Indiana, are in aminus 30-cent location adjustment zone. Under the current Southern Michiganorder, the zero adjustment Class I differential is $1.75 per hundredweight,with location adjustments of minus nine cents and minus 11 cents applicableto plants in Michigan counties along the Michigan-Indiana border. Thisarrangement results in misalignment of Class I prices between the two orders.Thus, a minus five-cent zone in southwestern Michigan will provide ClassI price alignment in the four Michigan counties that are part of the Indianamarketing area. The third zone proposed, with a minus seven-cent adjustment, is much morea rural area than are the other two zones. On a percentage basis, the populationincrease in this zone was the largest, showing an 11 percent (75,000) gainfrom 1976 to 1986. However, the 1986 population of this zone is the smallest,comprising only 8.4 percent of the marketing area's total population. Thiszone also appears to be self-sufficient with respect to milk supply anddemand. In December 1987, pooled milk produced in this zone amounted to86.7 million pounds. Class I use by plants in this zone and outside themarketing area amounted to 20.4 million pounds. The counties that comprise this minus seven-cent zone currently are inone of five different zones ranging from minus seven cents to minus 17cents. Only two distributing plants are located in this zone, one at Cheboygan,which is near the northern tip of the lower peninsula, and one at Evart,which is more nearly in the center of the lower peninsula. Currently, theCheboygan plant is in the minus 17-cent zone, while the Evart plant isin the minus 11-cent zone. The record does not reveal the sizes of the two distributing plants inthe proposed Zone 3, but an exhibit requested by Kraft, Inc., and preparedby the market administrator indicates that total Class I use by SouthernMichigan handlers in all the territory outside proposed Zones 1 and 2 amountedto 20.5 million pounds in December 1987. Thus it is safe to assume thateach of the two plants in Zone 3 had less Class I milk than the 20.5 millionpounds. It is noted that in December 1987, pooled milk production in theMichigan Counties of Newaygo, Mecosta, Isabella, Gladwin, Clare, Osceola,and Missaukee totaled more than 50 million pounds. Since the plant at Evartis in Osceola County, and the counties just noted are either adjacent toit or nearby, there seems to be no need for a higher price at Evart toattract milk from the Cheboygan area. The justification for fewer pricing zones is further reinforced by lookingat the marketing situation overall. From 1976 to 1986, the population ofthe lower peninsula grew by only .5 percent, or about 46,000 persons. Whilethe population remained static in size, major changes were going on aspopulation shifts occurred. Some of these have already been noted. At thesame time, total Class I packaged milk sales by Southern Michigan orderpool handlers actually declined, from about 2,218 million pounds in 1977to 1,976 million pounds in 1987, a 10.9 percent drop. However, milk productionpooled under the order increased by nearly 10.5 percent over the same period.Thus, the percent of available milk used for Class I purposes declinedfrom 53.9 percent in 1977 to 43.4 percent in 1987. Moreover, Class I sales from plants in the Detroit metropolitan area havedeclined while sales from plants in more outlying areas have increased.These changes call for eliminating some of the highly structured zone pricingthat has been operational since 1977. It is no longer needed. The opposition by Kraft, Inc. and Lansing Dairy, Inc. has been noted. LansingDairy objected because its costs would be increased due to the higher applicableClass I price, which would have a negative economic impact on their operation.Lansing also expressed a view that it was indirectly being asked to subsidizethe economic relationship between the cooperative and the Leprino Cheeseoperations. Under the changed zone structure, Lansing Dairy will be affected two ways.First, the Class I price under the order at Lansing will be five centshigher than it now is. However, Lansing Dairy is one of four distributingplants in what is now a minus five-cent zone that will be in the new zerozone. Two of the other plants are in Lansing and one is in Jackson. Thus,plants in the same general area will be treated alike and pricing equityamong these competing handlers will continue. Second, Lansing Dairy's witness indicated that the handler procures somemilk from independent producers north of Lansing, as far away as McBainin Missaukee County. Currently, the zone price difference between McBainand Lansing is six cents. Under the new structure, it will be seven cents.Thus, there will be greater recovery of hauling costs under the order forthe handler's independent producers. This may work to the handler's advantagein procuring milk supplies. Two proprietary handler supply plants would be similarly affected by thechanges. The Kraft plant at Clare, which is now in a minus 11-cent zone,would be in a minus seven-cent zone. Diehl, Inc., which operates a supplyplant in Charlotte, Michigan (Eaton County), now is in a minus seven-centzone, but will be in a minus five-cent zone. Aside from MMPA's plant inAdrian, the only other supply plant in lower Michigan that will not havea higher blend price at its location is the Kraft plant at Pinconning,Michigan, which is now and will continue to be in a minus seven-cent zone.Kraft objected to higher blend prices at the MMPA plant at Ovid and theNFO plant at Marlette since its Pinconning plant competes for part of itsmilk supplies in a common production area. All three plants are now inthe same pricing zone. Kraft's principal objection is that it believesit will have to pay its producers the higher blend price that would beapplicable at the Marlette plant in order to compete with NFO for milksupplies. Kraft contends that it would have to absorb the price differenceof 7 cents per hundredweight, which would amount to about $33,000 per year.If it does not do this, Kraft implies its producers will look for anotherbuyer.Kraft further argues (in its brief) that in 1977 it proposed higher pricesat a manufacturing plant in Saginaw County and for the Kraft plant in Pinconningfor essentially the same reasons that PEC now proposes higher prices atthe Marlette and Ovid plants. However, Kraft's proposal was denied. TheKraft brief argues that a higher price (at any plant) cannot now be adoptedfor the same area without the expression of a reversal of past policy.Kraft, in its brief, asked that Official Notice be taken of the DeputyAssistant Secretary's Interim Final Decision, Docket No. A0-361-A24 etal., published in the Federal Register on July 8, 1986 (51 FR 24677). Therequested document involved the issue of appropriate location adjustmentsin several orders, including Indiana, but not the Southern Michigan order.However, since the request does not indicate how Official Notice of thatdocument would be useful in this proceeding, the request is denied.In opposing Class I price increases in southwestern Michigan, Kraft pointsto the fact that the Class I differential at a Kalamazoo County distributingplant under the Indiana order would be $1.66. Kraft maintains that PEC'sproposals do not, as PEC claims, improve price alignment between the SouthernMichigan and Indiana orders. Kraft's brief also maintains that the PEC'sproposed increase in the blend prices in southwestern Michigan will tendto encourage milk supplies to remain at manufacturing plants such as theMMPA plant under construction at Allendale (Ottawa County), rather thanbeing delivered to deficit Class I markets. Kraft claims that MMPA admittedlyplans to serve the Allendale plant with milk now sold to out-of-area customers.Kraft's point about alignment of prices between the Southern Michigan andIndiana orders in Kalamazoo County, Michigan, is correct. However, fourMichigan counties (Berrien, Cass, St. Joseph, and Branch) and 14 northernIndiana counties are in the minus 30-cent zone of the Indiana order. Atplant locations in the four Michigan counties in this pricing zone of theIndiana order, Class I prices would be aligned under PEC's proposal. Kraft'sclaim that the PEC proposals diminish price alignment is correct at somelocations while the PEC's claim that their proposals improve price alignmentwith Indiana is true at other locations.Kraft expressed a view that higher Class I prices at plant locations inthe proposed base zone and the minus five-cent zone are not needed becausethe plants are located in major milk producing areas where milk productionis more than ample. Kraft holds that such increases will send a signalto producers to increase production. Instead, Kraft's brief suggest thatthe base zone (no adjustment) price could be lowered since the PEC maintainsthat there is now less need than there was in prior years to attract milkto Zone 1. However, there were no proposals submitted nor any testimonyoffered in support of any lowering of the Class I price. Moreover, theprice changes are not of sufficient magnitude to have any measurable productionresponse.With regard to Kraft's concern that the PEC proposal would not result ina higher blend price at its Pinconning plant, the PEC witness indicatedthat the majority of the ``thumb'' milk supply is delivered to fluid milkplants in Flint, Port Huron, and Detroit. This certainly indicates thatmilk from the ``thumb'' area moves southward and therefore the zero adjustmentzone should include the ``thumb'' counties. On the other hand, the recordfails to establish that the Pinconning plant of Kraft has a particularassociation with the proposed new Zone 1 or that it now serves as a balancingplant for other plants that would be in the proposed new ``no-adjustment''zone. While it is true that the plants at Ovid (MMPA), Marlette (NFO) andPinconning (Kraft) have been in the same zone since at least 1977, thereis no basis in the record to conclude that Pinconning should be includedin the new no-adjustment zone along with the other two plants at Ovid andMarlette.It also should be noted that Kraft's plant at Clare will be in the samepricing zone as MMPA's plant at Remus. Currently, the Remus plant is inthe minus 9-cent zone while the Clare plant is in the minus 11-cent zone.In this case, Kraft's ability to compete for milk supplies should be improved.Finally, the change from seven pricing zones to three pricing zones isnot tied to the cost of moving milk. Transportation costs were the mainconsideration when the current zone structure was adopted in 1977. Giventhe changes that have occurred since then, the new pricing structure willreflect three basically self-sufficient pricing zones with recognitionthat some limited movements of milk between zones may be needed. Also,these changed zones allow the cooperatives that operate market-balancingmanufacturing facilities an opportunity to operate those plants withoutbeing unduly influenced by differences in location adjustments.Exceptions to the recommended decision on this issue were filed by Kraftand Lansing Dairy. Kraft also asked that the hearing be reopened becauseof the closing of the Kraft plant at Clare, Michigan, and because of whatthey perceive as a change in the Department's policy on Class I pricingsubsequent to the close of the hearing.Kraft in its exceptions, has characterized the Secretary's decision toreduce the minus location adjustments in several zones as raising the minimumClass I price. Kraft cites the statutory language of section 8c (18) ofthe Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 (Act). In Kraft's view,the Act permits the Secretary to raise milk prices in a market or at alocation when the current price is inadequate to attract ``a sufficientquantity of pure and wholesome milk'' to meet fluid needs. Section 8c (18),in their view, does not permit a minimum price increase where uncontrovertedevidence establishes, and the Secretary finds, that the current supplyis more than adequate to meet fluid needs.The Class I differential, which is established at the base or ``zero''zone, is $1.75, and would not be changed. Section 8c(18) is the authorityfor the Secretary to change the Class I differential if supply and demandwarrants a change in order to increase or decrease milk production. Theauthority for the Secretary to provide for pricing zones (location adjustments)in an order is found in section 8c(5)(A) of the Act. What this decisiondoes is to reduce location adjustments at various locations inside thelower portion of Michigan, but outside the Detroit area.  Kraft, in support of its Motion to Reopen the Hearing, refers to threeletters from the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Service to:(1) Kraft, dated June 7, 1988, (2) Friendship Dairies, Inc., dated June7, 1988, and (3) Dean Foods, dated March 22, 1989. In Kraft's view, thedenial of proposals by these three organizations (markets other than SouthernMichigan) is inconsistent with our rationale in the Southern Michigan decision. The letter to Kraft was a denial of their proposal to increase the ClassI differential 15 cents in the New York-New Jersey market because of thesupply-demand pricing standard contained in section 8c(18) of the Act. The letter to Friendship Dairies, Inc. denied two proposals that wouldhave increased the Class I differential in the New York-New Jersey market.Again this denial was based on the supply-demand pricing standards containedin section 8c(18) of the Act.  The letter to Dean denied proposals that would have decreased the ClassI differential seven cents in the Rio Grande Valley order and would havechanged the location adjustment applicable to plants located in southeasternNew Mexico from a minus 15 cents to a plus 21 cents for a net increaseof 29 cents at Clovis, New Mexico. This request was prompted by Dean andseveral other handlers to lessen perceived interhandler inequities in thecosts of raw milk that resulted from a 96-cent increase in the Class Idifferential under the Texas order and no change in the Rio Grande ValleyClass I differential as mandated by the Food Security Act of 1985.  The Dean proposals were denied because they were inconsistent with thepurpose of location adjustments since the proposals would have increasedthe price of milk in an area of surplus production and decreased the priceof milk in an area that is slightly deficit in terms of local supplies. The factual situation in the southwestern United States in March 1989,in terms of supply-demand for milk, was entirely different than marketingconditions in the Southern Michigan market at the time of the hearing (May1988). Therefore, there is no inconsistency on the part of the Departmentin denying the proposals to amend the Rio Grande Valley order and in adoptingthe proposed amendments to the Southern Michigan order. Kraft, it appears,is misinterpreting the two sections of the statute that have been citedearlier and has taken a very narrow view of the purpose of location adjustments.The primary purpose of location adjustments continues to be to providean incentive to move milk from the production area to the consumption center. There is nothing improper about increasing or decreasing the location adjustmentin a market to reflect changes in the relationship between production areaand consumption areas. As clearly stated in the recommended decision, therehave been significant changes in the Southern Michigan market since 1977to justify the adoption of the proposed amendments.  Kraft, in its motion to reopen the hearing, states that it has closed itsClare, Michigan, plant since the hearing was held and that this has decreasedthe manufacturing capacity in the market. In Kraft's view, the closingof the Clare plant justifies reopening the hearing.  Kraft's request to reopen the hearing also relies on statements in briefsand exceptions filed by other producers and handlers to the effect thatthey would withdraw their milk from the Southern Michigan pool if certainproposed location adjustments were adopted at plants located outside themarketing area.  In response, we must conclude that Kraft's arguments are not persuasiveas to any need to reopen the hearing. As to any loss of manufacturing capacity,we find no reason to believe that there will be any significant impacton the market due to such reduced capacity. Moreover, the record revealsthat a new manufacturing plant is under construction, although it is ata different location. Since neither of the Kraft plants ship milk to distributingplants, we foresee no impact upon availability of milk for Class I usedue to Kraft's closing its plant at Clare.  As to whether other parties shift milk to another order, such action, ifit occurs, would not have a negative impact upon blend prices to producersin the lower portion of Michigan. If the result of such a shift would behigher blend prices to producers in lower Michigan, that would not compela reopening of the hearing, even if the PEC did not intend that the effectof its proposals would be to increase returns to producers. It would notbe surprising that adoption of a more realistic location adjustment applicableto distant milk supplies would cause handlers to evaluate whether thosedistant supplies should continue to be associated with the Southern Michiganorder.  For the foregoing reason, the exceptions filed by Kraft and the Motionto Reopen the Hearing are denied.  Lansing Dairy also took exception to the recommended decision because itscosts for bulk milk would be five cents higher since the plant would bein the base zone rather than in the minus five-cent zone. In its exceptions,Lansing states that over 30 percent of its finished products are marketedin the Detroit area and that therefore, its major competitors are not inthe same area as its plant.  In Lansing's view, the Secretary should consider a handler's cost of haulingpackaged milk to the major sales area where they compete in arriving atthe appropriate location adjustment. However, it is not the purpose oflocation adjustments to reflect the costs of moving packaged milk fromone location to another. There is nothing in the exception that persuadesus to reconsider this issue. Therefore, the exceptions filed by Lansingare denied.  2. <T3>The location adjustment rates applicable to plants located outsidelocation adjustment zones. </T3>The order should be amended to specify2.25 cents per hundredweight per 10 miles as the rate to be used for computingClass I and uniform price differentials at plants located outside the definedlocation adjustment zones. As indicated previously, the PEC proposed changing the location adjustmentrate on Class I milk and the uniform price applicable to plants locatedoutside the marketing area. The PEC proposed changing the present ratefrom 1 cent to 2.25 cents per ten miles of fraction thereof.The PEC witness testified that the present one-cent rate does not resultin very close alignment of either the Order 40 Class I price or the Order40 uniform price as it relates to prices in other markets in the UpperMidwest.Proponent's witness said that the Chicago order's Class I differentialat Green Bay, Wisconsin, for example, is $1.12; whereas, the Order 40 ClassI differential at this location using the present one-cent rate would be$1.40.The spokesman for the PEC said that the difference in the blend price fora producer who is pooled at an Order 40 plant versus an Order 30 plantis even more dramatic. For example, he stated that for 1987, the Order30 uniform price zoned out to Oconto, Wisconsin, averaged $11.44. The 1987uniform price for milk pooled by an Order 40 plant also located in OcontoCounty, he said, averaged $11.71. The Frigo Cheese Company plant at Lena,Wisconsin, is in Oconto County.The proponent's witness said that other examples of blend price differencescould be demonstrated and that this degree of price difference createsdisorderly market conditions. He said that this much of a difference inprice creates an incentive for distant milk supplies to attempt to becomepooled in a market with a higher Class I utilization while the supplierhas no desire to supply the fluid market that is generating the higherblend price. Such activities, he said, dilute the returns from the ClassI market for other producers who are actively involved in supplying theClass I and Class II processors.The PEC spokesman said that milk from producers located in 16 Wisconsincounties was pooled as producer receipts on Order 40 for one or more monthsduring 1987. In December 1977, he said, 10.6 million pounds of Wisconsinmilk was pooled on Order 40 and for December 1987, 16.4 million poundsof Wisconsin milk was pooled on this order. The witness said that the PECis concerned that this trend will escalate.Proponent's witness said that in 1987 the producer delivery provisionsand the diversion limitation provisons were relaxed. These changes, hesaid, were necessary to avoid uneconomic movements of milk but they alsomade it easier for distant producers to pool milk on Order 40 and divertthat milk to nonpool plants. The witness said that under the current provisions,during the months of September through February each Order 40 produceris required to deliver only one day's production to a pool plant and thatfor the months of March through August, 100 percent of a producer's milkmay be diverted to a nonpool plant.The PEC witness testified that increasing the mileage rate as proposedwill minimize the economic advantage that may be realized by such activitiesand therefore prevent the dilution of the uniform price. The mileage computation,he said, would be determined by the market administrator using the shortesthighway distance between such a plant and the nearest point in the SouthernMichigan marketing area.On cross-examination, the proponent's witness testified that the PEC, inarriving at their proposed rate of 2.25 cents, considered the fact thatwithin the State of Michigan, MMPA can haul milk at less cost than outsidethe State. He said that the State permits hauling tandem units with a payloadof 100,000 pounds in the Upper Peninsula. The proposed rate, he says, coversthe cost of transporting milk within the State of Michigan but not outsidethe State.At the hearing a witness for Chicagoland Dairy Sales, Inc. (CDS), testifiedin support of the PEC proposal.The CDS witness said that this organization is comprised of our cooperativeassociations, namely, Alto Cooperative Creamery, Lake-to-Lake Dairy Cooperative(division of Land O'Lakes, Inc.) Outagamie Producers Cooperative and WisconsinDairies Cooperative. This organization, he said, has 12 reserve supplyplants pooled on Order 30.The CDS spokesman said that their organization is experiencing problemsmeeting Order 40's producer pay prices in the common procurement areasof Michigan and Wisconsin. He said that the higher pay prices result fromthe higher Class I utilization in the Southern Michigan market relativeto the Chicago Regional market.The witness said that there is a common overlapping procurement area inthe State of Wisconsin and in Menominee County in Michigan. He said thatwhen comparing May 1977 with May 1987, the amount of Wisconsin milk procuredby Order 40 plants increased by 44 percent and for December 1987 the increasewas 54 percent.The spokesman for CDS also testified that the Order 40 uniform price forJanuary 1988 was $11.98 at the zero zone and for Chicago the zero zoneblend price was $11.47, or 51 cents lower. He said that the adjusted uniformprice at Wyocena, Wisconsin (where a Frigo plant is located), would be$11.64 ($11.98 minus a 34-cent location adjustment) for Order 40 and thatunder the Chicago order the uniform price at the same location (Zone 9)would be $11.26, or 38 cents less. The witness said that this pricing advantageenjoyed by plants pooled in Order 40 is due to the low location adjustmentrate contained in that order. He said that Order 30 uses a location adjustmentrate of 1.6 cents per 10 miles.The CDS witness said that for the years of 1985 through 1987, the Order40 uniform price averaged 21, 17 and 25 cents higher, respectively, thanthe Order 30 price at Wyocena. For 1988, he said, the spread for the monthsof January through April was 38, 41, 36 and 30 cents, respectively.At Lena, Wisconsin (where another Frigo plant is located), he said, forthe years of 1985 through 1987, the Order 40 uniform price averaged 26,22 and 30 cents higher, respectively, than the Order 40 price at that samelocation. For 1988, he said, the spread for the months of January throughApril was 43, 46, 41 and 35 cents, respectively.The CDS spokesman said that for the years of 1985 through 1987, the Order40 uniform price averged 35, 31 and 39 cents higher, respectively, thanthe Order 30 price at Carney, Michigan (the location of a third Frigo plant).For 1988, he said, the spread for the months of January through April was52, 55, 50 and 44 cents, respectively.The Frigo witness presented testimony to modify the PEC proposal. He saidthat the location adjustment rates for Order 33 (Ohio Valley) and Order36 (Eastern Ohio-Western Pennsylvania) are 1.5 cents per 10 miles, forOrder 30 it is 1.53 cents, and 2.0 cents for Order 49 (Indiana). The witnesssaid that the location adjustment rate for Order 40 should be somewherebetween 1.5 and 2.0 cents per ten miles. He said that Frigo preferred a1.5-cent rate. Furthermore, he said, andSection; 1040.52(a)(2) of the ordershould be changed by deleting the language that reads ``the nearest pointin such territory'' to read ``the state line.''The Frigo spokesman said that the milk supply in the Upper Peninsula isclosely aligned with Order 40 either through the efforts of MMPA or Frigo.He said that the PEC proposals would lower returns to dairy farmers locatedin the Upper Peninsula and also limit the economic viability of their Carneyplant. In his opinion, there are no realistic alternatives for the Carneyplant should it become unprofitable under Order 40. He said that reserveplant status under Order 30 is not possible.On cross-examination he said that using a 1.5-cent location adjustmentrate, as Frigo proposed, would produce minus location adjustments of 40cents at Carney, 49 cents at Lena and 39.5 cents at Wyocena. He said thecurrent minus location adjustments at these same locations are 35, 41 and34 cents, respectively. This would mean blend price decreases of 5, 8 and5.5 cents, respectively.On cross-examination, he said that about three percent of their total milksupply moves to an Order 40 distributing plant. He said that very littlemilk moves from their Lena plant to Liberty Dairy, a distributing plantlocated at Evart, Michigan (Osceola County) and owned by Dean. The witnesssaid that the unit pooling provisions do not require Frigo to ship anymilk from any particular plant. He said that milk from their Wyocena plantis moved the 320 miles around the south side of Lake Michigan to LibertyDairy at a cost of $1.60 per hundredweight. From the Carney plant, he said,the milk moves north around Lake Michigan and that they pay various ratesfor hauling.The Frigo modification was supported at the hearing by Dean. A witnessfor Dean testified that their distributing plant at Evart acquires, eachmonth, up to 10 percent of their milk supply from Frigo. He said that themajority of their milk supply comes from the Upper Peninsula. The Deanwitness testified that if the location adjustment for the MMPA supply plantat Sault Ste. Marie is 22 cents then the Frigo plant at Carney should havea 27-cent location adjustment.The Dean spokesman expressed the view that after MMPA and Leprino buildtheir new cheese plant at Allendale that he would have some reservationabout milk supplies being made available for distributing plants. He saidthat if you look at Frigo from the standpoint of being a cheese operationand compare it to other cheese operations in the state, then you wouldhave to conclude that Frigo is supplying more of their milk to the fluidmarket than any other other cheese operations.Farmers Union Milk Marketing Cooperative (FUMMC) also presented testimonyto modify the PEC proposal. Their witness said that the FUMMC representsapproximately 238 producers shipping to three supply plants pooled on Order40 (Frigo plants). He said that the PEC proposal would adversely affecta group of Wisconsin and Michigan Upper Peninsula producers who have beenassociated with Order 40 for 20 years. The proposal, he said, would resultin the shifting of about 30 million pounds of milk from the Order 40 poolto the Order 30 pool, thereby reducing the Order 30 blend price which isalready lower than the Order 40 blend price.The FUMMC witness said that they want the PEC proposal to coincide withneighboring markets and that they prefer the Order 30 location adjustmentrate of 1.53 cents. He said that the location adjustment rate should becalculated from the Michigan State line and that the present rate of onecent represents the cost of moving milk.Manitowoc Milk Producers Cooperative (Manitowoc) also supported a modificationof the PEC proposal. Their witness said that their organization representsapproximately 2,500 members shipping milk to Orders 30, 40, 68 (Upper Midwest)and Order 79 (Iowa). He said that about 130 of their members are shippingmilk to the Frigo plants located at Carney and Lena. The Manitowoc witnesssuggested a location adjustment rate of 1.5 cents per 10 miles. This rate,he said, would provide uniformity and equity among producers as Order 40relates to other orders.The proposal to change the rate for computing location adjustments to ClassI and uniform prices at locations outside the territory specified in thelocation adjustment zones should be adopted. The current location adjustmentrate of 1 cent per hundredweight per 10 miles seriously overstates thevalue of milk to the Southern Michigan pool at locations considerably distantfrom the central market.Location adjustments to Class I and uniform prices at plants located outsidethe zones specified for lower Michigan, which includes the marketing areaand other territory, are based on distance from the plant to the nearestpoint in such zoned territory. The location adjustment is computed by addingto the price differential applicable at such nearest point an amount computedby multiplying the number of 10-mile increments by one cent.There are four supply plants pooled under the order at which such locationadjustments are applicable. They are located at Sault Ste. Marie and Carney,both in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, and at Lena and Wyocena, Wisconsin.The current location adjustments at those plants are: Sault Ste. Marie,^23 cents; Carney, ^35 cents; Lena, ^41 cents; and Wyocena, ^34 cents.The nearest point in the zoned territory for the plants in the MichiganUpper Peninsula and at Lena, Wisconsin, is Mackinaw City. For the Wyocena,Wisconsin, location, the mileage is computed from Grand Beach (BerrienCounty), Michigan. From the point of measurement, the mileages to the plantsare as follows: Sault Ste. Marie, 51-60 miles; Carney, 171-180 miles; Lena,231-240 miles; and Wyocena, 221-230 miles.The current location adjustment rate is outdated. It's use results in ClassI and uniform prices at the various locations that are too high relativeto the prices of milk in the marketing area because the rate does not reflectthe cost of hauling milk. The record indicates that it costs about 2.25cents per hundredweight per 10 miles to move milk within Michigan, and3.6 cents or more to move milk into Michigan from plants outside Michigan.These numbers are based on the testimony of the PEC witness, who statedthat the proposed 2.25-cent rate ``_fairly well reflects the cost of transportingmilk within Michigan.'' The witnesses for Frigo Cheese and Farmers UnionCo-op indicated rates of $1.60 per hundredweight for a 320-mile haul, and$1.60 to $1.80 per loaded mile, respectively. These rates vary from about3.4 cents to 5 cents per ten miles per hundredweight, assuming a 47,000-poundload of milk for the per loaded mile figure. Thus, it is clear that a transportationrate of 1.0 cents per 10 miles per hundredweight is seriously inadequateto reflect hauling costs incurred under current conditions.In exceptions to the recommended decision, Frigo maintained that the distancefrom Wyocena, Wisconsin, to Evart, Michigan, is 443 miles, not 320. The443-mile number is accepted as a more accurate number. Frigo's exception,however, argues that based on the entire haul, the rate charged is only1.8 cents per hunderweight per 10 miles, and thus concludes that the locationadjustment rate should be 1.75 cents per 10 miles per hundredweight. Location adjustments are based on the distance between plants. Likewise,the cost of hauling milk is for moving the milk from one location to another.The costs per hundredweight per 10 miles as indicated in the recommendeddecision stand as valid to reflect the hauling costs indicated by the representativefor Frigo and by the representative for FUMMC.Various proposed modifications of the PEC proposal should not be adopted.After a through analysis of the issue, it is concluded that the best fitof location adjustments outside the zoned area results from the PEC proposal.The proposal by Frigo to extend the zoning concept to include two additionalzones for the Michigan Upper Peninsula was not supported by testimony orother evidence other than an expression of concern for the well-being ofproducers in that area. In that regard, such a modification would providea lesser location adjustment to producer blend prices at the Frigo supplyplants than would the proposals of the PEC. Along with this modificationFrigo proposed that location adjustments at plants outside Michigan bebased on the distance from the plant to the State line as determined bythe Market Administrator, and that the rate per hundredweight per 10 milesshould be somewhere between 1.5 and 2.0 cents. Under this proposed modification,the location adjustment at Carney would be ^40 cents, with adjustmentsat Lena and Wyocena of ^52 cents and ^51 cents, respectively.The modifications suggested by FUMMC and Manitowoc would use 1.50-1.53cents as the location adjustment rate. Additionally, FUMMC would prefermeasuring distances to plants from the Michigan State line. The basis forthese modificiations was to improve uniformity of location adjustment ratesamong orders. It is noted that these modifications also would result insmaller negative location adjustments and, therefore, higher blend pricesto producers at the Frigo plants.The proposal by the PEC would produce location adjustments of ^20.5 centsat Sault Ste. Marie and ^47.5 cents, ^61 cents, and ^57 cents at the Carney,Lena, and Wyocena plants, respectively. The record in this proceeding, as previously indicated, does not containdetailed hauling cost information. But there is a basis for concludingthat it costs more than 2.25 cents per hundredweight per 10 miles to movemilk outside the State of Michigan. Therefore, there is no sound basisto consider further the alternative rates of 1.5 to 2.0 cents as suggestedby several parties. The value of milk at locations considerably distant from the central marketmust be related to the transportation costs that would be incurred in movingthat milk to market. All the distributing plants that are fully regulatedunder the Southern Michigan order are located in the lower part of theState, mostly in the southern half of the State. Moreover, there is plentyof milk produced in this portion of the State to meet the market's needs.Since location adjustments at distant supply plants outside this area currentlydo not realistically reflect transportation costs, the blend prices applicableunder order at such locations overstate the value of the milk to the ClassI market. Thus, the producers in the southern part of the State are subsidizingproducer incomes in the Upper Peninsula and Wisconsin areas that supplymilk to those supply plants. This situation would continue under the PECproposals, but not to as great a degree as it now does. The two supply plants in Michigan's Upper Peninsula are located in themarketing area defined under the Michigan Upper Peninsula order and thetwo Wisconsin supply plants are located in the Chicago Regional order marketingarea. Ideally, location adjustment rates under the Southern Michigan orderwould provide Class I prices at the plant locations equal to the applicableClass I price at such locations for the order marketing area in which theplants are located. The plant at Wyocena, Wisconsin, has a Class I differentialof $1.188 under the Chicago Regional order. The PEC rate of 2.25 centsyields a Southern Michigan Class I differential at Wyocena of $1.75 minus57 cents, or $1.18. Similarly, although not quite as close, the Chicagoorder Class I differential at Lena, Wisconsin is $1.073, whereas the 2.25cents rate proposed under the Southern Michigan order would result in aClass I differential of $1.14.Under the Michigan Upper Peninsula order, the Class I differential at Carneyis $1.15, compared to the proposed $1.275 under the Southern Michigan order.At Sault Ste. Marie, the Class I differentials would not match up closely.The difference would be 19.5 cents. However, even with these differencesClass I price alignment under the orders would be more nearly achievedusing the 2.25-cent rate than with any of the proposed modifications. Thus,the best fit is provided using this rate. There was some testimony on this issue concerning misalignment of blendprices at the Carney, Michigan, and Wisconsin supply plants. The locationadjustment rate change will result in lower blend prices under the SouthernMichigan order at these locations and thus in a closer alignment with blendprices under the Chicago order for the Wisconsin locations. However, itmust be noted that the desire to achieve blend price alignment is not asufficient basis for revising the location adjustment rate. Instead, thelocation adjustment rate should more nearly reflect the cost of transportingmilk. Even if Class I prices are perfectly aligned, blend price differencesmay continue due to different levels of Class I use between two orders.In addition to the exceptions filed by Frigo, exceptions also were filedby FUMMC and Dean. CDS indicated by letter that they support the proposedamendments.The Frigo exceptions, for the most part, are a reiteration of the testimonypresented at the hearing and the arguments contained in a post-hearingbrief. Their views regarding the appropriate location adjustment for theirplant at Carney, Michigan were fully considered in the issuance of therecommended decision. However, Frigo's exception suggests that the location adjustment rate isbeing changed for the purpose of improving blend price alignment betweenthe Southern Michigan and Chicago orders. This is not the case. The onlypurpose for adopting the 2.25 cents per hundredweight per 10 miles rateis so that the value of milk at these distant locations will more nearlyreflect the cost of moving milk to the market. For this reason, and otherreasons stated earlier in this decision, the Frigo exceptions are denied.The exceptions filed by FUMMC also constitute a reiteration of their testimonyat the hearing and the arguments contained in their post-hearing brief.Their views regarding the appropriate location adjustments for plants locatedbeyond the proposed pricing zones were fully considered in the issuanceof the recommended decision, therefore, their exceptions are denied.Dean, in its exceptions, indicates the volume of milk received by its LibertyDairy plant for the month of January 1989 and the distance this milk movedfrom the farms to the plant. This information cannot be considered by theSecretary because it was not part of the record. Dean's representative in his exceptions and in his testimony presentedat the hearing expressed a concern about the price that Dean will haveto pay for milk to supply the Liberty Dairy plant as a result of the agreementbetween Leprino Cheese and MMPA. Dean has also expressed the view thatthis decision will exacerbate their ability to acquire a supply of milkbecause Frigo may be forced to ship a substantial quantity of milk to theChicago Regional order rather than deliver milk to Liberty Dairy. Deanhas asked that the Secretary continue to have a minus 11-cent locationadjustment at Liberty Dairy or to decrease the location adjustments byfour cents that would not be applicable to Frigo at their three plant locations.In essence, Dean is asking that order provisions ensure the ability tonot have to rely too heavily on cooperatives in acquiring a supply of milkfor the Evart plant. However, it is not the function of the order to assureany handler of a supply of milk from any particular source or exclusiveof any source. Dean's arguments are not persuasive and the exceptions,therefore, are denied. The views expressed by Dean as to the appropriatelocation adjustments for plants located outside of the proposed zones werefully considered in the issuance of a recommended decision and, therefore,their exceptions are denied.   The proposed changes in the location pricing provisions (both the zoningand rate issues) will change the total value of pooled milk by a smallacount. An exhibit introduced by the market administrator shows recomputeduniform prices for the zero adjustment zone for May 1987 through April1988 as being only one cent per hundredweight lower for eight months andno change for the other four months. For example, had the proposed changesbeen in place in December 1987, the value of Class I milk in the pool wouldhave been, at most, about $40,000 higher. However, in a 379 million poundmarket, the impact of the $40,000 on the uniform price for the zero zonewould have been about one cent per hundredweight.   There would be changes in the distribution of the location adjustment moneyamong the market's producers. In general, producers in the western andnorthern part of the state will receive higher returns for their milk,while producers delivering their milk to plants located outside the marketingarea will receive less for their milk. Not enough detailed informationis available to be able to determine how much more or less will be paidto producers for delivering milk to plants in the specific zones. The amountswith which prices would change at the various locations have already beendescribed.   3. <T3>Changing the factor used in the computation of the butterfat differential.</T3>The order should be amended to provide for the use of a factor of0.115, rather than 0.113, times the butter price specified in the orderin the computation of the butterfat differential.   The order presently provides that for milk containing 3.5 percent butterfat,the uniform price shall be increased or decreased for each one-tenth percentbutterfat variation from 3.5 percent by a butterfat differential and roundedto the nearest one-tenth cent. The butterfat differential is determinedby multiplying 0.113 times the simple average of the wholesale sellingprices (using the midpoint of any grade range as one price) of Grade A(92-score) bulk butter per pound at Chicago, as reported by the Departmentfor the month.   The PEC witness proposed that in the computation of the butterfat differential,a factor of 0.115 be used. He said that in 39 of 42 marketing orders, afactor of 0.115 is used in the computation of the butterfat differential.  Butterfat produced in the State of Michigan, he said, is marketed throughoutmost of the eastern half of the United States either as part of a freshliquid product or as a component of a manufactured dairy product. The witnesssaid that at different times of the year, butter produced in the Far Westis shipped into Midwest markets. He testified that the cost of butterfatto all processors of dairy products should be similar, particularly sincethe market for butterfat is national.   A witness for Lansing Dairy testified that they were opposed to this proposal.The witness, however, never indicated why.   In its brief, Frigo stated that their organization supported the PEC aproposal.  This proposal should be adopted. Marketing orders adjacent to the SouthernMichigan market are using the factor of 0.115 in the computation of thebutterfat differential. The adoption of this factor will promote orderlymarketing of butterfat in the Southern Michigan market and in adjacentmarkets.   No exceptions to the recommended decision were filed on this issue.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions   </ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings   </ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the Southern Michigan order was first issued and whenit was amended. The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratifiedand confirmed, except where they may conflict with those set forth herein.  (a) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, will tend toeffectuate the declared policy of the Act;   (b) The parity prices of milk as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the marketing area, and the minimum prices specifiedin the tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors, insurea sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and be in the publicinterest; and   (c) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, will regulate the handling of milk in the same manner as,and will be applicable only to persons in the respective classes of industrialand commercial activity specified in, a maketing agreement upon which ahearing has been held.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Exceptions   </ITAG>In arriving at the findings and conclusions, and the regulatory provisionsof this decision, each of the exceptions received was carefully and fullyconsidered in conjunction with the record evidence. To the extent thatthe findings and conclusions and the regulatory provisions of this decisionare at variance with any of the exceptions, such exceptions are herebyoverruled for the reasons previously stated in this decision. <ITAG tagnum="84">Marketing Agreement and Order  </ITAG>Annexed hereto and made a part hereof are two documents, a Marketing Agreementregulating the handling of milk, and an Order amending the order regulatingthe handling of milk in the Southern Michigan marketing area, which havebeen decided upon as the detailed and appropriate means of effectuatingthe foregoing conclusions.   It is hereby ordered that this entire decision and the two documents annexedhereto be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.<ITAG tagnum="81">Determination of Producer Approval and Representative Period   </ITAG>January 1989 is hereby determined to be the representative period for thepurpose of ascertaining whether the issuance of the order, as amended andas hereby proposed to be amended, regulating the handling of milk in thesouthern Michigan marketing area is approved or favored by producers, asdefined under the terms of the order (as amended and as hereby proposedto be amended), who during such representative period were engaged in theproduction of milk for sale within the aforesaid marketing area. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 1040  </ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on June 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jo Ann R. Smith,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services.           </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="85">Order Amending the Order Regulating the Handling of Milk in the SouthernMichigan Marketing Area</ITAG>This order shall not become effective unless and until the requirementsof andSection;900.14 of the rules of practice and procedure governing proceedingsto formulate marketing agreements and marketing orders have been met.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Determinations</ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the order was first issued and when it was amended.The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,except where they may conflict with those set forth herein.(a) Findings. A public hearing was held upon certain proposed amendmentsto the tentative marketing agreement and to the order regulating the handlingof milk in the Southern Michigan marketing area. The hearing was held pursuantto the provision of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, asamended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicable rules of practice and procedure(7 CFR Part 900).Upon the basis of the evidence introduced at such hearing and the recordthereof, it is found that:(1) The said order as hereby amended, and all of the terms and conditionsthereof, will tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act;(2) The parity prices of milk, as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct, are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the said marketing area; and the minimum prices specifiedin the order as hereby amended are such prices as will reflect the aforesaidfactors, insure a sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and bein the public interest; and(3) The said order as hereby amended regulates the handling of milk inthe manner as, and is applicable only to persons in the respective classesof industrial or commercial activity specified in, a marketing agreementupon which a hearing has been held.<ITAG tagnum="84">Order Relative to Handling</ITAG>It is therefore ordered that on and after the effective date hereof, thehandling of milk in the Southern Michigan marketing area shall be in conformityto and in compliance with the terms and conditions of the order, as amended,and as hereby amended, as follows:The provisions of the proposed marketing agreement and order amending theorder contained in the recommended decision issued by the Administratoron February 21, 1989, and published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on February 24, 1989 (54 FR 7938), shall be andare the terms and provisions of this order, amending the order, and areset forth in full herein.<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 1040_MILK IN THE SOUTHERN MICHIGAN MARKETING AREA</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 7 CFR Part 1040 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-674.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1040.52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>2. In andSection;1040.52, revise paragraph (a)(1) to read as follows:(a) * * *(1) <T3>Zone rates.</T3> For a plant located within the following describedterritory, including the cities located therein, the applicable zone ratesshall be as follows:<ITAG tagnum="74">Michigan Counties</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Zone I_No Adjustments</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Clinton, Genesee, Gratiot, Hillsdale, Huron, Ingham, Jackson, Lapeer,Lenawee, Livingston, Macomb, Monroe, Oakland, Saginaw, Sanilac, St. Clair,Shiawassee, Tuscola, Washtenaw and Wayne.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Bay (except Gibson, Mount Forest, Pinconning, Garfield and FraserTownships).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Zone II_5 cents</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Allegan, Barry, Berrien, Branch, Calhoun, Cass, Eaton, Ionia, Kalamazoo,Kent, Montcalm, Muskegon, Ottawa, St. Joseph and Van Buren.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Zone III_7 cents</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Bay (all townships excluded from Zone I), Alcona, Alpena, Antrim,Arenac, Benzie, Charlevoix, Cheboygan, Clare, Crawford, Emmet, Gladwin,Grand Traverse, Isabella, Iosco, Kalkaska, Lake, Leelanau, Manistee, Mason,Missaukee, Mecosta, Midland, Montmorency, Newago, Oceana, Ogemaw, Osceola,Oscoda, Otsego, Presque Isle, Roscommon and Wexford.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. Amend andSection;1049.52(a)(2) by changing ``one cent'' to ``2.25 cents.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1040.74</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>4. Amend andSection;1040.74 by changing ``0.113'' to ``0.115''.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1040.75</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>5. Amend andSection;1040.75 by removing and reserving paragraph (a)(2) andrevising paragraph (a)(3) to read as follows:(a) * * *(3) Shall add not less than 10 cents per hundredweight with respect tomilk received from producers and cooperative associations pursuant to andSection;1040.9(c)at a pool plant located within the Michigan counties of Macomb, Oakland,and Wayne.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="75">Marketing Agreement Regulating the Handling of Milk in the SouthernMichigan Marketing Area</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The parties hereto, in order to effectuate the declared policy ofthe Act, and in accordance with the rules of practice and procedure effectivethereunder (7 CFR Part 900), desire to enter into this marketing agreementand do hereby agree that the provisions referred to in paragraph I hereofas augmented by the provisions specified in paragraph II hereof, shallbe and are the provisions of this marketing agreement as if set out infull herein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">I. The findings and determinations, order relative to handling, andthe provisions of andSection;andSection;1040.1 to 1040.86, all inclusive, ofthe order regulating the handling of milk in the Southern Michigan marketingarea (7 CFR PART 1040) which is annexed hereto; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">II. The following provisions:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1040.87 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Record of milk handled and authorization to correct typographicalerrors.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(a) Record of milk handled. The undersigned certifies that he handledduring the month of January 1989, hundredweight of milk covered by thismarketing agreement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(b) Authorization to correct typographical errors. The undersignedhereby authorizes the Director, or Acting Director, Dairy Division, AgriculturalMarketing Service, to correct any typographical errors which may have beenmade in this marketing agreement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">andSection;1040.88 Effective date. This marketing agreement shall becomeeffective upon the execution of a counterpart hereof by the Secretary inaccordance with Section 900.14(a) of the aforesaid rules of practice andprocedure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In Witness Whereof, The contracting handlers, acting under the provisionsof the Act, for the purposes and subject to the limitations herein containedand not otherwise, have hereunto set their respective hands and seals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(Seal)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Attest</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Date</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Signature)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">By</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Name)        (Title)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Address)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-15024 Filed 6-23-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>