<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891121-0062 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-21-89.f2.A1061</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Department of the Navy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">National Environmental Policy Act; Record of Decision To EstablishMid-Atlantic Electronic Warfare Range Within Restricted Airspace R-5306Aat BT-11 Piney Island; Carteret County, NC</ITAG>Pursuant to section 102(2)(c) of the National Environmental Policy Act(NEPA) of 1969 and the Council on Environmental Quality Regulations (40CFR Parts 1500-1508), the Department of the Navy announces its decisionto modify existing BT-11 range facilities within special use airspace R-5306Ato establish the Mid-Atlantic Electronic Warfare Range (MAEWR). The Navywill install electronic threat emitters, associated platforms, and communicationsdata link equipment at Piney Island and Marine Corps Outlying Field Atlantic.The Navy will also install a Tactical Aircrew Combat Training System (TACTS)and effect other planned range improvements that are required for continuedsafe operation of the range.These actions are directly related to the Department's overall objectiveof providing specialized training to achieve and maintain the highest degreeof combat readiness for its forces, including tactical aircraft and associatedcrews.Advances in technology have allowed the development of air defense measureswhich require that pilot training include acquisition of skills to detect,identify, and evade the radars that are utilized to guide weapons whichthreaten the effectiveness and survivability of our pilots. This type oftraining is referred to as electronic warfare (EW) training. To achievereadiness, attack crews must train in hostile electromagnetic environmentssimilar to those that would be encountered during an actual combat mission.Aircraft survivability depends upon frequent training under such realisticconditions. There is presently, however, a lack of sufficient electronicwarfare simulation equipment to provide adequate aircrew training. Thisshortage is particularly acute in the mid-Atlantic region where significantnumbers of Department of the Navy aircraft are based.The MAEWR will provide a realistic means of training combat aircrews intactics and survival techniques when attacking a defended target. The threatemitters are state-of-the-art radar simulators that mimic anti-aircraftweapons. The TACTS enables an accurate real time determination of aircraftspeed and direction, as well as its yaw, pitch, and roll and will enablescoring the effectiveness of countermeasures taken by the aircraft.BT-11 was chosen for establishment of the MAEWR by use of a tiered selectionprocess. Locations throughout the East Coast of the United States wereinitially considered. Screening criteria for potential sites were dividedinto (1) ``essential'', (2) ``needed'' and (3) ``ratable'' categories.Essential criteria were existing DOD airspace with surface to ceiling restrictions,DOD controlled surface, land background, and location within 150 milesproximity to one major strike or close air support squadron home base.Needed criteria were an impact area and the ability of existing airspaceto absorb electronic warfare training without a significant detrimentaleffect on current mission. Ratable criteria were airspace size, carryingcapacity of the range, safety, support facilities, environment, and totalcost.By successive application of the essential criteria and needed criteria,seven possible sites were identified. Applying the ratable criteria, BT-11was identified as the location best meeting criteria. Environmentally,BT-11/ Piney Island is not as sensitive as two of the remaining locationswhich would have required significant loss of wetlands acreage to constructaccess roads through a pocosin and salt marsh. These two sites had otherdrawbacks. Both had insufficient airspace volume to support EW training.One presented significant safety risks and the other would be unable toaccommodate the MAEWR without degrading other types of training. At thesame time, BT-11 because of its location in Pamilico Sound is more environmentallysensitive than the four sites on high ground. Of these four, one is utilizedto the point that it could not accommodate electronic warfare trainingwithout degrading some other type of existing training. Use of this sitewould also present safety risks as it is adjacent to a high density lowaltitude airway and the airspace immediately to the north is heavily usedby civilian aircraft approaching Orlando and aircraft enroute between theTampa/Lakeland area and Melbourne. The second site has insufficient airspacevolume for aircraft maneuvering. The third has insufficient airspace volumeand an insufficient target area. The fourth has insufficient airspace volumeand would be unable to accommodate electronic warfare training withoutdegrading other training.The ``no action'' alternative, relocation alternative, and technologicalalternative were also considered.BT-11 is located on Piney Island in Carteret County, North Carolina, andconsists of 10 fixed and 3 mobile targets. It is operated by Marine CorpsAir Station, Cherry Point. Usage of BT-11 for conventional and specialweapons delivery practice has been sustained for many years. Water surfacerestricted areas assure the safety of watercraft operating in adjacentwaters. Outlying Field Atlantic is located near the town of Atlantic. Itis currently home for the Marines supporting targets at BT-9 and BT-11and is used for occasional military exercises. Both Piney Island and OutlyingField Atlantic are within Federal Aviation Administration designated specialuse airspace R-5306A. R-5306A covers 760 square miles from the surfaceto 17,999 feet. It has been the principal training area for the SecondMarine Aircraft Wing, located at Marine Corps Air Station, Cherry Point,North Carolina, for more than thirty years.BT-11 presently has a helicopter pad, sheltered boat dock, landing craft/bargeramps, scored targets, a road network, and a power distribution system.Threat emitters for the MAEWR at BT-11 will be constructed at the marshedge within the existing road network. All emitters will be on 10 foothigh tripod towers except for two that will be mounted on 60-foot hightowers. Approximately 50% of the emitters will be manned. Threat emittersat Outlying Field Atlantic will be on towers at a height sufficient forsignals to clear the treeline.The Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) was filed with the publicand EPA in June 1988. As a result of public concerns over noise and electromagneticradiation, supplements to the Draft EIS were produced and distributed inAugust and November 1988 respectively. Public information briefings wereconducted on December 13 and 14, 1988. Comments were received over a 90-dayperiod, and public hearings were held on February 1 and 2, 1989. As a resultof public comments, the MAEWR was modified to further reduce wetlands impactand limit threat emitters to existing federal property.The major issues identified concerning the installation, associated construction,and operation of the MAEWR were noise, electromagnetic radiation (EMR),economic impacts, loss of wetlands, bird strikes, access to airspace, andcumulative effects of other Department of Defense projects. The resultinganalyses and conclusions reached regarding these issues are summarizedas follows:Operation of the MAEWR will result in a four-hour-per-week increase inthe manned operation of the BT-11 range. Range use could increase 10 to15 percent. Usage would be concentrated in the vicinity of BT-11. Furtherincreases are limited by the finite number of daylight hours, weather conditions,and the number of aircraft that can effectively use the target at one time.Based on the number and types of aircraft using the range, noise wouldnot increase more than 3 dB and may decrease in some areas.Operation of the MAEWR will produce EMR. Outside the Department of theNavy property, the power densities of the EMR will in all cases be belowthe 1982 American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards. They willalso be below the lower standards presently proposed. This remains trueeven in a worstcase analysis in which beams are focused on a single pointat zero elevation. The sum of the power densities would still remain withinsafety limits. In addition, the emitters will be elevated and placed onplatforms to further reduce any possible exposure.Public concern was also expressed regarding possible danger posed by humanexposure to EMR within the exposure limits of frequency and specific absorptionrate specified by ANSI. After reviewing current literature and consultingspecialists in the field of EMR, the Department of the Navy is convincedthat there is no scientifically verified report of injury to humans exposedto EMR levels specified in ANSI guidelines. It is therefore concluded thatEMR resulting from operation of the MAEWR should not pose a threat to humans.This position comports with a letter of February 2, 1989, from the RegionIV of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (filed at FinalEIS Volume III, p. 3) which provided in pertinent part that:<ITAG tagnum="21">Based on our review of biological effects associated with activitiesnoted in the EMR Supplement, we conclude that the exposures resulting fromthe operation of the MAEWR as described should not cause significant healtheffects in the general public. This conclusion is based on the determinationthat exposures in areas accessible to the public will not equal or exceedthe 1986 NCRP (National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurement)guideline for the general public. The NCRP general population guidelineis the most restrictive U.S. guideline and limits exposure to a dose rateof 0.08 W/kg. The NCRP guideline for the general public is equal to one-fifthof the 1982 ANSI (American National Standards Institute) guideline.</ITAG>With regard to public concerns on economic effects of MAEWR implementation,there are too many factors to reliably determine whether aircraft noiseor the existence of the MAEWR would have a ``chilling effect'' (as alludedby some commentors) on the economic growth in areas underlying R-5306A.There is one report which found that aircraft noise around an urban airportresulted in a small decrease in property values. Military aircraft havebeen flying in R-5306A since the 1940s. There has been economic growthin the area; however, the effect of noise on that growth cannot be quantified.Complicating analysis of noise as it may affect the area underlying R-5306Aare other major factors which are believed to inhibit economic growth,such as expansive wetlands, unsuitable soil for septic systems, lack ofwastewater treatment plants, and location within the 100-year flood plain.The MAEWR has been designed to minimize destruction of wetlands. Constructionand operation of the MAEWR and other range improvements will result inthe destruction of about 1.7 acres of wetlands. This loss will be mitigatedby replacement of wetlands, yielding a zero net loss.Songbirds and wintering waterfowl, waterbirds, and raptors create a riskof bird strikes within R-5306A. The most active period of feeding for thesebirds is the dawn and dusk periods at altitudes below 500 feet. The birdpopulation on Piney Island, however, is relatively small. Bird strikesby aircraft using R-5306A are rare and have not resulted in an accident.The Department of the Navy will continue to survey bird strikes at BT-11for any increase in order to protect the public, crews, and aircraft.The Marine Corps desires additional information on the specific effectsof aircraft noise on migratory birds. To help provide this information,the Marine Corps will cooperate with the United States Fish and WildlifeService and provide funding and other support to undertake a study whichwill assess the effects of aircraft noise on migratory waterfowl in R-5306A.This study is being pursued to provide information that will benefit futureplanning and operations on the Range. The Marine Corps will evaluate thestudy findings and, as appropriate, modify its operations consistent withnational defense needs.Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point, which controls use of R-5306A, hasletters of agreement with the North Carolina Departments of Agricultureand Forestry, the North Carolina Division of Fisheries, various Virginiaand North Carolina companies, crop dusters, and the Bayboro/Pamlico CountyAirport lessee. These agreements permit use of R-5306A airspace even whenthe area is in use by the military. Law enforcement agencies also haveaccess to the airspace.In response to public requests, the Final EIS provided expanded documentationon the cumulative effects on the North Carolina coastal region broughtabout by the MAEWR and other military projects. The regionally significantcumulative socio-economic, safety, and natural environment impacts areidentified in the final EIS. They include the following potential negativeeffectives:_Socio-economic impacts from noise and perceived loss of airspace,_Safety impact from potential air disasters arising from use of existingand proposed special use airspace and military training routes, and _Natural environmental impacts from disruption of migratory waterfowl feedingand resting and from the loss of wetlands.The following potential positive regional cumulative effects were identified:_Socio-economic impact from the generation of jobs,_Safety impacts from charting special use airspace or military trainingroutes and from controlling aircraft using that airspace, and_Natural environment impacts from protection of endangered species andpreservation and management of their habitat.All practical means of mitigating impacts of the proposal on environment,including replacement of wetlands, have been included in project developmentand will be included in design and construction.In addition to comments on the Draft EIS, the Department of the Navy receivedcomments after publication of the Final EIS. Besides individual comments,agency and organization comments were provided by the Albemarle Commission,the Pamlico County Health Department, the North Carolina Department ofJustice, Home on the Range, Inc., the United States Environmental ProtectionAgency, Carteret County Crossroads, and the Department of Administrationof the North Carolina State Clearinghouse.The Department of the Navy has responded to each party making commentson the Final EIS. Major issues raised in comments on the Final EIS andconnected to implementation of the MAEWR and responses thereto may be summarizedas follows:A. <T3>Failure to include information and to respond to comments. </T3>Councilon Environmental Quality regulations implementing NEPA require federalagencies to assess and consider comments. Responses to comments may include,<T3>inter alia, </T3>modifying alternatives, supplementing or modifyinganalyses, making factual corrections, or explaining why no further responseis warranted. The regulations clearly do not require individual discussionof every comment received. The written comment of the North Carolina Departmentof Justice (NCDOJ) was inadvertently omitted from the Final EIS, as werecertain other pages of that document. Those comments and pages were circulatedby separate correspondence dated August 23, 1989. The circulation was madeto all those who had received the Final EIS. The Final EIS did not containwritten responses to the NCDOJ written comments or to oral comments madeduring public hearings. Although all comments were considered, many werefound to parallel those of other state and federal agencies, citizen groups,and individuals. Responses to duplicative comments were considered unnecessary.Nothing in the NCDOJ written comments or the public hearing comments werefound to contain significant new circumstances or information relevantto environmental concerns and bearing on the proposed action or its impacts.Written responses were made to the NCDOJ on September 8 and 26, 1989.B. <T3>Failure to address mitigation for prior actions and existing operations.</T3>Several commentors suggested a requirement to mitigate for on-goingoperations and for wetland losses from actions occurring in the early 1970's.A number of measures to reduce the noise effects of existing operationson areas underlying R-5306A were also suggested. These effects are nota result of the MAEWR proposal; they occurred or will continue whetheror not the MAEWR is implemented. As required, the MAEWR Final EIS providesmitigation for reducing the impacts that will result from that proposal.Several of the suggested measures were in effect prior to the release ofthe MAEWR Final EIS, e.g., removal of practice ordnance from target areason BT-11, establishment of minimum operating altitudes, or requirementto avoid specific areas.C. <T3>Failure to acknowledge interrelationship of Cherry I and Core MilitaryOperating Area (MOA) proposals to the MAEWR.</T3> The Department of Navyconsistently has stated that the MAEWA proposal is separate from and independentof <T3>all</T3> other proposals in North Carolina. The purpose of the MAEWRis to provide a realistic means to help aircrews acquire skill in detecting,identifying, and defending against threats from weapons systems that wouldbe used against them in combat. The Core MOA is proposed to help pilotsacquire skills in locating and attacking a land target from a seaward locationwhile operating at low altitudes and speeds in excess of 250 knots. TheCherry I MOA is proposed to allow pilots to acquire skills in low altitudesubsonic air-to-air combat. A land background is required for such trainingbecause during these operations a pilot relies on visual cues (vice hisinstruments) to safely fly the aircraft. The readily discernible land/skyhorizon, depth perception, and geographic points of reference providedby a land background are needed to learn this skill. If the MAEWR proposalis not approved the needs for both the Cherry I and Core MOA's would stillexist. The converse is equally true. D. <T3>Failure to adequately address the cumulative impacts of the MAEWR.</T3>The cumulative impacts analysis examined effects from implementation of9 military proposals and one reasonably foreseeable military action, togetherwith current effects from existing facilities and training areas, to determinethe extent of regional cumulative impacts. Scoping comments were providedby the State of North Carolina and citizens, and these comments were includedin the analysis where valid and reliable data were available. Based oncomments on the Draft EIS, the cumulative impacts analysis was expandedto provide improved evaluation of the impacts of the MAEWR proposal. Themethodology and bases for conclusions were defined. The analysis followedthe guidance contained in <T3>Fritiofson </T3>v.<T3> Alexander</T3> 772F.2d 1225 (5th Cir 1985). The analysis examineddata and trends to draw general conclusions on socio-economic impacts,safety, and the natural environment. This analysis utilized the available,reliable data. Substantial amounts of data were gathered and evaluatedin an attempt to make the cumulative impacts analysis as detailed as reasonablypossible. To the extent practicable, and to an extent assuring that furtherstudy would not yield different conclusions, the cumulative impacts analysisidentifies real and potential regional impacts. E. <T3>Failure to circulate the cumulative impacts analysis for comment. </T3>Thequality of cumulative impacts analysis in the Draft EIS improved considerablyin the Final EIS. Council on Environmental Quality regulations expresslyallow an agency to supplement, improve, or modify its EIS analysis. Asthe expanded cumulative impacts analysis did not involve any significantnew circumstances or information relevant to environmental concerns andbearing on the MAEWR or its impacts, it was not circulated for commentsas a supplement to the Draft EIS. The cumulative impacts analysis was circulatedupon publication of the Final EIS, and several comments were received andresponded to as indicated above. The comments provided on the Final EISand responses thereto have been considered in reaching the decision toproceed with the MAEWR. F. <T3>Failure to address uncertainty of the Navy's jurisdiction within R-5306Aover airspace between the surface and 1,200 feet.</T3> Restricted airspacefrom the surface to varying altitudes has existed in the vacinity of PineyIsland/BT-11 for more than forty years. The Marine Corps is authorizedby the Federal Aviation Administration to exercise control from the surfaceto 17,999 feet within R-5306A. The areas within R-5306A were the MAEWRwould be constructed and where emitters would be located are owned by theNavy. These facts meet the selection criteria. The Federal Aviation Administrationhas confirmed the Marine Corps' continued use of airspace from the surfaceto 1,200 feet altitude within R-5603A. It is fully expected that militaryoperations which have been conducted successfully in the past in R-5306Awill continue in a manner compatible with limited civilian access.G. <T3>Failure to include or address incomplete or unavailable information,particularly with regard to noise and electromagnetic radiation. </T3>Someagency comments demanded additional information either be extracted fromexisting or partially existing data bases or that new research be conducted.In most instances the data would add little to the description of the affectedenvironment or consequences of the MAEWR proposal. Of a virtually infiniteamount of information that could be amassed, there exists a point at whichfurther information becomes insignificant, irrelevant, or redundant. Requirementfor a detailed statement on the environmental impacts of a proposed majorfederal action arises from the purpose of ensuring that the decision-makerunderstands the environmental consequences of the action and can, thereby,reach a decision that minimizes adverse impacts. The Final EIS containssufficient information to permit fulfillment of NEPA's purposes.The Department of the Navy has used nationally accepted methodology tomeasure noise impacts. At the request of the State and others, single eventsound exposure levels were included in the Final EIS. To the extent available,information about the effects of aircraft noise on humans and animals hasbeen presented. Data on the specific effects of aircraft noise on waterfowland wildlife is limited. The extensive Federal and state waterfowl areasand waterfowl habitat within R-5306A prompt the Marine Corps to cooperatewith the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to develop and implementa study on the effects of aircraft noise on migratory waterfowl.Analysis of EMR relies on scientific-based consensus. EMR was addressedin a supplement to the Draft EIS, at public information meetings, and ata meeting with state representatives hosted by the United States EnvironmentalProtection Agency at Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. All sidesof the EMR issue were presented.The decision to proceed with the MAEWR was reached after deliberating onthe appropriate balance to be struck between furthering the national securityof the United States by developing an acutely needed electronic warfarerange with the potentially regionally significant incremental socio-economic,safety, and environmental concerns associated with that project. Comparingthe de minimus impacts (both local and regional) identified in the MAEWRenvironmental documentation with the benefit to be gained by training militarypilots how to survive in electronic warfare combat situations, the constructionand operation of the MAEWR is determined to be in the best interest ofthe United States. Since the Department of the Navy (DON) does not havea program to oversee the development and utilization of military trainingfacilities (to include military special use airspace) in, above, and nearcoastal North Carolina, the decision to proceed with a cumulative impactsanalysis as part of the MAEWR Final EIS voice the promulgation of a programmaticEIS for all projects and actions in the region is appropriate.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: November 16, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Sandra M. Kay,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Department of the Navy, Alternate Federal Register Liaison Officer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-27317 Filed 11-20-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3810-AE-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>