<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89808-0087 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-08-89.f2.A1086</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7931] et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Exemptions; Westchester Teamsters Pension Fund, et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested person are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Westchester Teamsters Pension Fund (the Plan) Located in Elmsford,New York</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7931]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1, (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a) and 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to (1) the proposedpurchase by the Plan from Local 456 Holding Corp. (the Corp.), a corporationowned by members of Teamsters and Chauffeurs Local 456 (the Local), ofapproximately three acres of undeveloped land (the Land), provided thepurchase price is not more than the fair market value of the Land on thedate of the purchase, and (2) the extension of credit by the Corp. to thePlan for up to 90 days after the closing date of the purchase pursuantto a non-interest bearing note in the amount of half of the purchase price,provided the terms of the transaction are at least as favorable to thePlan as those the Plan could obtain in a similar transaction with an unrelatedparty.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a multiemployer defined-benefit pension plan with approximately1700 active and 800 retired participants and total assets of approximately$64 million as of December 31, 1988. The Plan was established and has operatedunder a series of collective bargaining agreements negotiated between theLocal, which is affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters,Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and Helpers of America, and the Construction IndustyCouncil together with its component associations (the Association). TheAssociation is composed primarily of road and heavy construction companieslocated and operating in Westchester and Putnam Counties, New York. Employeesof other companies having collective bargaining agreements with the Localrequiring contributions to the Plan are also covered by the Plan. The Localrepresents primarily drivers, warehousemen, and servicemen of contributingemployers.2. The Plan has eight trustees: four were appointed by the Local; three,by the Association; and one, by the Grand Union Company, a contributingemployer. The Plan's assets are under the management of a professionalmoney manager and the Connecticut General Life Insurance Company (CIGNA).The Plan's assets are invested in cash, corporate and government bonds,preferred and common stock of publicly held corporations, and a CIGNA groupannuity contract providing a guaranteed interest rate and covering pensionerswho participated in the Plan before it became self insured. The Plan hasno real estate investment assets at the present time. It is representedthat the Plan trustees have extensive background in real estate developmentin Westchester and Putnam Counties, New York, that they have determinedthat the Plan should diversify its assets and have, accordingly, authorizedthe investment of no more than 10% of the Plan's assets in real estatedevelopment.3. The Corp. is a non-profit New York corporation owned by the membersof the Local. It serves as the Local's property holding entity and is comprisedof the members of the Local. Corp. officers are the same Local officerselected by the Local membership. The stock of the Corp. has no par valueand is not issued. The membership of the Local manifests its control ofthe Corp. through the election of Corp. officers.4. The firm of Howard Lieberman, Consulting Engineer, has agreed to serveas an independent fiduciary to the Plan with respect to the proposed transaction.Mr. Howard S. Lieberman (Mr. Lieberman) is a licensed professional engineeerin the States of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Massachusetts, andthe District of Columbia. He represents that he has been engaged in thebusiness of engineering since 1954, including, since 1959, private practicein civil and structural engineering with emphasis on matters relating todesign and construction of buildings and subdivision improvements (roads,sewers, septic systems, storm drains, individual water systems, extensionof public water supply) including preparation of design drawings, specifications,and budgets for new construction, alterations and additions, constructionsupervision, review of bids and payment requests, and building and constructioninspections. He was named Engineer of the Year in 1987 by the NationalSociety of Professional Engineers, and he served as president of the WestchesterCounty chapter of that Society from 1984-5.Mr. Lieberman states that he and his firm are not involved at present andhave not been involved in the past with any individual or organizationthat is a party in interest to the Plan, including but not limited to theCorp., the Local, the Association, or any employer of Plan participantsexcept for six employers (the Six Employers), namely, Conlin Supply Company,Village of Dobbs Ferry, Nelstad Materials, Village of Scarsdale, VernonHills Landscaping, and Yonkers Municipal Housing Authority. The applicantrepresents that three of the Six Employers, namely_Village of Dobbs Ferry,Village of Scarsdale, and Yonkers Municipal Housing Authority (collectively,the Municipal Employers), are municipal employers which are not partiesin interest with respect to the Plan and that Mr. Lieberman's representationto the contrary is incorrect. The applicant explains that the MunicipalEmployers do employ members of the Local but that these members do notparticipate in the Plan; accordingly, the Municipal Employers do not contributeto the Plan but maintain their own employee pension plans. The other threeof the Six Employers, namely_Conlin Supply Company, Nelstead MaterialsCorporation, and Vernon Hills Landscaping, contributed $4,353.60, $40,297.73,and $4,790.40, respectively, to the Plan for 1988, representing .1277%,1.1823%, and .1405%, respectively, of the $3,408,386.94 contributed tothe Plan by all employers of Plan participants for 1988. The applicantrepresents that none of the Six Employers have any interest in purchasingor leasing any of the buildings or building space to be constructed onthe Land (see item 8, below).5. The Land, a three-acre parcel of unimproved land, is located behindthe Local building at 160 S. Central Avenue, Elmsford, New York, on Route9A and is zoned for commercial use. The Plan trustees have commissionedan appraisal of the Land by the Albert Appraisal Company Inc., and independentcompany with no relationship to the Plan or any party in interest to thePlan, according to the applicant. The appraisers, Eugene Albert, MAI, SREA,CMI, and William Ceccolini, Staff Appraiser, certify that they have nopresent or prospective interest in the Land and no personal interest orbias with respect to the parties involved, and that their analyses, opinions,and conclusions regarding the appraisal of the Land were developed andreported in conformity with the requirements of the Code of ProfessionalEthics and the Standards of Professional Practice of the American Instituteof Real Estate Appraisers. Mr. Albert, a member of said Institute, hasover 35 years experience as a real estate analyst, appraiser, and consultantand, from 1972-82, served as Adjunct Associate Professor of Real Estateat Pace University. Mr. Ceccolini, a licensed real estate broker in NewYork State, a member of the New York State Society of Real Estate Appraisers,and a candidate for membership in the American Institute of Real EstateAppraisers, has over 15 years experience in the real estate business, includingcommercial real estate appraising in Westchester County, New York.6. The above-mentioned appraisal concludes that the market value of theland was $600,000 as of September 1, 1988, and states that even thoughthere is an oversupply of available office space in Westchester County,from an investor's standpoint the Land could either be sold or used toconstruct additional office rental space. The appraised value of the Landis less than 1% of the Plan's total assets.7. The Plan trustees wish to purchase the Land from the Corp. for a pricenot to exceed its fair market value as of the purchase date, said valueto be determined by Mr. Lieberman. The Plan will pay the purchase pricein cash: half on the closing date of the purchase and half pursuant toa non-interest bearing note payable to the Corp. within 90 days after theclosing date. The Corp. will pay all closing costs and fees related tothe purchase and will insure a full fee simple title to the Plan as freeand clear of encumbrances.8. Subsequent to the purchase, the Plan trustees plan to develop a seriesof three separate, but connecting, commercial buildings of approximately20,000 square feet, each consisting of one floor of warehousing space andthree above floors of commercial office space. The applicant states thatdevelopment plans have not been finalized and will be subject to competitivebidding. Similarly, final plans have not been made regarding rental andsale of the buildings to be constructed. The applicant states that partiesin interest to the Plan will not be excluded either from bidding on thedevelopment or from renting and purchasing the buildings to be constructed.subject to competitive pricing.\1\<NOTE/> However, the applicant represents that the Local has no interestin purchasing or leasing any of the proposed buildings or building spaceas the Local already maintains an office building. Similarly, as mentionedabove (see item 4), none of the Six Employers has any interest in purchasingor leasing any of such buildings or building space.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The proposed exemption provides no relief either for thedevelopment of the Land by any party in interest with respect to the Planor for the rental or sale of the buildings to be constructed to any partyin interest with respect to the Plan. Further, the Department is expressingno opinion herein as to the applicability of the exemptions provided undereither section 408(b)(2) of the Act and section 4975(d)(2) of the Codeto such development, or under Prohibited Transaction Exemptions 76-1 and77-10 to such rental or sale. Similarly, the Department is expressing noopinion herein as to whether or not the proposed development of the Landor the proposed rental or sale of the buildings to be constructed thereonsatisfies the fiduciary duties provided under section 404 of the Act.9. Mr. Lieberman represents that he has reviewed the above-mentioned appraisalby the Albert Appraisal Company, that he has visited the Land, and thathe believes said appraisal was carefully prepared and is based on generallyaccepted procedures. He notes that public utilities, including water, sewer,gas, and electric are readily available to the Land, that there are noindications of any difficult or unusual drainage problems, and that theLand is located well above the elevation of the Saw Mill River and is notwithin the flood hazard area, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housingand Urban Development maps. Mr. Lieberman opines that the highest and bestuse of the Land is as the site of an office building. He advises that thezoning regulations of the Village of Elmsford permit construction of a65,000 square foot building on a three-acre site, resulting in a land valueof $9.25 per square foot of building floor area.10. Mr. Lieberman's professional opinion is that the land should be developedutilizing three buildings each containing four stories for a total of approximately65,000 square feet. He suggests that the buildings be constructed one ata time so that the additional office space can be absorbed into the marketand so as to minimize the disturbance and inconvenience at the site. Heestimates the construction cost of this development at $6 million, includingapproximately $2.5 million for the first building and utilities and sitework serving all three buildings. Mr. Lieberman states further that basedon his review of the above-mentioned appraisal, inspection of the Land,and familiarity with current conditions in Westchester County, it is hisprofessional opinion that the construction of three additional office buildingson the Land is viable and would be profitable for the owner.11. For the reasons stated in the two preceding paragraphs, Mr. Liebermanstates that he believes that the proposed transaction is in the best interestsof the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries since it will lead toa broadening of the Plan's investment base in real estate, which has provenvery successul in Westchester County, New York. He represents that theterms of the proposed transaction are no different than those of similartransactions in Westchester County between unrelated parties.2. Mr. Lieberman explains that before forming his opinion regarding theproposed transaction, he examined the Plan's overall investment portfolio,showing that the Plan's self-insured assets are wholly invested in cash,fixed income investments, and other securities. In undertaking this examination,he examined the Plan's annual report (Form 5500) for the year ending December31, 1987, the Plan's asset statement for the year ending December 31, 1988,and the Plan's accountant's preliminary report of the Plan's financialstatements for the year ending December 31, 1988. Mr. Lieberman statesthat he has reviewed the Plan's liquidity reports, examined the diversificationof the Plan's assets in light of the proposed transaction, and has determinedthat the proposed transaction complies with the Plan's investment objectivesand policies to diversify Plan investments so that up to 10% of the Plan'stotal assets are invested in real estate development.13. Mr. Lieberman agrees to monitor the proposed transaction throughoutits duration on behalf of the Plan and to take all appropriate actionsnecessary to safeguard the interests of the Plan and its participants andbeneficiaries. The applicant has submitted the Plan trustees' agreementnaming Mr. Lieberman as a fiduciary of the Plan and expressly empoweringhim to direct them regarding the proposed transaction, provided that suchdirections are consistent with the terms of the Plan and the conditionsof the Act. Mr. Lieberman states that although he has limited experiencewith the Act, he has consulted with counsel experienced with the Act regardingthe duties, responsibilities, and liability imposed by the Act on planfiduciaries and that he understands and acknowledges such duties, responsibilities,and liabilities in acting as a fiduciary with respect to the Plan.14. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionsatisfies the exemption criteria set forth in section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) An indepenent fiduciary to the Plan, Mr. Lieberman, has determinedthat the proposed transaction is in the best interests of the Plan andits participants and beneficiaries; (b) said independent fiduciary willmonitor the proposed transaction on behalf of the Plan and will take allappropriate actions necessary to safeguard the interests of the Plan andits participants and beneficiaries; (c) the purchase price will not exceedthe Land's fair market value as of the purchase date, said value to bedetermined by Mr. Lieberman, the independent fiduciary; (d) Mr. Liebermanhas determined that the terms of the proposed transaction are no differentthan those of similar transactions in Westchester County between unrelatedparties; and (e) the proposed transaction will involve less than one percentof the Plan's total assets as of December 31, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact: </T2>Mrs. Miriam Freund, of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Jen Productions, Inc. Restated Money Purchase Pension Plan and TrustAgreement (the Plan) Located in Nashville, Tennessee</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7943]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of theCode, shall not apply to the proposed sale by the Plan of unimproved realproperty (Lot 45) to Edward James Norman (Mr. Norman) and Kimberly Norman(collectively, the Normans), disqualified persons with respect to the Plan,provided that the Plan receives the greater of $165,000 or the fair marketvalue at the time of the sale.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Because Mr. Norman is the only participant in the Planand the employer is wholly owned by Mr. Norman, there is no jurisdictionunder Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, thereis jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975 of theCode.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan, established on September 1, 1979, is a restated money purchaseplan. The Plan's sole participant is Mr. Norman. As of August 31, 1988,the Plan had $333,598 in assets. The current Trustees of the Plan are theNormans (the Trustees). The sponsor of the Plan is Jen Productions, Inc.,a California corporation engaged in the business of producing records.Lot 45 is a vacant unimproved property measuring one acre located in Northumberland,Davidson County, Nashville, Tennessee. It was acquired by the Plan on January9, 1987 for $155,000 for investment purposes from Northumberland RealtyCo., an unrelated party. Since its acquisition by the Plan, Lot 45 hasremained unimproved and vacant and it has not produced any income. At thetime of the purchase, it was anticipated that Lot 45 could be sold at afuture date for a substantial profit. The applicant represents that thearea is developing very slowly with no anticipation of appreciation inthe value of property for some time. The Trustees are thus seeking to investPlan's assets in instruments with a higher return.2. The applicant proposes to sell Lot 45 to the Normans. An appraisal,dated April 17, 1989, was prepared by William R. Manier III, an independentand qualified appraiser with the William R. Manier III and Associates,real estate appraisers and consultants (the Appraisal). The Appraisal usesthe direct sales comparison approach and esitmates the value of the Lot45 to be $165,000. Also, the applicant represents that the Normans owna lot that is adjacent to Lot 45. An update to the Appraisal was done byJames F. Hagan, an appraiser with William R. Manier III and Associates(the Hagan update). The Hagan update concludes that Mr. Norman's ownershipof an adjacent Lot 48 does not merit a premium on the fair market valueof Lot 45. The Hagan update states that the current estimate of $165,000remains the fair market value for Lot 45.3. The applicant represents that the transaction will be a one-time cashsale. Furthermore, the Plan will bear no costs associated with the sale.The transaction will enable the Plan to acquire liquidity for reinvestment.The fair market value of Lot 45 has been determined by a qualified, independentappraiser. The applicant will pay the greater of $165,000 or the fair marketvalue at the time of the sale.4. In summary, the applicant represents that the transaction satisfiesthe statutory criteria of section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because:(A) The proposed sale will be a one-time cash transaction;(B) The price paid to the Plan will be $165,000 or the fair market valueat the time of the sale, whichever is greater;(C) The Plan will pay no costs associated with the sale;(D) The sale will provide the Plan with more liquidity for reinvestment;and(E) Mr. Norman is the sole participant of the Plan to be affected by thetransaction, and he desires that the transaction be consummated.Notice to interested persons: Because Mr. Norman is the sole participantin the Plan, it has been determined that there is no need to distributethe notice of proposed exemption to interested persons. Comments and requestsfor a hearing are done 30 days from the date of publication of this noticein the <T4>Federal Register.</T4></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact:</T2> Ekaterina A. Uzlyan at (202)523-8194 of the Department. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Jon A. Harding, D.M.D., P.S., Employees' Amended and Restated MoneyPurchase Pension Plan and Trust (the Plan) Located in Spokane, Washington</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Exemption Application No. D-8030]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedsale for cash by the Plan of certain real property (the Real Property)to Helen M. Harding (Mrs. Harding), a party in interest with respect tothe Plan, provided that the price paid be no less than the fair marketvalue of the Real Property on the date of sale, as established by an independentand qualified appraiser of real estate.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a money purchase pension plan sponsored by Jon A. Harding,D.M.D., P.S., which is engaged in the practice of dental medicine in Spokane,Washington. The trustee and administrator of the Plan is Jon A. Harding,D.M.D. (Dr. Harding). As of April 11, 1989 the Plan had five participants.As of October 31, 1988, the Plan had assets of $298,781.2. In 1981 the Plan acquired the Real Property from unrelated parties for$17,500. The Real Property is a parcel of 1.8 acres of unimproved landon Alberta Lane in Spokane, Washington. The Plan acquired the Real Propertyin the hope of realizing an appreciation in the value of the Real Property.3. Since 1981 the Real Property has remained unimproved. The Plan derivesno current benefit from its ownership of the Real Property and moreovermust pay property taxes on the Real Property. The applicant representsthat the Spokane real estate market is depressed and that it would be difficultfor the Plan to sell the Real Property at its appraised value in the nearfuture.4. On March 20, 1989, Kim Hemphill, ASREA, of Appraisals Unlimited, a realestate appraisal firm in Spokane, Washington, a qualified and independentappraiser, stated that the fair market value of the Real Property was $25,000.5. Accordingly, the Plan proposes to sell the Real Property for cash atits fair market value, as established by a qualified and independent realestate appraiser, to Mrs. Harding, Dr. Harding's former wife, a party ininterest with respect to the Plan.\3\<NOTE/> The Plan will not incur any fees, taxes or transfer costsin connection with the sale of the Real Property. The applicant representsthat the proposed sale of the Real Property to Mrs. Harding is unrelatedto the divorce settlement between Dr. and Mrs. Harding.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The applicant represents that Mrs. Harding is a partyin interest to the plan pursuant to section 3(14)(I) of the Act.6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willmeet the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) TheReal Property will be sold at its fair market value as of the date of saleas established by an independent and qualified appraiser; (b) the proposedsale represents a one-time transaction for cash, which can be readily verified;(c) the proposed sale will not involve the payment by the Plan of any fees,taxes or transfer costs; (d) the proposed sale will enable the Plan torealize a cash purchase price in the full amount of the current appraisedvalue of the Real Property; and (e) the Plan trustee has determined thatthe proposed transaction would be in the best interests and protectiveof the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact:</T2> Joseph L. Roberts III of theDepartment, telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">A.C. Products Co. Defined Benefit Pension Plan (the Plan) Locatedin Wooster, Ohio</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-8090]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A)through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposed cash sale by thePlan of a parcel of improved real property (the Property) to Wayne Mullet(Mr. Mullet), a party in interest with respect to the Plan; provided thatthe terms of the sale are not less favorable to the Plan than similar termsnegotiated at arm's length between unrelated third parties; and providedfurther that the sales price is not less than the fair market value ofthe Property on the date of the sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined benefit pension plan with eighteen (18) participants,as of June 1, 1989, the date the application was filed. The assets of thePlan totaled approximately $705,265 on October 31, 1988. It is representedthat notice of intent to terminate the Plan was distributed to each participantof the Plan on November 10, 1988, and the Plan was terminated on January9, 1989. The applications for approval of the termination and the proposeddistribution of assets are currently being assembled for submission tothe Internal Revenue Service and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.2. Mr. Mullet serves as the trustee and administrator of the Plan and wasthe president of A.C. Products Co. (the Employer), the sponsor of the Plan.It is represented that Mr. Mullet owned 100 percent of the Employer eitherdirectly or through family attribution. On November 4, 1988, the Employerwas liquidated through a sale of assets.3. The Plan purchased the Property June 15, 1987, for $145,000 from VernonM. and Ada Miller, unrelated parties with respect to the Plan. During thePlan's ownership the Property was leased to Levi D.L. Miller, also an unrelatedparty, for a rental amount of $4,000 annually. It is represented that rentfor similar real estate in the same geographic area ranges from $40 to$60 per acre per year. The Property constitutes approximately 21 percentof the assets of the Plan.4. The Property consists of an 82.82-acre farm, located at 5798 South ApplecreekRoad, Applecreek, East Union Township, Wayne County, Ohio. It is representedthat Wayne County is predominately agricultural with many farms. The Propertyis described as irregular in shape and having frontage on the northeasterncorner of Applecreek and Buss Roads. The Property includes, among otherthings, a farm house, consisting of 2,848 square feet and containing fivebedrooms and two baths.5. Mr. Mullet proposed to purchase the Property for the greater of $153,000or the fair market value of the Property, as appraised by a qualified independentappraiser on the date of the sale. It is represented that the Plan willpay no expenses associated with the sale and that Mr. Mullet will pay fordeed preparation, title expenses, auditors conveyance fee, recording ofthe deed, and any other expenses. Mr. Mullet states that neither the incomegenerated from the Property as a working farm nor the potential appreciationin value are sufficient to make the Property a suitable investment forthe Plan. In addition, Mr. Mullet represents that maintenance, costs, andtaxes are depleting the assets of the Plan. By his purchasing the Propertyfor cash, Mr. Mullet intends for the Plan to: (1) Avoid delay in locatinga qualified buyer in the Wayne County area which has a slow sales activity;(2) avoid delay inherent in consummation of a sale contract which is conditionedon the buyer's securing financing; and (3) avoid unnecessary sales commissionsand expenses. Further, Mr. Mullet argues that a cash sale will create amarket for a non-liquid asset, increase proceeds available for distributionto all participants, and expedite the winding up of the Plan's affairs.6. William J. Lemmon (Mr. W.J. Lemmon), MAI, with the assistance of ScottW. Lemmon (Mr. S.W. Lemmon), of William J. Lemmon and Associates, Inc.,located in North Canton, Ohio, appraised the Property, as of April 13,1989. Mr. W.J. Lemmon valued the 82.82 acres at $1,850 per acre for a totalof $153,000. Mr. W.J. Lemmon did not employ the cost approach in reachingthis valuation due to the age of the buildings on the Property and thedifficulty in measuring the accrued depreciation. Mr. W.J. Lemmon representsthat he is independent of any personal association or bias with respectto the parties involved and has no present or prospective interest in theProperty. Mr. W.J. Lemmon's qualifications include 27 years experiencein appraising residential, commercial, industrial, farm, and special purposeproperties throughout Ohio and seven (7) other states. Mr. W.J. Lemmonis a member of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers, the Societyof Real Estate Appraisers and the National Association of Realtors. Mr.S.W. Lemmon has two (2) years of experience appraising residential properties,has successfully completed two real estate appraisers courses, and is acandidate for RM designation from the American Institute of Real EstateAppraisers. 7. In summary, Mr. Mullett represents that the proposed transaction meetsthe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) The sale of the Property will be a one time transaction forcash; (b) the Plan will incur no expenses on the sale; (c) the sales priceis based on the fair market appraisal prepared by a qualified independentappraiser; and (d) participants will receive timely distribution of theirbenefits from the cash proceeds of the sale of the Property. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact: </T2>Angelena C. Le Blanc of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883 (This is not a toll-free number). <ITAG tagnum="84">General Information </ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following: (1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries; (2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and (3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction. (4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption. <ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 3rd day of August 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Ivan Strasfeld, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Exemption Determinations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-18523 Filed 8-7-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>