<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89404-0122 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-04-89.f2.A1121</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[OPTS-211023; FRL-3524-2] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Asbestos; Denial of Citizens' Petition </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Denial of citizens' petition. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>On November 8, 1988, the Service Employees InternationalUnion (SEIU) petitioned EPA under section 21 of the Toxic Substances ControlAct (TSCA), 15 U.S.C. 2620, to initiate a rulemaking proceeding, undersection 6 of TSCA, 15 U.S.C. 2605, concerning friable asbestos-containingmaterials in non-school public and commercial buildings. This notice announcesEPA's denial of SEIU's petition.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Michael M. Stahl, Director, TSCAAssistance Office (TS-799), Office of Toxic Substances, Room EB-44, 401M Street SW., Washington, DC 20460, (202) 554-1404, TDD: (202) 554-0551.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background </ITAG>On November 8, 1988, SEIU petitioned EPA, under section 21 of TSCA, toinitiate a proceeding to issue a rule to control friable asbestos-containingmaterials (ACM) in public and commercial buildings other than schools.Specifically, SEIU requests that EPA initiate a rulemaking, under TSCAsection 6, to: 1. Require adequate inspection for, and identification of ACM and communicationof this knowledge to those at risk (petition pages 3 and 14). 2. Establish procedures to be followed where actual or potential hazardis present (petition pages 3 and 14). 3. Establish rules to ensure that the most beneficial and least harmfulactions are taken during the time that EPA considers it necessary to developthe national infrastructure to manage asbestos problems (petition pages3 and 10 through 13). The petition also requests action on asbestos in school buildings to theextent that they are not covered by EPA rules. However, the petition doesnot discuss any gaps SEIU perceives in EPA's school rules, nor does thepetition set forth any facts which SEIU claims establish that it is necessaryto issue a rule affecting schools. Accordingly, EPA does not regard thepetition as applying to schools. This is the second TSCA section 21 petition filed by SEIU requesting Federalregulation of asbestos in buildings. In November 1983, SEIU filed its firstpetition, which requested EPA to issue rules affecting asbestos in schoolsand in public and commercial buildings and to issue rules to protect employeesperforming abatement activities. EPA responded to the first petition byissuing notices in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on March 7, 1984 (49 FR 8450), and June 14, 1984(49 FR 24552). In response to SEIU's first petition, EPA issued final rules to protectcertain State and local government employees engaged in asbestos abatement.<T3>See </T3>40 CFR Part 763, Subpart G. With respect to the other rulesrequested in the petition, EPA stated that it granted the petition, initiateda proceeding by holding hearings to decide on its next course of action,and ultimately decided not to proceed to a proposed rule. SEIU filed suitagainst EPA in the United States District Court for the District of Columbiato compel EPA to propose these other rules. After several years of litigation, the court, in <T3>SEIU </T3>v. <T3>Thomas, </T3>No. 84-2790 (D.D.C.) (Memorandum Opinion, October 24,1986), ordered EPA to propose rules requested by SEIU under TSCA section6 for schools and other buildings. The court reasoned that EPA was obligatedto propose rules under TSCA section 6 because EPA had originally statedthat it granted SEIU's petition. The court did not reach the issue of whetherFederal rules were needed to protect against asbestos risk in buildings.At approximately the same time as the court issued its order, Congressenacted the Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act (AHERA) of 1986, whichrequired EPA to issue rules for the inspection and management of asbestosin schools and required EPA to submit a study to Congress which would assessthe risks of asbestos in other public and commercial buildings and recommendwhether rules were appropriate for those buildings. AHERA created some inconsistencies with the court order. While EPA wasable to comply with the court's order affecting schools by meeting theAHERA mandate, AHERA created a conflict with the court's order as it appliedto non-school public and commercial buildings. The order required proposedrules; AHERA only mandated a study. In deference to Congress, on July 17,1987, the court vacated its order regarding the other buildings. EPA complied with both AHERA and the District Court order by promulgatingrules affecting asbestos in schools. <T3>See </T3>52 FR 41826 (October 30, 1987). EPA successfully defendedthese rules against a challenge in the United States Court of Appeals forthe District of Columbia Circuit. <T3>See Safe Buildings Alliance </T3>v. <T3>EPA </T3>846 F.2d 79 (D.C. Cir. 1988). The Supreme Court declined toreview the Court of Appeals decision. In February 1988, EPA submitted to Congress its study on public and commercialbuildings. SEIU, thereupon, petitioned the District Court to clarify orreconsider its June 1987 order vacating the requirement for EPA to proposerules on public and commercial buildings. Before the court could hear theparties on this motion, EPA and SEIU settled the District Court litigationwith regard to public and commercial buildings. The U.S. Government paidSEIU approximately $220,000 in attorneys' fees, and SEIU agreed that EPAno longer had any obligations with regard to the first SEIU petition. EPAalso agreed to consider, in accordance with TSCA section 21, any furtherSEIU petitions on asbestos in public and commercial buildings. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. EPA Asbestos Activities </ITAG>EPA has undertaken a variety of technical and financial assistance programsand regulatory activities designed to control ACM in buildings and minimizeinhalation of asbestos fibers. This Unit discusses those actions takento date by EPA.A. Technical and Financial Assistance Programs Since 1979, EPA staff have assisted schools and other building owners inidentifying and controlling ACM in their buildings. EPA employs nearly50 technical assistants, hired through a special environmental programwith the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), to counsel buildingowners. With the help of these technical assistants, many school officialsand building owners have effectively and safely dealt with their asbestosproblems. In addition, EPA has published state-of-the-art guidance to help identifyand control asbestos in buildings. EPA's principal asbestos guidance document,<T3>Guidance for Controlling Asbestos- Containing Materials in Buildings</T3>(EPA 560/5-85-024, also known as the Purple Book), was expanded and updatedin June 1985, based   on recommendations from recognized national experts.The document provides criteria for building owners to use in deciding whichabatement method is most appropriate for each situation. An important EPA goal has been to provide training for people involvedin all aspects of the identification and control of asbestos. During 1985and 1986, EPA established five Asbestos Information and Training Centersto provide information concerning the identification and abatement of asbestoshazards and to train people in proper asbestos abatement techniques. Thefive centers are located at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta,the University of Kansas in Kansas City, Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts,the University of Illinois in Chicago, and the University of Californiaat Berkeley. In addition, EPA established four satellite training centersin 1986 and 1987 to help keep pace with the growing demand for trainingresulting from the enactment of AHERA. These centers are located at theUniversity of Utah in Salt Lake City, the University of Texas at Arlington,Rutgers Medical School in Piscataway, New Jersey, and Drexel Universityin Philadelphia. These centers, alone, are not able to supply the nation's schools withthe very large number of trained and accredited asbestos personnel requiredto implement AHERA. To help increase the number of individuals qualifiedto perform asbestos work in schools, EPA has developed a program for reviewingand approving individual training courses taught across the nation. Asof  December 22, 1988, EPA had approved a total of 310 training providersfor 660 individual training courses. Abatement decisions need to be made locally, because the large number ofasbestos abatement projects and the short-term nature of many of them precludeextensive Federal involvement. EPA, therefore, believes that contractorsshould be State-certified and that States should oversee projects to ensurethat they are properly performed. To that end, EPA has provided Stateswith model legislation to help them develop contractor certification programs.EPA has also awarded a total of $2.5 million in grants to 39 States forthe purpose of establishing contractor certification programs. Finally,in 1988 EPA distributed slightly more than $1 million in grants to 17 Statesto help them develop inspector accreditation programs. In addition to the wide variety of technical assistance programs, EPA hasalso provided financial assistance to public school districts and privateschools for the purpose of controlling ACM in their school buildings. TheAsbestos School Hazard Abatement Act (ASHAA) authorized EPA to award grantsand loans to local education agencies (LEAs) which have serious asbestosproblems and which have a demonstrated financial need. These funds arelimited to only those abatement projects necessary to reduce the risk ofharmful asbestos exposure for school children and/or school employees.Since 1985, EPA has awarded over $150 million to deserving LEAs for nearly1,800 individual abatement projects. Also, since October 1987, EPA has provided $20 million to 28 States, 2 territories, and the Bureau of IndianAffairs to help schools in these areas conduct the asbestos inspectionsand develop the asbestos management plans mandated by AHERA. B. Regulatory Program EPA's asbestos regulatory program began in 1973 when EPA issued the NationalEmission Standard for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP): Asbestos Regulations(40 CFR Part 61). The NESHAP for asbestos applies to building renovationand demolition involving friable ACM. The building owner or operator mustprovide to EPA written notice of intention to renovate or demolish andfollow basic asbestos emission control procedures. Transport and disposalpractices prohibit visible emissions into the air. The NESHAP for asbestosis currently being amended to enhance enforcement and to promote compliancewith the existing standard. In 1982, EPA issued an asbestos identification and notification rule forschools (47 FR 23360). This rule required school officials to inspect allschool buildings for friable materials, take a minimum of three samplesof each type of friable material found, analyze samples using polarizedlight microscopy (PLM) to determine if asbestos is present, and keep recordsof the findings. School officials who found friable ACM were required tonotify employees of the location of the materials, post a notificationform in the primary administrative and custodial offices and faculty commonrooms, provide  maintenance and custodial employees with a guide for reducingasbestos exposure, and notify parent-teacher associations or parents directlyof the inspection results. In 1986, after extensive consultation, comment, and public hearings, theOccupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) promulgated ruleswhich establish standards for occupational exposure to asbestos. OSHA'sconstruction standard (29 CFR Part 1926.58) and general industry standard(29 CFR Part 1910.1001) set a permissible exposure limit for all privatesector workers. These standards also provide for exposure monitoring, medicalsurveillance, and hazard communication to employees. Following OSHA's lead in worker protection and responding to SEIU's firstpetition, EPA issued a worker protection rule (40 CFR Part 763, SubpartG) in 1986 which essentially extended the provisions of the OSHA constructionstandard to public sector employees in those States not covered by thecurrent OSHA standards. The EPA rule also includes a provision not in theOSHA rules, i.e., EPA must be notified 10 days before an asbestos abatementproject is begun when public sector employees are doing the work. The Agencyis committed to modifying its worker protection rule to remain consistentwith any OSHA revisions. In particular, EPA is now in the process of extendingits regulations covering public sector employees to include those serviceworkers not already covered under the OSHA rules. In October 1987, EPA issued a comprehensive rule, as mandated by AHERA,for managing and abating ACM in schools. This rule, known as the AHERAschools rule, requires all LEAs to identify ACM in their school buildingsand to take appropriate actions to control the release of asbestos fibers.LEAs are required to describe their activities in management plans, whichmust be made available to all concerned persons and submitted to StateGovernors. The rule also requires LEAs to use specially-trained personsto conduct inspections for asbestos, develop the management plans, anddesign or conduct major actions to control asbestos.In January 1986, EPA proposed a rule to prohibit, over a 10-year period,the manufacture, importation, and processing of asbestos products. Sincethe 1986 proposal, EPA has evaluated public comments, held public hearings,updated much of its hazard, exposure, and economic analyses, and is nowin the concluding stages of issuing a final rule.C. Recent DevelopmentsIn addition to establishing a comprehensive regulatory framework for controllingasbestos in schools, AHERA also required EPA to conduct a study to determine``the extent of danger to human health posed by asbestos in public andcommercial buildings and the means to respond to any such danger'' (AHERA,section 201(b)(3)). In February 1988, EPA responded to that statutory mandateby publishing its study findings in a report to Congress.The EPA study consisted of a number of activities including a review andreanalysis of data previously collected by EPA during its 1984 nationalbuilding survey, a review of information on asbestos in buildings availablefrom sources outside EPA, and a description of new data collection effortsinitiated by EPA during 1987. The activities in 1987 included a seriesof workshops with panelists consisting of building owners, managers andinvestors, abatement contractors, State and local officials, and Federalbuilding managers involved in asbestos management and a study of airborneasbestos levels in Federal buildings.The February 1988 Report to Congress found that approximately 733,000 or20 percent of the 3.6 million public and commercial buildings in the 1984EPA survey contain friable asbestos. An estimated 501,000 or 14 percentof the total buildings contain some damaged ACM. About 317,000 or 9 percentof all buildings have at least some significantly damaged ACM. The Reportpoints out that significantly damaged material is commonly thermal systeminsulation, often found in nonpublic building areas, such as boiler andmachinery rooms.The Report states that estimates of absolute risk associated with exposureto asbestos in public and commercial buildings are subject to great uncertaintydue to limited exposure data in these buildings. EPA, however, has developeda proportional risk model which suggests that the elimination of asbestosexposures in schools might significantly reduce residual risk for populationslater exposed in public and commercial buildings, assuming equal or higherexposures in schools. Even though the elimination of asbestos exposuresin schools may significantly reduce risk, there may be significant residualrisk resulting from exposure in public and commercial buildings. Serviceworkers, for example, may encounter higher episodic exposures, if existingOSHA and EPA worker protection standards are violated.To try to determine the most appropriate course of action, the Report examinedsix major scenarios which go beyond present EPA activity. For each scenario,EPA analyzed the feasibility, risk reduction, and costs of implementation.The scenarios ranged from enhancement of current technical assistance programswithout imposing additional Federal regulations, through development ofprograms using Federal buildings as a management model, to promulgationof various levels of Federal regulation. Regulatory considerations rangedfrom inspection rules only, through regulations targeted to specific activitiesbeyond inspection (e.g., operations and maintenance), through sequentialregulations that gradually expand the coverage of building types, to acomprehensive regulatory program as currently established for schools.EPA specifically refers readers to pages 24 through 35 of the Report toCongress and applicable appendices and references for a more detailed discussionof the scenarios.After considering the various options for additional EPA action, the EPAAdministrator, in a letter transmitting the Report to Congress, concludedthat greater Federal regulation of asbestos in public and commercial buildingswas not the most responsible approach for the Agency to take at this time.The Administrator reached that decision for the following reasons:1.<T3> Inadequate infrastructure.</T3> EPA believes that a new regulatoryinspection or abatement program for public and commercial buildings couldstimulate more inspection and abatement actions than the current infrastructureof accredited personnel and enforcement staff can handle. As a result,abatement may be performed improperly, which, in turn would likely increaserather than reduce risk. The Administrator stated on page 5 of his transmittalletter that ``until the necessary infrastructure to manage asbestos problemson a much larger scale exists, I fear a major initiative in other buildingscould do more harm than good.''2.<T3> Primary focus on schools.</T3> Although asbestos in commercial buildingsrepresents a potential health hazard that deserves careful attention, EPAbelieves that the nation's primary focus needs to remain on asbestos inschools. That priority is merited, because children, who are the primaryoccupants of school buildings, may be particularly vulnerable to asbestosexposure. First, data suggest that asbestos material appears to be morecommon and more likely to be disturbed in schools than other buildings.Second, the student population is clearly subject to the 20- to 40-yearlatency period before an asbestos-related disease usually manifests itself.In addition to the special concerns about children, EPA must be very carefulnow not to take steps which might undermine the successful completion ofthe school asbestos program. During the next few years, AHERA school ruleactivities will stretch the resources of this country, in terms of trainedand accredited inspectors, contractors, laboratories, as well as complianceassistance and enforcement capabilities among the various levels of government.In fact, Congress recently extended the AHERA deadline for some schools,due, in large part, to the perceived inadequacy of the infrastructure ofaccredited inspectors and laboratories to meet school needs. Although EPAexpects the supply of accredited professionals and laboratories to expandin response to demand for increased services, any significant additionaldemand imposed by law and immediate regulation could pose a serious obstacleto the success of the AHERA schools program. 3. <T3>Inadequate information. </T3>At present, there are significant gapsin our base of information about asbestos exposure in public and commercialbuildings. Estimates of the number of persons exposed, prevailing fiberlevels, and the frequency and effect of episodic events are highly uncertain.As a result, the Administrator stated on page 4 of the transmittal letterthat ``it would be foolish for the country to consider a large new programof asbestos control without first asking basic questions which could improveour response to asbestos in public and commercial buildings and probablyprovide public health protection at a lower cost.'' Although the Administrator concluded, for the reasons discussed above,that it would be unwise and inappropriate to initiate rulemaking at thistime, he also stated in his letter that ``this should not be interpretedas ruling out an inspection rule or even greater Federal regulation ofthese public and commercial buildings at some later time.'' The Administratorclosed the letter by adding that ``we should address (the question of rulemaking)in about 3 years after we have had more experience with the AHERA schoolrule, have dealt with the large surge of demand for trained professionals,and have completed the important studies I have outlined above.'' Finally, the Administrator made four recommendations for assessing andimproving the quality of asbestos-related actions currently taking placein public and commercial buildings. These recommendations were to be carriedout over a 3-year period. The recommendations and the actions EPA has takento date to implement these recommendations are discussed below: 1. <T3>Enhance the nation's technical capability. </T3>The Report identifiestwo major categories of activities to enhance the nation's technical capabilities.First, EPA, should increase the number of asbestos professionals accreditedto perform management and abatement tasks in public buildings. Second,EPA must help building owners better select and apply appropriate asbestoscontrol and abatement actions in their buildings. It is important to pointout that, while EPA has helped build up the national infrastructure toaccommodate the increased level of asbestos activity mandated by AHERAfor the nation's 100,000 schools, a much larger infrastructure would berequired to provide a similar level of activity in the nation's more than3.6 million public and commercial buildings. EPA estimates that, as of October 1988, EPA-approved courses had trainedsome 21,000 individuals to become accredited inspectors and managementplanners under AHERA. However, even this number of accredited personnelmay not be adequate to handle the nation's 100,000 schools. Anecdotal informationsuggests that, in several sparsely populated States at least, the availablesupply of trained asbestos professionals could not meet the demand forservices in schools within the original AHERA time frame. In addition, it is not a simple matter to extrapolate from the number ofaccredited personnel needed for schools to those needed for public andcommercial buildings. EPA estimates that about 30 percent of inspector/managementplanner courses are filled by school district personnel, not private contractors.While school officials may conduct inspections and draw up management plansin their local schools, they are unlikely to perform asbestos work in otherpublic and commercial buildings. Moreover, a number of EPA training centersreport that each accreditation training course includes Federal, State,and local government officials, attorneys, and others who are unlikelyto conduct asbestos inspections and other asbestos-related activities inpublic and commercial buildings. Finally, the universe of public and commercial buildings is quite heterogeneous.Compared to the homogenous nature of the universe of school buildings,power plants, skyscrapers, hospitals, factories, etc., all present uniquecharacteristics that greatly increase the difficulty of conducting asbestos-relatedactivities. Given the great variety in size, function, and design of publicand commercial buildings, it is very difficult to approximate how manyof these buildings a trained professional can inspect or develop managementplans for during a specified period of time. Consequently, EPA cannot determine,at this time, the size of the infrastructure which would be necessary forthe more than 3.6 million public and commercial buildings; but it is clearlymuch larger than the current infrastructure. The following are activities EPA has recently started or completed to enhancethe nation's technical capability and increase the size of the infrastructurefor asbestos management and control: a. Asbestos training. In July 1988, EPA made available final model coursematerials for inspection and management planning training. In Decemberl988, EPA also made available a revised course for asbestos abatement contractorsand supervisors. EPA makes these course materials available to trainingproviders to help ensure consistent instructional quality. As of December 22, 1988, EPA had approved a total of 310 training providersfor 660 individual training courses taught across the nation. This totalincludes 236 asbestos abatement worker courses, 159 contractor/supervisorcourses, 118 inspector/management planner courses, 7 inspector only courses,and 12 project designer courses.b. State accreditation programs. AHERA mandates that each State adopt acontractor accreditation plan at least as stringent as EPA's model planwithin 180 days following the commencement of the State legislature's firstregular session after April 30, 1987. As of January 1, 1989, three Stateshad received full EPA approval of their accreditation programs for allasbestos contractor disciplines (i.e., workers, supervisors, inspector/managementplanners, and project designers). Nine other States had received EPA approvalfor part of their accreditation program. The remaining States do not haveEPA- approved accreditation programs.The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL), through a cooperativeagreement with EPA, has developed model legislation that addresses allthe major components of a comprehensive AHERA-grade accreditation program.All State legislatures have received this model legislation to assist indeveloping an accreditation plan for all asbestos management and abatementpersonnel. NCSL also provides technical assistance to individual Stateson accreditation issues.c. National data base of AHERA accreditation. The National Asbestos Council,under a cooperative agreement with EPA, is developing a listing of allindividuals accredited to perform asbestos-related inspection, managementplanning, and abatement activities under AHERA. This national data baseis scheduled to be operational in 1989.d. AHERA-accredited laboratories. EPA has provided funds over the past2 years to support the development of a laboratory accreditation programfor asbestos analysis at the National Institute of Standards and Technology,formerly called the National Bureau of Standards. The bulk analysis componentof this program should be fully operational in April 1989. The second halfof the program, air sampling analysis, should be in place by April 1990.In the meantime, EPA has established the Interim Asbestos Bulk Sample QualityAssurance Program, under which some 700 laboratories are currently approvedfor analysis of suspect materials.e. Operations and maintenance guidance and training for asbestos. EPA hasresumed the development of an operations and maintenance (Oandamp;M) guidancemanual for public and commercial building owners. Publication of the newOandamp;M manual is scheduled for 1989.Model Oandamp;M course curriculum and materials are also being developedthrough an EPA cooperative agreement with the University of Minnesota fortraining custodial and maintenance personnel who work in schools and publicand commercial buildings. These Oandamp;M course materials should be completein 1989, when they will be made available at cost to training organizations,schools, and other interested groups.f. GSA/EPA asbestos management program. Following a longstanding cooperativeeffort, EPA has launched a new public building management program withthe General Services Administration (GSA). The featured component of theGSA/EPA asbestos program is the development of a Federal building manager's``kit,'' which would include guidance, model forms, and reports for thecomprehensive management of ACM in Federal buildings. It would also serveas a useful tool for other public and commercial building managers. The``kit'' is scheduled for completion in the summer of 1989. The joint programwill also provide for specialized management training, a GSA asbestos managers'information network, and an ongoing GSA/EPA exchange on asbestos issuesand abatement technology.g. Commercial buildings case study. EPA has reinstated its case study ofresponsible corporate asbestos management with a major national corporation.This project will demonstrate how an asbestos management program in a corporatesetting is properly initiated and conducted. EPA expects to complete thestudy by mid-1989.2.<T3> Focus attention on thermal system insulation (TSI) asbestos.</T3>The Report indicates that TSI asbestos is more common, more likely to bedamaged and of a higher asbestos content than other forms of ACM. In addition,TSI is generally easy to repair and abate, and thus amenable to quick,safe remediation. As a result, EPA has recommended specific activitiesto develop and provide proper guidance through a new TSI assistance program:a. Information on TSI asbestos in public buildings. EPA has consolidatedits current knowledge about the presence of TSI asbestos in the Nation'spublic and commercial buildings through a reanalysis of data collectedduring EPA's 1984 survey of public and commercial buildings. This informationwill provide a better basis for establishing EPA's TSI assistance program.b. New TSI guidance and model course materials. EPA intends to developnew guidance and instructional materials on TSI repair and abatement techniques.EPA will be working with asbestos training programs to improve the qualityof TSI training materials and to increase training opportunities.3.<T3> Improved integration of activities to reduce imminent hazards.</T3>The Report acknowledges that more should be done to avoid high peak exposuresassociated with improper or poorly timed asbestos removal activities. Stepsshould be taken to improve coordination among EPA and other Federal, State,and local asbestos control organizations and to increase EPA's capabilityof enforcing existing asbestos regulations.a. Revised asbestos NESHAP strategy. On January 10, 1989, EPA issued aproposed rule in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>to revise the asbestos NESHAP. This proposedrule revises the current standard by enhancing enforcement and promotingcompliance without altering the stringency of existing controls.b. NESHAP/TSCA coordination project. EPA initiated a pilot TSCA/NESHAPcoordination project in its Region VII area in 1986 to better integrateNESHAP compliance inspection activities with TSCA technical assistance.EPA has directed all of its regional offices to establish formal practicesfor NESHAP/TSCA coordination by FY 1990.c. Federal Asbestos Task Force. EPA has sponsored the Federal AsbestosTask Force, a working group of officials from Federal agencies with asbestosprogram responsibilities. Over the next 2 years, EPA expects to developinformation systems which allow these Federal agencies to share informationabout asbestos.4.<T3> Objectively assess the effectiveness of the AHERA Schools Rule andother current activities.</T3> The Report commits EPA to determine whetherthe AHERA schools rule approach is working in schools and whether it isappropriate for public and commercial buildings. Further, the Report identifiesseveral ``data gaps'' which limit EPA's ability to assess options, drawconclusions, and make recommendations about asbestos in nonschool buildings.EPA is committed to filling these ``gaps,'' to the extent possible andpracticable, through ongoing Agency research and a special research initiativewith the private sector:a. AHERA evaluation. EPA has established the AHERA Evaluation Project tocollect data about how well the asbestos control process is working inschools. It will also help provide EPA with information it needs to determinewhat components of the AHERA schools rule might be applicable for publicand commercial buildings.To this end, several individual studies have been identified. A final reporton the entire AHERA evaluation project is planned in 1991, when all studiesare scheduled for completion. b. Exposed population study. EPA has initiated a study to determine, amongother things, the number, sex, and age distribution of people exposed toasbestos in public buildings. This information will increase EPA's abilityto calculate potential risk. c. EPA's ongoing research program. EPA has initiated a new research studyto help identify appropriate engineering control technologies for asbestoscontrol and abatement in occupied spaces and tall buildings. Other research projects include a program to standardize air sampling ofasbestos, using transmission electron microscopy (TEM); a program to testthe efficacy of glovebags for TSI removal; and a study to determine theeffectiveness of wet vacuuming to control the release of asbestos fibers.d. Health Effects Institute (HEI) research. In EPA's fiscal year 1989 appropriation,Congress provided $2 million for asbestos research that would help fillin the informational gaps identified in EPA's February 1988 Report to Congress.Congress stipulated that these funds be matched by private contributions.Congress also specified that the research be conducted under the auspicesof the Health Effects Institute (HEI) to assure the quality and objectivityof the research. The HEI research, as specified by Congress, should help provide EPA withanswers to questions about prevalent airborne asbestos levels in buildings,prevalent exposure levels of particular groups (e.g., service workers),the contribution of ``peak'' asbestos fiber releases to total exposure,and fiber levels following removal and Oandamp;M activities. The answersto these questions should greatly aid in the design of an effective andefficient response to the presence of asbestos in public and commercialbuildings and could reduce the cost of dealing with the problem by billionsof dollars. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Statutory Requirements </ITAG>Section 21 of TSCA provides in part that any person may petition EPA toinitiate a proceeding for the issuance of a rule under section 6. The petitionmust set forth the facts which it is claimed establish the need for therule. EPA is required to grant or deny the petition within 90 days afterfiling. If EPA grants the petition, EPA must promptly commence an appropriateproceeding. If EPA denies the petition, EPA must issue its reasons in the<T4>Federal Register</T4>. Within 60 days of denial, or if EPA fails togrant or deny the petition within 90 days, within 60 days of the expirationof the 90-day period, the petitioner may commence a civil action in a U.S.District Court. In the case of a petition to issue a rule under section6, the court is required to order EPA to initiate the action requestedby the petitioner if the petitioner shows to the satisfaction of the courtby a preponderance of the evidence that ``there is a reasonable basis toconclude that the issuance of such a rule * * * is necessary to protecthealth or the environment against an unreasonable risk of injury. * * *'' In reviewing the SEIU petition, EPA assessed whether the rules requestedby SEIU are necessary to protect against an unreasonable risk of injuryto human health. This is the same test as the court would apply under section21. The test has two aspects. Rules must be ``necessary'' and there mustbe an ``unreasonable risk'' against which the rules will protect. EPA interprets the standard that rules are ``necessary'' to require considerationof whether TSCA rules are the appropriate remedy to protect against therisk described. For example, regulations under other Federal statutes,administered by EPA or other agencies, may be more appropriate than TSCArules. Another consideration may be whether State or local initiativesconstitute the appropriate remedy instead of Federal rules. To determine ``unreasonable risk,'' EPA believes it is appropriate to usethe criteria of TSCA section 6, since SEIU is requesting rules under thatsection. The finding of unreasonable risk under TSCA section 6 is an administrativejudgment under which EPA determines that the reduction of health or environmentalrisk resulting from a potential regulation outweighs the regulatory burdento society. Determining whether a risk is unreasonable under section 6involves balancing the probability that harm may occur from a chemicalsubstance or mixture and the magnitude and severity of that harm, againstthe effect on society, including economic effects, of placing regulatoryrestrictions on that chemical. Specifically, TSCA section 6(c) requiresthat the following be considered: 1. The effects of the chemical of concern on human health and the environment.2. The magnitude of exposure of the chemical to humans and the environment.3. The benefits of the chemical for various uses and the availability ofsubstitutes for such uses. 4. The economic consequences of the rule after considering the effect uponthe national economy, small business, technological innovation, the environment,and public health. In summary, to decide whether a chemical presents an unreasonable risk,EPA must determine the risk by considering evidence on chemical toxicityand exposure, and then weigh that evidence against the projected burdensand any countervailing risk of regulation. If EPA decides that the risksoutweigh the burdens, the risks are unreasonable. An unreasonable risk finding requires more than a determination by EPAthat a chemical has toxic properties and that numbers of persons are exposedto that chemical. Rather, EPA must examine the reduction in risk that willresult from taking various alternative actions and the societal burdensthat will be incurred from each of those alternatives. For example, ifcontaminant levels are low and extremely high burdens would be incurredto achieve small incremental risk reduction, the Agency might not findthe risk unreasonable. On the other hand, an unreasonable risk may be foundif moderately high levels may be reduced to acceptable levels at a lowburden.Furthermore, the greater the societal burden of regulation, the betterthe evidence of risk must be to impose that burden. This concept is discussedin the legislative history of TSCA. The House Report notes that risk ismeasured by elements of probability of harm and severity of harm that mayvary in relation to each other and that the regulatory effect will be ofgreater significance in making an unreasonable risk determination if greaterrestrictions are imposed by regulation (H.R. Rep. 94- 1341, 94th Cong.,2d Sess., pages 14 and 15). Thus, for example, in order to impose regulationsbanning a chemical substance and thereby imposing a significant burdenon society, EPA would need considerable information on toxicity and exposure.On the other hand, the Agency would need less information on risk if itwere to impose only a testing requirement that would not, by itself, resultin the loss of benefits of the chemical to society. Finally, if governmental action under section 6 would itself create additionalrisk, either directly or indirectly, by shifting the risk to another locationor pathway or population, these risks must be considered as decreasingthe total risk reduction achieved by governmental action. This considerationis especially relevant in the present case. EPA evaluates the SEIU petition in the next unit in light of these criteriaand the weight of the evidence presented. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Evaluation of the Petition </ITAG>A. Summary of Petition SEIU's petition, first, briefly summarizes the history of litigation andlegislation involving ACM in schools and other buildings (petition pagesl through 4) and, then, makes the following claims which, SEIU asserts,establish the need for a rule (petition pages 4 through 13). EPA has determinedthat asbestos is a toxic chemical (petition page 5). In addition, EPA doesnot know which of the approximately 3.6 million public and commercial buildingsin the United States contain asbestos, although EPA estimates that approximately20 percent do (petition page 6). Many of the buildings containing asbestoshave some damaged material (petition page 6). Many of the very large numbersof people occupying these buildings do not know of the presence of asbestosin the buildings (petition pages 2 and 4). Peak levels of asbestos duringserious disturbances can be very high and could cause serious risk to individuals(petition pages 4, 6, and 7). EPA's guidance urges building owners andoperators to take voluntary action, but also acknowledges that not allaction taken is competent and that action improperly taken could increaserisk (petition pages 2 and 13). SEIU uses these claims to support its argument that uniform, Federal rulesconstitute the necessary response to remedy the risks from asbestos inpublic and commercial buildings. SEIU makes three basic arguments. First,the widespread risk from asbestos in buildings is beyond dispute. In supportof this argument, SEIU cites various EPA pronouncements which state thatasbestos has toxic properties, is present in a large number of buildings,and in some cases, may lead to peak exposure levels if improperly treated.Second, EPA has effectively made the unreasonable risk findings to mandaterulemaking. SEIU bases this argument on the following logic. EPA foundin support of its 1982 school inspection rule that inspections for asbestosin schools were necessary to protect against unreasonable risk. EPA alsodetermined in its February 1988 Report to Congress that service workersare equally at risk whether employed in schools or in public or commercialbuildings. Also, EPA, by its guidance, counsels building owners and operatorsto take action voluntarily and, thus, cannot argue that protective actionsare too costly. According to SEIU, these arguments necessarily lead tothe determination that asbestos in public and commercial buildings presentsan unreasonable risk, at least for service workers. Finally, SEIU argues that by counseling building owners through guidanceto take voluntary action without controlling and/or limiting that actionby rulemaking, EPA may exacerbate the problem of asbestos in schools. SEIUargues that this voluntary program is nothing more than a repetition ofa discredited policy that building owners follow Agency guidance (petitionpages 9 and 10). In support of this argument, the petition generally incorporatesby reference documents that SEIU claims show EPA's ``internal conclusionsthat, in the absence of regulations, building owners/operators were toofrequently either not taking action, or taking action that was counterproductive''(petition page 12, footnote 18). While SEIU does not cite any specificdocuments, it apparently refers to various documents obtained in its earlierlitigation against the Agency and subsequently presented to Congress duringvarious hearings on asbestos in buildings (petition pages 1, 2, and 12,footnote 18). B. Evaluation of SEIU'S Petition As a preliminary matter, EPA notes that it does not entirely agree withSEIU's characterizations of earlier asbestos in buildings litigation orlegislative deliberations, particularly deliberations affecting publicand commercial buildings. For the most part, it is not necessary for EPAto respond to characterizations of the litigation in this notice becauselitigation disputes are well documented in court records and need not befurther elaborated here. In addition, legislative deliberations generallysupport the view taken by EPA in its Report to Congress that further studyis needed before considering additional regulation for public and commercialbuildings, and do not support SEIU's petition requests. EPA is not, at this time, convinced that greater Federal regulation isthe most responsible approach to the problem of asbestos in public andcommercial buildings. EPA's position remains unchanged from that presentedin the Administrator's letter transmitting the February 1988 Report toCongress. That letter, as discussed in Unit II.C., emphasized that thereis currently an inadequate national infrastructure of trained personnel,a need to focus attention on the successful implementation of the AHERAschools rule, and inadequate information as to asbestos exposure in publicand commercial buildings. In addition, SEIU has presented no evidence thatcurrent worker protection rules do not adequately protect against unreasonablerisk to the service employees represented by SEIU. These reasons, takentogether, prevent EPA from determining at this time what, if any, riskreduction would result from additional Federal regulation. Thus, the Agencycannot determine that Federal rules under TSCA are necessary to protectagainst unreasonable risk.This reasoning applies to any type of rule, including rules SEIU characterizesas rules to ensure that the most beneficial and least harmful actions aretaken while a national infrastructure is developed (petition page 3). EPAis not able to evaluate, given the current state of knowledge, the appropriateform of this type of rule to achieve risk reduction. At this point, EPAwants to preserve the flexibility of building owners to abate serious risksin particular buildings and does not want to mandate any actions by rules.Congress seems to agree with the need to obtain more information beforeproceeding to rulemaking on asbestos in public and commercial buildings.In apparent direct response to the 1988 Report to Congress, the House Committeeon Appropriations reported a bill earmarking $2 million, to be matchedby private sources, for research to determine actual airborne asbestoslevels in buildings and to characterize definitively the significance ofpeak exposure levels. See H.R. Rep. 100-701, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. at 25.The Committee places a high priority on developing more reliable exposureestimates of asbestos in buildings, as tens of billions of dollars maybe required to address asbestos in buildings. In reaching this conclusion, EPA focuses on only one aspect of the TSCAsection 21 standard for determining whether to initiate rules under TSCAsection 6_that is, whether an unreasonable risk can be shown to exist.EPA does not at this time need to address the issue of whether rules underTSCA are ``necessary'' to protect against that risk_that is, whether TSCArules are the appropriate remedy. EPA identified several of these issuesin its 1988 Report to Congress (pages 24-35). When EPA addresses the needfor regulations, the Agency will more closely focus on such issues as whethera Federal regulation rather than State or local initiatives is more appropriateto deal with asbestos risks in buildings, or whether SEIU should pursueamendments to Federal worker protection rules under OSHA instead of theTSCA remedy. SEIU's three supporting arguments do not alter EPA's position for the reasonsdiscussed below. 1. <T3>Asbestos presents a risk. </T3>SEIU's assertions that asbestos hastoxic properties and many persons are potentially exposed to the asbestosin public and commercial buildings do not complete the unreasonable riskdetermination needed to initiate TSCA section 6 rules. SEIU only showsthe potential risk from asbestos in buildings, and does not in any waydiscuss the risk reduction that would result from Federal rules. Furthermore,as noted in EPA's letter transmitting its Report to Congress, a major rulemakinginitiative could do more harm than good, particularly if it stretches thenational infrastructure of accredited professionals and laboratories thatshould be devoted to schools. These likely countervailing risks undercutany hoped-for risk reduction from Federal action. 2. <T3>EPA has effectively made an unreasonable risk finding. </T3>SEIU'sargument that EPA has effectively made the unreasonable risk determinationwhich mandates rulemaking is similarly unavailing for several reasons.First, in its school inspection rule issued in 1982, EPA determined thatthe reduction in risk hypothesized in the rulemaking record justified onlythe minimal costs of an inspection rule for schools, and did not discussthe implications of a more comprehensive rule, as requested by SEIU (47FR 23364). Second, EPA's 1988 Report to Congress shows that the societaleffects of any rule for public and commercial buildings, even a rule limitedto inspections, are much more far reaching than the 1982 schools rule.This is illustrated by the number of buildings alone (100,000 vs. 3.6 million).As noted in Unit III, a regulation imposing considerable societal burdensmust be justified by better evidence of risk than a regulation imposinga lesser burden. The Report to Congress discusses at length the uncertaintyof the risk attributed to asbestos in public and commercial buildings.This uncertainty, weighed against the societal burdens of potential regulation,makes it impossible, without further data and subsequent analysis, simplyto transfer the unreasonable risk determination for schools to public andcommercial buildings. Finally, current OSHA rules, which were promulgated after the 1982 determinationof unreasonable risk in schools, establish a permissible exposure limitfor all workers and presume that suspect materials are identified beforethey are disturbed. SEIU participated in the rulemaking proceedings whichled to these rules and has not demonstrated in its petition here why theserules are insufficient to protect workers from asbestos exposure. Theserules, in part, have been remanded by a court to OSHA for revision. Thisaction offers SEIU an opportunity to pursue the relief it seeks from OSHArather than EPA. EPA has made it a practice to extend to public sectorworkers any protections related to asbestos which OSHA establishes forprivate sector workers, and EPA intends to continue to do so in the future.3. <T3>Using AHERA rules as a guide is inappropriate. </T3>EPA disagrees withSEIU that use of the AHERA schools rule as a guide is counterproductive.First, criticisms leveled at EPA's earlier guidance do not apply to usingAHERA rules as a guide. While Congress criticized the vagueness of EPA'sprevious guidance documents, AHERA rules are a significant improvement.The rules provide detailed criteria and standards for dealing with asbestos.The rules also specify detailed criteria for accrediting persons who conductasbestos-related work in schools. This includes initial training, examination,and continuing education for all persons involved in asbestos activities,including inspectors, management planners, abatement supervisors, and abatementworkers. These rules were upheld against litigation challenge and, indeed,supported by SEIU which intervened on behalf of EPA. If the AHERA rulesare used as guidance, they should alleviate any problems perceived in earlierguidance. Similarly, in view of the nature of the AHERA rule, the internal EPA documentsobtained by SEIU in earlier litigation and cited by SEIU as being criticalof earlier Agency guidance do not apply to use of AHERA regulations asa guide. Those documents represent, at best, anecdotal information andinternal Agency discussions about problems with earlier voluntary programs.In any event, these documents were never considered probative by EPA, orby a court, to discredit any voluntary program to the extent that regulationsshould replace it. Second, EPA is not encouraging broad voluntary action, but prudent actionbased on local circumstances. EPA counsels building owners to considerinspecting and/or taking broader action than that mandated by law onlywhen appropriate and when qualified people are available to ensure thework is conducted properly. EPA's current position is that prudent buildingowners should turn to the AHERA rule for technical guidance as their ownconditions and circumstances warrant. Thus, decisions on risk and riskreduction measures are to be made at the appropriate local level, and thesecase-by-case decisions would not burden the limited infrastructure of accreditedand enforcement personnel as much as a regulatory requirement. Nor wouldthe voluntary program limit the flexibility of building owners and managersto abate serious risks if they feel such action is needed under the circumstances.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Conclusion </ITAG>EPA shares the deep commitment of SEIU to protecting individuals from asbestoshazards in all public and commercial buildings. However, for the reasonsstated above in this notice, EPA must deny SEIU's petition. EPA, in theabsence of additional information on risk reduction, believes that an unreasonablerisk determination cannot be made at this time. In this regard, EPA isespecially concerned about the acknowledged inadequacy of the infrastructureof accredited professionals. Thus, EPA cannot determine that Federal rulesunder TSCA are necessary to protect against unreasonable risk and is notinitiating a rulemaking proceeding under section 6 of TSCA at this time.EPA notes, however, that it does not believe it needs to reach other issuesrelating to whether rules under TSCA are the appropriate remedy to protectagainst risk from asbestos in buildings. These other issues, instead, willbe addressed when EPA has obtained the information it has determined islacking. EPA has not permanently ruled out a regulatory response to the asbestosproblem in public and commercial buildings. At some later time, EPA may,in fact, recommend an inspection rule or even greater Federal regulation.Yet, EPA believes that it would be inappropriate and unwarranted, at leastat this time, to initiate a new regulatory inspection and abatement programfor these buildings. In the meantime, SEIU might be well advised to pursue protection of itsmembers with OSHA, which has primary jurisdiction for providing that protectionand which is even now reconsidering its asbestos rule. EPA is committedto extending OSHA's asbestos rules to public sector workers who are notcovered by OSHA's protections and, in limited cases, to supplementing thatprotection. Since SEIU apparently has a fundamental disagreement with thescope of the OSHA asbestos rule, this disagreement should appropriatelybe taken up with OSHA rather than EPA. EPA, however, has begun and intends to continue discussions with affectedgroups in the public and commercial buildings community. These groups includeSEIU and other worker groups, building owners and managers, mortgage bankers,and former and present manufacturers of asbestos-containing materials.Together, these groups can help EPA review new exposure and efficacy information,assess the experience and information gained from the AHERA implementationand evaluation process, explore the merits of various regulatory strategies,and nurture the development of the nation's asbestos management and abatementcapabilities, especially the infrastructure of accredited asbestos controlprofessionals. EPA expects to work closely and productively with these groups. In fact,elsewhere in this <T4>Federal Register </T4>is a notice which announces a public meetingto gather data and hear arguments which will assist EPA in assessing whatfuture activity is necessary. This will allow the Agency to proceed quicklyand effectively with any subsequent activity which may prove to be necessaryto deal with the asbestos problem in public and commercial buildings. <ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Administrative Record </ITAG>EPA has established a public record of those documents the Agency consideredin denying SEIU's petition. The record consists of documents located inthe file designated by Docket Control Number, OPTS-211023, located at theTSCA Public Docket Office. This Docket is available for reviewing and copyingfrom 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays,at the following address: Environmental Protection Agency, Room NE-G004,401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460. The public record consists ofall documents in the OPTS-211023 file and all documents cited in the documentsin that file.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 28, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William K. Reilly,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7932 Filed 4-3-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>