<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89317-0058 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-17-89.f2.A1057</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 51 / Friday, March 17, 1989 /Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Patent and Trademark Office</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">37 CFR Parts 1 and 10</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 90135-9035]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Duty of Disclosure and Practitioner Misconduct </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Patent and Trademark Office, Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Patent and Trademark Office (Office) proposes toamend the rules of practice in patent cases (1) to clarify the duty ofdisclosure standard for information required to be submitted to the Office;(2) to make information disclosure statements mandatory for complying withthe duty of disclosure; (3) to provide specific deadlines for submittingsuch statements including the requirement of a fee in some cases if thestatement is filed after the first deadline; (4) to eliminate considerationof duty of disclosure issues by the Office except in disciplinary proceedings,and under limited circumstances in the examination of reissue applications;and (5) to eliminate the striking of patent applications which are improperlyexecuted. The Office further proposes to amend the rules governing practicebefore it by registered attorneys and agents to define acts of misconductwhich conform to a failure to comply with the proposed rules on duty ofdisclosure. These proposed changes are considered desirable in view of the large amountof resources that are being devoted to duty of disclosure issues both withinand outside the Office without significantly contributing to the reliabilityof the patents being issued. The proposed rules are intended: (1) To reducethe burden on patent applicants and those associated with the filing andprosecution of patent applications in complying with the duty of disclosureto the Office; (2) to minimize the risk that valuable patent rights willbe lost by providing procedures and mandatory deadlines for submittinginformation to the Office in pending patent applications; (3) to ensureconsideration of relevant information by the Office before a final decisionon patentability is made by the patent examiner; and (4) to permit someof the Office resources now devoted to a consideration of duty of disclosureissues to be directed to the reduction in the backlog of pending patentapplications.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments must be submitted on or before June 20, 1989.A public hearing will be held on June 22, 1989, beginning at 9:30 a.m.Requests to present oral testimony should be received on or before June20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Address written comments and requests to present oraltestimony to Box 8, Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, Washington,DC 20231, marked to the attention of Charles E. Van Horn. The hearing willbe held at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in Room 912 of Building2, Crystal Park, located at 2121 Crystal Drive, Arlington, Virginia. Writtencomments and a transcript of the public hearing will be available for publicinspection in Room 5C15 of Building 2, Crystal Plaza.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Charles E. Van Horn or John H.Raubitschek by telephone at (703) 557-4035 or by mail addressed to Box8, Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, Washington, DC 20231.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The goal of any patent examinationsystem is to provide for the grant of reliable patents to protect the patentowner and those who must often expend considerable resources in developingthe invention. The grant of reliable patents is dependent, in large part,on the examiner making a decision on patentability after a thorough considerationof the scope and content of the prior art. Any intentional withholdingfrom the Office of information which directly affects the determinationof patentability of an invention may undermine the reliability of the resultingpatent. This proposed rule change is designed to ensure that the examiner considersthe pertinent prior art before making a final decision on patentabilityand to allow for the reallocation of Office resources regarding the dutyof disclosure in the prosecution of patent applications before the Office.It has long been recognized that by reason of the nature of an applicationfor patent, those representing a patent applicant before the Office arerequired to act in a manner consistent with the highest degree of candorand good faith. <T3>Kingsland </T3>v. <T3>Dorsey, </T3>338 U.S. 318, 83 USPQ 330 (1949), <T3>reh'g denied, </T3>338 U.S. 939 (1950). There have been several attempts to define the duty to disclose informationto the Office in 37 CFR 1.56. In addition, an evolving body of case lawon fraud and inequitable conduct in the Office has reflected, at times,a lack of cohesive direction. This has led to some uncertainty about theduty of disclosure and to the unproductive use of considerable resourcesby the Office, the patent bar, patent applicants, and patent owners inaddressing issues relating to this duty. See 16 AIPLA Quarterly JournalNos. 1 and 2 (1988). The determination of inequitable conduct in the office as it relates tothe nondisclosure of information affecting the patentability of an inventionhas involved a factual determination of two elements: (1) Materiality ofthe information; and (2) intent to mislead the Office on the part of theindividual who did not bring the information to the attention of the Office.After the withheld information and conduct of the individual are determinedto meet the threshold levels of materiality and intent, courts balancethe findings relating to materiality and intent in order to evaluate whetherinequitable conduct has occurred. <T3>J.P. Stevens andamp; Co. </T3>v. <T3>Lex Tex, Ltd., </T3>747 F.2d 1553, 223 USPQ 1089 (Fed. Cir. 1984),<T3>cert. denied, </T3>474 U.S. 822 (1985). The Office standard for materiality in andSection; 1.56 is considered bythe courts to be an appropriate starting point for analysis since it appearsto be the broadest, thus encompassing other standards, and because andSection;1.56 governs how one ought to conduct business with the Office. <T3>American Hoist andamp; Derrick Co. </T3>v. <T3>Sowa andamp; Sons, Inc., </T3>725 F.2d 1350, 220 USPQ 763 (Fed. Cir.),<T3>cert. denied, </T3>469 U.S. 821 (1984). However, the Office believesthat an appropriate standard of materiality should take into considerationwhether or not the examiner was influenced by the withholding of the informationto avoid the harsh effects of <T3>A.B. Dick Co. </T3>v. <T3>Burroughs Corp., </T3>798 F.2d 1392, 230 USPQ 849 (Fed. Cir. 1986),Where a patent was held to be unenforceable even though the examiner wasaware of and applied the withheld prior art. In addition, there may bea question of the need for applying the concept of materiality to claimswhich have been canceled or modified in order to find inequitable conduct.<T3>See Driscoll </T3>v. <T3>Cebalo, </T3>731 F.2d 878, 221 USPQ 745 (Fed. Cir. 1984). Some court decisions have held that intent to mislead may be inferred fromthe materiality of the withheld reference(s). <T3>Argus Chemical Corp. </T3>v. <T3>Fibre Glass-Evercoat Co., Inc., </T3>759 F.2d 10, 225 USPQ 1100 (Fed.Cir.), <T3>cert. denied, </T3>474 U.S. 903 (1985). Other decisions require considerationof the attorney's or agent's good faith or lack thereof. <T3>Allen Archery, Inc. </T3>v. <T3>Browning Mfg. Co., </T3>819 F.2d 1087, 2 USPQ 2d 1490 (Fed. Cir. 1987).However, recently the Federal Circuit has required that in order to proveinequitable conduct, there must be evidence of intent to mislead the Officebeyond the materiality of the withheld references. <T3>FMC Corp. </T3>v. <T3>Manitowoc, Co. Inc., </T3>835 F.2d 1411, 5 USPQ 2d 1112 (Fed. Cir.1987) and <T3>Burlington Industries, Inc. </T3>v. <T3>Dayco Corp., </T3>849 F.2d 1418, 7 USPQ 2d 1158 (Fed. Cir. 1988). <T3>See also Kingsdown Medical Consultants, Ltd. </T3>v. <T3>Hollister Inc., </T3>863 F.2d 867, 9 USPQ 2d 1384 (Fed. Cir. 1988)(en banc). The requirement for evidence on intent to mislead the Office was also appliedto the Office in making a rejection under andSection; 1.56. <T3>In re Harita, </T3>847 F.2d 801, 6 USPQ 2d 1930 (Fed. Cir. 1988). Therecent emphasis by the courts on the element of intent has led the Officeto re-examine its policy with respect to andSection; 1.56 because of thedifficulty in obtaining probative evidence on intent. The Office makesits decision on the record and does not take live testimony where the demeanorof the witnesses, who are subject to cross-examination, can be observed.For the Office to conduct hearings is not considered to be an effectiveutilization of resources. Further, the examination procedure is essentially<T3>ex parte </T3>and so the evidence on intent would have to be developedprimarily by the Office. On the other hand, courts hear testimony, have subpoena power, and caneasily fashion an equitable remedy to fit the precise facts in those caseswhere inequitable conduct is established. In addition, a court proceedinggenerally involves at least two participating adverse parties to developthe evidence. Thus, it seems more appropriate for inequitable conduct issuesto be handled by the courts rather than by an administrative body, especiallysince inequitable conduct is not a statutory criterion for patentabilitybut rather results from a judicial application of the doctrine of uncleanhands.The proposed changes to the rules relating to the duty of disclosure retainthe responsibilities of candor and good faith in dealing with the Officeand are intended to promote the reliability of issued patents while minimizingthe risks that patent rights may be unnecessarily compromised in the examinationof patent applications. The Office believes that these purposes can beaccomplished by specifying the threshold level of materiality to conformwith an objective ``but for'' standard, and by ensuring that an informationdisclosure statement will be considered in an application at a point intime before a final determination of patentability is made. The ``but for''standard of materiality should result in a more predictable duty of disclosurebecause it is based on a statutory standard of patentability. Althoughsubmission of an information disclosure statement might be acceptable ashort time after final action by the examiner with an additional fee tocover the increased costs of examination, the Office considers the establishmentof final action as a specific deadline to be a more effective way to ensurethat pertinent information will be thoroughly considered by the examinerbefore the patent issues and to discourage intentional delays in the submissionof information disclosure statements. Under the proposed changes to the rules, the Office will no longer investigateviolations of the duty to disclose, except with respect to a charge ofmisconduct under andSection; 10.131, nor will it reject claims for such violations.Similarly, the Office will not comment upon duty of disclosure issues whichare brought to the attention of the examiner except to note in the applicationfile, when appropriate, that such issues are no longer considered by theOffice during its examination of patent applications. Examination of lack of deceptive intent in reissue applications will continue,but without any independent investigation of inequitable conduct issues.The reissue applicant's statement of lack of deceptive intent will be acceptedas dispositive except in special circumstances, such as a judicial determinationof fraud or inequitable conduct or an admission of facts which would conclusivelyestablish fraud or inequitable conduct without any investigation. In thosecases, the claims will be rejected under 35 U.S.C. 251 for failing to satisfythe statutory requirement of a lack of ``deceptive intent.'' <T3>See In re Clark, </T3>522 F.2d 623, 187 USPQ 209 (CCPA 1975). Accordingly,reissue will not be available to cure a prior judicial determination ofinequitable conduct. It is anticipated that under the proposed change in practice, informationpertinent to a determination of patentability will be brought to the attentionof the Office in a timely manner. An applicant's desire to minimize theprospect of facing an inequitable conduct charge or decision in any laterlitigation as well as to assure the greatest benefit of the presumptionof validity under 35 U.S.C. 282, should provide sufficient incentive tofurnish the necessary information to the Office. By filing informationdisclosure statements which include close art or information even thoughit is not considered to render any claim unpatentable, an applicant maythereby avoid inequitable conduct issues or charges and develop a strongdefense in the event of such a charge. The practice of citing close artmay be helpful in those cases where the art is combinable with other artsubsequently found and cited by the examiner especially since a court mayfind that the withheld information does, in fact, affect patentability.It should be noted that patentees may have to show later in litigationthat there was no ``intent'' to withhold information or deceive the Office.Thus, until the proposed change by the Office is adopted by the Officeand the courts, an applicant and those others who owe a duty to the Officeshould comply also with the duty as applied by the courts which may findinequitable conduct or fraud with respect to one or more claims, therebyrendering a patent unenforceable or invalid. <T3>See Kingsdown Medical Consultants, Ltd. </T3>v. <T3>Hollister Inc., supra, </T3>at 20. The proposed change is very unlikely to have a significant impact on theworkload of the Federal courts since the duty of disclosure issue was raisedin less than 0.3% of the pending applications over the past two fiscalyears and patent suits were filed at a rate of about 0.83% of all patentsgranted in the same time period. Further, enforcement by the Office ofthe duty of disclosure has rarely avoided the necessity of considerationof this issue by the courts. Practitioners found to have participated in inequitable conduct or fraudremain subject to disciplinary proceedings. 37 CFR Part 10. The proposed rules would substantially conform the rules to the policyannounced in the Official Gazette: ``Patent and Trademark Office Implementationof 37 CFR 1.56,'' 1095 <T3>Official Gazette </T3>16 (October 11, 1988), ``Further Clarificationon Patent and Trademark Office Implementation of 37 CFR 1.56,'' 1096 <T3>Official Gazette </T3>19 (November 8, 1988), and ``Patent and TrademarkOffice Implementation of 37 CFR 1.28(d) and 1.56 (c), (f) and (g),'' 1098<T3>Official Gazette </T3>502 (January 3, 1989). <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Specific Rule Change Proposals </ITAG>Section 1.17, if amended as proposed, would add a fee defined in paragraph(p) to be $200.00, which is due upon filing of an information disclosurestatement more than three months after the filing date of the applicationas described in proposed andSection; 1.97 (f) and (g) or more than two monthsafter the date of the order for examination as set forth in proposed andSection;1.555(b). Two exemptions from this fee requirement are provided in andSection;andSection;1.97(g) and 1.555(b). The information disclosure statement will not beconsidered to have been filed until the fee is paid in full. Prior to the changes in the duty of disclosure proposed herein, an applicantassumed the risk of violating the duty if an examiner cited a referencebefore it was brought to the attention of the Office. Under the proposedrules, which are more flexible in allowing information to be brought tothe attention of the Office, the duty would not be violated until a patentissued. Therefore, the proposed fee is being charged to cover a new serviceas well as to compensate the Office for the extra work caused the examinerwho may have to redo part or all of the examination. Section 1.28(d)(2) is proposed to be amended to remove the references toandSection; 1.56(d) (proposed to be deleted) and to andSection; 1.555 of thispart. This proposal retains the identification of a fraud practiced orattempted on the Office, but removes the reference to those sections ofthis part which provide for rejections based on such fraud.Section 1.52(c) is proposed to be amended to remove the reference to andSection;1.56(c), which is proposed to be deleted. As noted below, the Office proposesthat it will no longer take steps to strike an application for the reasonsdefined in andSection; 1.56(c). Section 1.56 is proposed to be deleted in its entirety to provide a cleardemarcation with past practice in the Office and to facilitate future citationand application of the proposed new rule and the principles it embodies.Thus, a legal search of andSection; 1.57 will reveal only cases decided underthe new practice, but a search of andSection; 1.56 will be limited to casesdecided under the old practice. Proposed andSection; 1.57 defines the new duty to disclose information tothe Office and the limited circumstances in which the Office will takeaction when it is determined that a violation has occurred. Proposed andSection;1.57 defines various aspects of Office practice, procedure, and policyas follows: (a) Who has the duty to disclose; (b) What information is required to be disclosed; (c) Circumstances for action by the Office; and (d) Misconduct_lack of candor and good faith. Section 1.57(a), as proposed, defines the class of individuals who owea duty of candor and good faith to the Office. The purpose of andSection;1.57(a) is to define the same class of individuals included in andSection;1.56. Thus, the duty is owed by four groups of individuals that are notnecessarily mutually exclusive: (1) Any named inventor as defined in paragraph(a)(1); (2) any non-inventor as defined in paragraph (a)(2); (3) each registeredattorney or agent as defined in paragraph (a)(3); and (4) any other individualwho is both substantively involved in the preparation or prosecution ofthe application and who is associated with at least one of the entitiesdefined in paragraph (a)(4)(II). The latter group of individuals wouldinclude foreign patent attorneys representing an applicant for a U.S. patentthrough a local correspondent firm. <T3>See In re Harita, supra, </T3>and <T3>Gemveto Jewelry Co., Inc. </T3>v. <T3>Lambert Bros., Inc., </T3>542 F. Supp. 933, 216 USPQ 976 (S.D.N.Y.1982). It would also include a person acting as liaison between the inventorand the attorney or agent handling the prosecution of an application beforethe Office and who is involved in the preparation or prosecution of theapplication in a manner that would make a reasonable representative awareof the substantive aspects of the patent application. The person does nothave to be a member of a law firm or corporate patent department employedby the assignee of the patent application. On the other hand, merely becausethe individual worked on related cases for the same assignee would not,without further knowledge of the content and claims of the applicationbeing considered, create a duty of disclosure for that individual, norwould there be a duty to inquire of that individual as to whether he orshe knew of relevant information. Section 1.57(b), as proposed, represents a significant departure from thestandard defined under andSection; 1.56. It adopts an objective ``but for''standard of materiality, which requires a conclusion that a pending claimwould not have been permitted to issue in a patent grant ``but for'' themisrepresentation, concealment, or otherwise culpable conduct with respectto any fact. That is, the ``but for'' standard of materiality requiresa conclusion that a pending claim is (1) patentable in the absence of agiven fact which is the subject of misrepresentation, concealment, or otherwiseculpable conduct; and (2) unpatentable in the presence of such fact. Indeciding the question of materiality under the ``but for'' standard, adecision maker would first look to the patentability of the claim basedon the record and the facts known to the individuals designated in andSection;1.57(a) without the fact which was misrepresented, concealed, or otherwisesubject to culpable conduct, i.e., as though the fact did not exist. Havingdetermined that the claim is patentable without the fact which was misrepresented,concealed, or otherwise subject to culpable conduct, the decision makerwould then determine if the claim is unpatentable assuming the fact doesexist. If the claim is determined to be unpatentable, the fact would meetthe ``but for'' test standard of materiality proposed in these rules. Whether or not information meets the ``but for'' standard of materialityis not dependent upon what the examiner would do with the misrepresentedor concealed information if the true facts were known to the examiner,but rather whether or not the information would make a difference in thepatentability of the claims if the information had been properly disclosedand not misrepresented nor concealed. Thus, the determination of patentability under this standard is not basedon the subjective determination of any particular examiner or other Officepersonnel, nor on the subjective determination of any of the individualsdefined in proposed andSection; 1.57(a), but consists of an objective legalconclusion as to the patentability of one or more claims under relevantsections of Title 35 and applicable judicial precedent. A person wouldnot be considered by the Office to have violated the duty of disclosureunder andSection; 1.57 until a patent issued and it is determined that atleast one patent claim is unpatentable based at least in part on informationwithheld from the Office.The duty to disclose under proposed andSection; 1.57(b) does not apply toinformation which is of record in an application. In other words, therewould be no violation of the duty if the examiner independently finds thewithheld prior art and makes it of record in the application file priorto the issuance of a patent. Further, information and documents cited ininternational search reports from the European Patent Office (EPO) andJapanese Patent Office (JPO) will be considered to be of record under certaincircumstances in the corresponding PCT-based national stage applicationfiled under 35 U.S.C. 371. Those circumstances include the current agreementamong the three patent offices (EPO, JPO, USPTO) that international searchreports prepared by any of the three offices and designating another officewill include a copy of each document cited and an indication of the relevanceof such document. This cooperative arrangement has been working informallyfor about five years and became a formal continuing program recently. Thus,the duty to disclose does not apply to documents cited in an internationalsearch report prepared by any of the three offices because they will beconsidered by the Office to be of record in the national stage applicationfiled in the United States under 35 U.S.C. 371. The information which is misrepresented or concealed need not anticipatea pending claim to fall within the ``but for'' standard of materiality,but must, when added to other facts of record in the application and knownto the individuals designated in proposed andSection; 1.57(a) preclude theallowance of at least one pending claim in a patent. Allowance may be precludedunder appropriate sections of Title 35 in addition to any judicially createddoctrine such as double patenting of the obviousness type. A pending claim within the meaning of proposed andSection; 1.57(b) is a claimwhich is presented for examination and has not been canceled. No duty ofdisclosure would exist as to a claim that is canceled in a preliminaryamendment submitted with the application papers. Similarly, no duty ofdisclosure would exist as to a claim that has been canceled at the timea person defined in proposed andSection; 1.57(a) becomes aware of a publicationthat would render that claim unpatentable, either by itself or in combinationwith other evidence of record or known to such a person. On the other hand,a duty of disclosure would exist as to a claim that has been withdrawnfrom consideration by the examiner_for example, as the result of a restrictionrequirement_but has not been canceled. Nevertheless, a violation of thatduty would not occur unless and until a patent issued with such a claim.The duty of disclosure arises at the point in time when an individual becomesaware of information not of record in the application that would renderunpatentable any claim then pending. Actual knowledge of the pertinentinformation and its materiality is not required by this proposed paragraphif the individual should have known of the information and its materiality.<T3>See FMC Corp. </T3>v. <T3>Manitowoc Co., supra </T3>and <T3>FMC Corp. </T3>v. <T3>Hennessy Industries, Inc., </T3>836 F.2d 521, 5 USPQ 2d 1272 (Fed.Cir. 1987). The duty of disclosure continues until that claim is canceled.If a claim is modified during prosecution in the Office, the scope of theamended claim determines the duty of disclosure. But, as mentioned above,there would be no violation of that duty unless a patent issues with aclaim which would be unpatentable over information which includes the withheldprior art or information. Proposed andSection; 1.57(b) makes mandatory the procedures set forth inproposed andSection;andSection; 1.97 and 1.98 for disclosing to the Officeinformation that meets the ``but for'' standard of materiality. The generalpractice of filing information disclosure statements as a method of complyingwith the duty of disclosure would no longer be optional. Finally, proposed andSection; 1.57(b) indicates that an individual designatedin proposed andSection; 1.57(a)(4) can satisfy the duty of disclosure bydisclosing information to an individual designated in any of proposed andSection;1.57(a) (1)-(3). This provision relates only to the determination of possiblemisconduct on the part of the individual designated in proposed andSection;1.57(a)(4), and does not otherwise satisfy the duty of disclosure owedto the Office. Proposed andSection; 1.57(c) emphasizes that responsibility for compliancewith the duty defined in paragraph (b) rests with the individuals identifiedin paragraph (a), and that generally no evaluation will be made by theOffice in any proceeding as to compliance with paragraph (b). The onlycircumstances in which the Office will consider compliance with this sectionunder the proposed rules are either with reference to a disciplinary proceedingunder 37 CFR Part 10 or in limited situations with a reissue application,as where there is a judicial determination of fraud or inequitable conductor an admission of facts which would conclusively establish fraud or inequitableconduct without any investigation. Proposed andSection; 1.57(d) would provide a cross reference to the rulesrelating to the representation of others before the Office in 37 CFR Part10 and indicate that the failure of a registered representative to complywith the duty of candor and good faith required by proposed andSection; 1.57may be cause for instituting disciplinary action under andSection; 10.131for misconduct. The provisions of andSection; 1.56 (c), (f), and (g) are proposed to beeliminated because an application may be filed in the Office without anoath or declaration pursuant to andSection; 1.53(d). Further, the defectsin executing a patent application listed in andSection; 1.56(c) would haveto be cured by filing a supplemental oath or declaration pursuant to proposedandSection; 1.67(c). Accordingly, the Office will not consider striking anapplication for these defects under the proposed rules and will not entertaina petition directed to such matters. However, the conduct of any practitionerpermitting a material alteration of the application papers after the oathor declaration has been signed, which is prohibited by andSection; 1.52(c),is not condoned by the Office and remains subject to a disciplinary proceeding.<T3>See</T3> andSection; 10.23(c)(11). Similarly, since the Office will not comment on duty of disclosure issueswhich are brought to its attention in original or reissue applicationsexcept in very limited circumstances related to deceptive intent in a reissueapplication, the provisions of andSection; 1.56 (d), (e), (h), and (i) areproposed to be eliminated. The provision in andSection; 1.56(j) that a timeperiod would be set by the Office for the applicant to provide copies ofdocuments omitted from an information disclosure statement is to be deletedbecause time may be given only in very limited circumstances in order tocomplete an information disclosure statement under proposed andSection; 1.97. Section 1.63(a)(1) is proposed to be revised to require that an oath ordeclaration be dated when it is signed. Thus, the Office will be able todetermine if there has been an unusual length of time between the dateof execution of the oath or declaration and the filing date of the application.Also, a cross reference to andSection; 1.64 is added because that sectioncontains several execution requirements. Section 1.63 (b)(3) and (d) are proposed to be revised to reflect thatandSection; 1.56 is being replaced by new andSection; 1.57. The oath or declarationfiled with an application would need to acknowledge a duty to discloseinformation as required by proposed andSection; 1.57. Any oath or declaration,which acknowledges a duty to disclose information material to the examinationof the application in accordance with the present andSection; 1.56(a), wouldbe acceptable under the proposed rules since the proposed standard of materialityis included within the standard previously applied by the Office (i.e.,if an individual complied with the former standard, that individual wouldcomply with the proposed standard). Section 1.67 is proposed to be revised to add new paragraph (c) requiringthat a new oath or declaration be filed if a prior one contained any ofthe defects previously listed in andSection; 1.56(c). The new oath or declarationmay be sought by the Office or the applicant may voluntarily submit one. The provisions of present andSection; 1.97 are proposed to be revised torequire the submission of a statement regarding information which an individualdesignated in proposed andSection; 1.57(a) has a duty to disclose under proposedandSection; 1.57(b), to define the time periods for filing an informationdisclosure statement, and to continue the option to file a statement directedto information which the applicant would like the Office to consider eventhough the information may not meet the ``but for'' level of materiality. Under proposed andSection; 1.97(a), an information disclosure statementwould be required to be filed in each national application or Patent CooperationTreaty (PCT)-based national stage application where an individual designatedin proposed andSection; 1.57(a) knows or should have known of informationwhich meets the objective ``but for'' test of proposed andSection; 1.57(b).An individual is not obligated to conduct a prior art search nor furnisha negative information disclosure statement. The filing of an informationdisclosure statement in a reexamination proceeding is addressed in theproposed revision of andSection; 1.555. Under proposed andSection; 1.97(b), an information disclosure statementmay be filed to contain information which an applicant would like the Officeto consider in the examination of an application. There is no duty or requirementto disclose information to the Office unless it meets the threshold materialityand knowledge requirements set forth in proposed andSection; 1.57.Section 1.97(c), as proposed, would make mandatory the time periods forfiling an information disclosure statement. This provision differs fromcurrent practice which only encouraged the filing of an information disclosurestatement within a short period of time after the application is filed.By requiring a statement to be filed within the times specified, the Officeseeks to promote the efficiency of the examination process and to helpavoid duty of disclosure issues. Specifically, the statement shall be filedin a national patent application within three months of the filing dateof the application. For a PCT-based national stage application, the statementshall be filed within three months of entry of the national stage applicationas set forth in andSection; 1.491. In each type of application, an informationdisclosure statement may be filed after the three-month period, but thiswould normally require a fee. The purpose of the fee for information submittedafter the three-month period is to compensate the Office for the extrawork caused the examiner who may have to redo part or all of the examinationbecause of the late submission. The time periods for filing a statement are not subject to an extensionof time under andSection; 1.136. However, the examiner may allow an additionaltime period to permit an applicant to provide any information requiredby andSection; 1.98, which was inadvertently omitted. The concept proposedhere is the same as that applied under andSection; 1.135(c). Otherwise, ifthe applicant needs to supplement an incomplete statement after the three-monthperiod has expired, the additional information would have to be filed aspart of a separate statement under andSection; 1.97(f), which may requirea fee. An information disclosure statement timely filed within the three monthsof the filing date pursuant to proposed andSection; 1.97(c) will be consideredby the examiner, even if filed after the mailing of an examiner's finalaction or a notice of allowance, which in rare instances may occur withinthree months of the filing date. For the purposes of this proposed section,the statement will be considered to be filed on the day it is receivedin the Office, or the date of mailing on a properly executed certificateof mailing pursuant to andSection; 1.8 or Express Mail certificate pursuantto andSection; 1.10, whichever is earlier. Proposed andSection; 1.97(d) would continue the present practice of permittingan applicant to file an information disclosure statement either as a paperor submission separate from the specification or by incorporating the informationdisclosure statement in the specification of the application. Proposed andSection; 1.97(e) would stipulate that the mere filing of an informationdisclosure statement shall not constitute an admission that any informationdisclosed in that statement renders unpatentable any claim pending in theapplication, unless the statement contains an admission within the meaningof andSection; 1.106(c). This section would also continue the present policythat the filing of an information disclosure statement will not be construedas a representation that any patentability search has been made. Proposed andSection; 1.97(f) would expand and revise the existing practiceof filing supplemental information disclosure statements under andSection;1.99. Under the proposed section, an applicant may satisfy the duty ofdisclosure requirement by filing a statement after the three-month periodin paragraph (c) has expired. In addition, a statement would be requiredto bring to the attention of the Office any information not in the recordnor contained in an information disclosure statement filed under proposedparagraph (c), which meets the standard of materiality in proposed andSection;1.57. As in paragraph (c), a statement filed under paragraph (f) may includeother information which an applicant would like the Office to considerin examining the application. Thus, such a statement may be used to supplementone filed under paragraph (c). It should be noted that the standard of materiality applies to claims pendingin the application and relates to information of record in the applicationbeing examined in addition to the information known or which should havebeen known by an individual designated in proposed andSection; 1.57(a). Thus,a document known to such an individual which was not required to be disclosedin an information disclosure statement under proposed andSection; 1.97(c)may need to be disclosed in a statement under proposed andSection; 1.97(f)due to intervening events. For example, the scope of the claims may be changed to make a documentfall within the proposed standard of materiality even though the documentwas not relevant to the patentability of the claims as originally presented.As an additional example, an inventor may know of a first reference whichby itself does not render a claim unpatentable. However, the examiner mayfind and cite a second reference which makes the first reference fall withinthe proposed scope of materiality_thereby creating a duty to disclose thefirst reference. Likewise, the first reference may become relevant dueto the citation of a third reference by a foreign patent office or becauseof the independent discovery by the inventor during the examination processof a fourth reference. All of these possibilities continue to make it importantfor individuals to bring pertinent information to the attention of theOffice as soon as it is discovered. It is recognized that patentability may be established by the submissionto the Office of evidence of unexpected results or commercial success.In addition, a reference may be removed from consideration by filing anantedating affidavit containing evidence of prior invention under andSection;1.131. It is permissible for an applicant to rely on such evidence in determiningwhether or not to disclose certain information to the Office even if theevidence is not submitted to the Office for evaluation. Therefore, therewould be no violation of the duty of disclosure if, prior to the issuanceof a patent, an applicant is or becomes aware of such evidence that wouldestablish patentability of all the claims over the withheld informationand the art of record. Of course, a court later might conclude that theevidence was not sufficient to establish patentability and find that therewas inequitable conduct. On the other hand, if the applicant becomes awareof such evidence after issuance of a patent, this would not avoid a violationof the duty to the Office because the patent would not have issued <T3>but for </T3>the withholding of information.A statement under paragraph (f) must be filed no later than the businessday prior to the mailing date of the final action or the notice of allowance,whichever occurs first. This will enable the examiner to consider carefullythe statement without disrupting the normal processing of applicationswithin the Office. In the event that a final Office action is withdrawnor a notice of allowance is rescinded, any information disclosure statementthat had not been filed in a timely manner would be acceptable if timelyresubmitted and otherwise proper in form and content. The application wouldthen be treated as if no final action or notice of allowance had been mailedup to the point that such an action is withdrawn or rescinded. No extensionsof time are permitted under andSection; 1.136 although the examiner may setan additional time period to permit an applicant to provide any informationrequired by andSection; 1.98, which was inadvertently omitted. As noted above, a statement that was untimely when filed under paragraph(f) could be considered timely by the occurrence of subsequent events.If one of those events occurs, the information contained in the statementwould be considered by the examiner if the information disclosure statementis timely resubmitted. In the absence of any of those events, such thatthe statement remains untimely, the information contained in the statementwould be considered only if the application in which it is filed is abandonedand the information is disclosed in a continuing application in the mannerprescribed in proposed andSection;andSection; 1.97 and 1.98. This will requirethat copies of documents cited in the information disclosure statementbe resubmitted in the continuing application. Proposed andSection; 1.97(g) would require that a fee in the amount set forthin proposed andSection; 1.17(p) accompany an information disclosure statementfiled under paragraph (f) unless the statement certifies that all of theinformation disclosed in such a statement was, within three months priorto the date the statement is filed in the Office, either first cited bya foreign patent office in a counterpart foreign patent application orfirst came to the attention of any person charged with the duty of disclosurein andSection; 1.57(a). The date on the action by the foreign patent officebegins the three-month period in the same manner as the mailing of an Officeaction starts a three-month shortened statutory period for response. Likewise,the filing date of the statement is the date the statement is receivedin the Office, or the date of mailing if accompanied by a properly executedcertificate of mailing under andSection; 1.8, or certificate of Express Mailunder andSection; 1.10, whichever occurs earlier. The term ``counterpart foreign patent application'' means that a claimfor priority has been made in either the U.S. application or a foreignapplication based on the other, or that the disclosures of the U.S. andforeign patent application are substantively identical. Although paragraph(g) does not require a fee if the information disclosure statement is submittedwithin certain time periods, this is not intended to modify the requirementin paragraph (f) of this section that a statement must be filed beforethe final action or notice of allowance is mailed. Certification by a registered practitioner that the statement was filedwithin the three-month period of either first citation by a foreign patentoffice or first discovery of the information (not the materiality of theinformation) will be accepted as dispositive of compliance with this provisionin the absence of evidence to the contrary. A statement on informationand belief normally will not be sufficient. Although it is recognized thatan individual actually becomes aware of the information in the communicationfrom the foreign patent office sometime after it was mailed, the mailingdate of such a communication, if it occurs prior to the first awarenessof the same information, would determine the date for filing of an informationdisclosure statement without a fee. The Office is willing to absorb anyadditional cost in considering such information submitted three monthsafter filing the application only when it is clear that an applicant isdiligent in providing the information to the Office. Under proposed andSection; 1.97(h), an information disclosure statement wouldnot be considered to be filed until all component parts of a complete statementunder proposed andSection; 1.98 are filed with the Office, except for inadvertentomissions. Thus, the filing of a statement identifying relevant documentsbut intentionally failing to supply available copies of all the cited documentswill not be accepted until such copies are supplied. Paragraph (h) alsosets forth the consequences and procedures for processing an informationdisclosure statement that is either not complete and/or not filed in atimely manner. Such a statement will not be deemed to satisfy any applicableduty of disclosure owed to the Office by an individual designated in proposedandSection; 1.57(a) but will be returned to the applicant and not consideredby the Office in that application. If the required fee was submitted, itwill be refunded. The Office will note in the record of the applicationthat an information disclosure statement was returned to the applicant.It is expected that an applicant will file a continuing application tohave the Office consider pertinent prior art which comes to his or herattention after final action or notice of allowance has been mailed ifthe prior art affects the patentability of any claim. Under the proposed revision of andSection; 1.98, the administrative detailsof supplying information to the Office are defined. For the most part,these details remain unchanged from current practice, but the format andwording has been modified to provide greater clarity. Under proposed andSection;1.98(a), the information disclosure statement must include a listing ofthe information required to be disclosed by andSection; 1.97, preferablyin or on a form which is suitable for inclusion in the record without requiringthe examiner to reproduce the same information on a form acceptable tothe printer so that the documents will be listed on the patent. Those submittingan information disclosure statement are encouraged to use form PTO-1449,``Information Disclosure Citation.'' In addition to the listing, the statementmust include an explanation of the reason each item of information is listed.Typically, the reason would include a concise explanation of the relevanceof each item to the claimed invention, but may further contain an explanationof why the claimed invention should be considered patentable over the itemof information.Proposed andSection; 1.98(b) would continue the present practice and policyof requiring an individual to submit a legible copy of the document orother information cited in the information disclosure statement eitherin its entirety or at least that portion of each item of information whichcaused the individual submitting the information to list that item in theinformation disclosure statement. If a copy of the document or item ofinformation is not in the possession, custody, control or is not otherwisereadily available to any individual designated in proposed andSection; 1.57(a),the individual submitting the statement must submit a statement to thateffect at the time of presenting the statement to the Office. It is notexpected that the latter situation will arise very often, but because ofthe time deadlines involved in filing an information disclosure statement,it is considered appropriate to provide this flexibility for individualscharged with the duty to bring information to the attention of the Office.The Office will not, however, assume the responsibility of obtaining acopy of that item of information before making a final determination ofpatentability. Copies of pending U.S. patent applications cited in the information disclosurestatement should not be submitted to the Office as set forth in proposedandSection; 1.98(b)(1)(III) because this may result in the unnecessary disclosureof the contents of such patent applications when the application in whichit was cited matures into a patent. Proposed andSection; 1.98(c) continues the present practice and policy regardingthe identifying information to be listed for each document typically citedin an information disclosure statement. Listing of the patentees or authorsin a patent or publication may be limited to the last name of the firstlisted inventor followed by ``<T3>et al</T3>.'' Proposed andSection; 1.98(d) continues the present practice and policy relativeto citing and supplying information which is cumulative and relative tosupplying a translation of information that is not in the English language.Under this proposed section, if any of the information required to be disclosedis substantially cumulative in terms of its content relative to the patentabilityof the claims, the statement need be accompanied by only a single copyof a document containing the essential information provided that the omissionof the copies of the cumulative information is explained. In addition, an English language translation of a foreign language documentor the relevant portion thereof need only be submitted when it is in thepossession, custody or control of, or readily available to any individualdesignated in proposed andSection; 1.57(a). This does not mean that suchan individual must purchase a translation in each case, even though a translatingservice is readily available. But if the individual has the ability totranslate the foreign language into English and has done so for the purposesof reviewing the information relative to the claimed invention, the translationwould be considered ``readily available'' to the individual. Section 1.175(a)(7) is proposed to be revised to reflect that andSection;1.56 is being replaced by andSection; 1.57. Any reissue oath acknowledginga duty to disclose information, which is material to the examination ofthe application in accordance with the present andSection; 1.56(a), wouldbe acceptable under the proposed rules as explained in connection withthe proposed change to andSection; 1.63 (b) and (d). Section 1.193(c) is proposed to be deleted and reserved, reflecting theintention of the Office not to comment on duty of disclosure issues inan original or reissue application except in very limited circumstancesrelated to deceptive intent in a reissue application.Section 1.291(a) is proposed to be revised to eliminate consideration ina protest of an allegation about duty of disclosure issues. Since the Officewill not be investigating these issues, such a protest will merely be placedin the application file without comment. Further, protests which do notadequately identify a pending application will be disposed of because theOffice cannot act on such protests. Section 1.291(c) is proposed to be revised to remove the reference to andSection;1.56. As explained above, there would be no need to require informationin a protest with respect to an issue of duty of disclosure. Section 1.313(b) is proposed to be revised to include, as a reason forwithdrawing an application from issue after the issue fee has been paid,a request by an applicant to consider information which has not been filedin a timely manner. Accordingly, since the Office will not consider informationwhich is untimely filed in an application, it is necessary to provide amechanism to permit an applicant to withdraw an application from issuein the event that it is desired to have the Office consider informationthat has come to the attention of an individual specified in proposed andSection;1.57(a) after the mailing of the final Office action or the notice of allowance.This mechanism is also available to those who belatedly decide to bringthe information to the attention of the Office before the patent issues.The Office wishes to provide every reasonable opportunity for an individualto avoid the consequences of misconduct in the Office. Section 1.555 is proposed to be revised to conform with the duty of disclosurecontained in new andSection; 1.57 and to require that an information disclosurestatement be filed within certain time periods. Under proposed andSection;1.555(a), there would be no fee if the statement is filed within two monthsof the date of the order for reexamination pursuant to andSection; 1.525.An information disclosure statement limited to information not of recordas of the date of the order for reexamination will not be considered tobe a patent owner's statement pursuant to andSection; 1.530. Under proposed andSection; 1.555(b), a statement may be filed after the twomonths if accompanied by a fee in certain circumstances and if filed priorto the mailing of a notice of intent to issue a reexamination certificate.A fee would be due unless it is certified that all of the information disclosedin such a statement was, within two months prior to the date the statementis filed in the Office, either first cited by a foreign patent office ina counterpart foreign patent application or first came to the attentionof any person charged with the duty of disclosure in andSection; 1.57(a)if the same information was not earlier cited by a foreign patent officein a counterpart foreign application. As stated with respect to proposed andSection; 1.97(g), the date on the actionby the foreign patent office begins the two-month period and the filingdate of the statement is the date the statement is received in the Office,or the date of mailing if accompanied by a properly executed certificateof mailing under andSection; 1.8, or certificate of Express Mail under andSection;1.10, whichever is earlier. Extensions of time to file an information disclosurestatement under either paragraph will not be permitted because 35 U.S.C.305 requires that reexamination proceedings be conducted with special dispatchand because such a provision would defeat the purpose of the fee to payfor the added costs of examination. The duty of disclosure is not violated in a reexamination proceeding unlessa claim either confirmed or allowed in a reexamination certificate wouldbe rendered unpatentable by withheld information known at the time of themailing of the notice of intent to issue a reexamination certificate. Relevant prior art discovered after the mailing of the notice of intentwould not be considered in the pending reexamination proceeding. Therefore,the patent owner may wish to file a new request for reexamination under35 U.S.C. 302 to have the new information considered on the merits. Aninformation disclosure statement filed in a reexamination proceeding mustbe made in accordance with the form and content specified in proposed andSection;1.98. Subparagraph 10 of andSection; 10.23(c) is proposed to be revised to reflectthat andSection; 1.56 is proposed to be replaced by proposed andSection; 1.57and to add a reference to the duty of disclosure requirement in a reexaminationset forth in andSection; 1.555. The proposed change in the duty of disclosurewill, of course, have an impact on any disciplinary action charging a practitionerwith a violation of that duty. Subparagraph 11 of andSection; 10.23(c) is proposed to be revised to reflectthe change that andSection; 1.56(c) is proposed to be deleted. Although applicationshaving defects in their execution will no longer be stricken, the Officedesires to continue to discourage practitioners from permitting alterationsin the application papers after the oath or declaration is signed as prohibitedby andSection; 1.52(c), especially if such alterations are material. Mere editing, such as correcting misspellings, would not be consideredto involve material changes. Nor would the insertion of filing or patentinformation of a parent or related application. However, adding to or deletingfrom the application matters of substance, such as a working example ora claim, would be considered to be a material change.<ITAG tagnum="84">Other Considerations</ITAG> The proposed rule change is in conformity with the requirements of theRegulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601<T3> et seq.</T3>, Executive Orders 12291 and 12612, and the PaperworkReduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. 3501<T3> et seq.</T3> The General Counsel of the Department of Commerce has certified to theSmall Business Administration that the rule change will not have a significantadverse economic impact on a substantial number of small entities (RegulatoryFlexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 605(b)) because the proposed rules do not requireindividuals to submit information that they are not already under an obligationto provide to the Office. The proposed rules further promote the efficiencyof the examination process by requiring a timely submission of an informationdisclosure statement and eliminating rejections based on inequitable conduct,thereby reducing the costs to all patent applicants. The Patent and Trademark Office has determined that this proposed rulechange is not a major rule under Executive Order 12291. The annual effecton the economy will be less than $100 million. There will be no major increasein costs or prices for consumers, individual industries, federal, stateor local government agencies, or geographic regions. There will be no significantadverse effects on competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation,or on the ability of the United States-based enterprises to compete withforeign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets. The Patent and Trademark Office has also determined that this proposedrule has no Federalism implications affecting the relationship betweenthe National Government and the States as outlined in Executive Order 12612. This proposed rule contains a collection of information requirement subjectto the Paperwork Reduction Act, which has previously been approved by theOffice of Management and Budget under Control No. 0651-0011. Each informationdisclosure statement is estimated to take approximately 30 minutes, includingtime for reviewing instructions, gathering and maintaining data neededand completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send commentsregarding this burden estimate to the Patent and Trademark Office, Officeof Management and Organization and to the Office of Information and RegulatoryAffairs, Office of Management and Budget, Washington DC 20503. (AttentionPaper Reduction Project 0651-0011)<ITAG tagnum="84"> List of Subjects</ITAG> 37 CFR Part 1 Administrative practice and procedure, Inventions and patents, Reportingand record keeping requirements, Small businesses. 37 CFR Part 10 Administrative practice and procedure, Inventions and patents, Lawyers,Reporting and record keeping requirements. For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 37 CFR Parts 1 and 10 are proposedto be amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52"> PART 1_RULES OF PRACTICE IN PATENT CASES</ITAG> 1. The authority citation for Part 1 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 35 U.S.C. 6, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG> 2. In andSection; 1.17, paragraph (p) is proposed to be added to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80"> andSection; 1.17</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Patent Application Processing Fees.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG>(p) For filing an information disclosure statement under andSection;andSection;1.97 (f) and (g) and 1.555(b) * * * 200.00. 3. Section 1.28(d)(2) is proposed to be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.28 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Effect on fees of failure to establish status, or change status, asa small entity. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d)(1) * * * (2) Improperly and through gross negligence (i) establishing status asa small entity or (ii) paying fees as a small entity shall be consideredas a fraud practiced or attempted on the Office. 4. Section 1.52(c) is proposed to be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.52 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Language, paper, writing margins. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) Any interlineation, erasure, cancellation or other alteration of theapplication papers filed must be made before the signing of any accompanyingoath or declaration pursuant to andSection; 1.63 referring to those applicationpapers and should be dated and initialed or signed by the applicant onthe same sheet of paper. No such alterations in the application papersare permissible after the signing of an oath or declaration referring tothose application papers. After the signing of the oath or declarationreferring to the application papers, amendments may only be made in themanner provided by andSection;andSection; 1.121 and 1.123 through 1.125. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>5. Section 1.56 is proposed to be removed and reserved. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.56 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Reserved] </ITAG>6. Section 1.57 is proposed to be added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.57 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duty of disclosure. </ITAG>(a) A duty of candor and good faith toward the Office rests on the followingindividuals: (1) Any named inventor who signs the oath required by 35 U.S.C. 115; (2) Any non-inventor who signs the oath required by the last sentence of35 U.S.C. 115 in an application filed under 35 U.S.C. 117 and 35 U.S.C.118; (3) Each registered attorney or agent who prepares or prosecutes the application;and (4) Every other individual who is: (i) Substantively involved in the preparation or prosecution of the application;and (ii) Associated with the inventor, an assignee, or any entity to whom thereis an obligation to assign the application or any patent issuing thereon.(b) Any individual designated in paragraph (a) of this section has a dutyto disclose to the Office all information not considered by the Officeto be of record in an application, which that individual knows or shouldhave known would render unpatentable any pending claim. This duty continueswith respect to the pending claim until it is canceled or the applicationbecomes abandoned at which time the duty ceases. Thus, the duty is violatedonly if a patent issues with a claim which would be rendered unpatentableby the withheld information when all the facts of record in the patentfile and known to the individuals designated in paragraph (a) of this sectionat the time the patent issues are considered. The manner for submittingthe required information to the Office is provided in andSection;andSection;1.97 and 1.98. Disclosure to a person designated in paragraphs (a)(1),(a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section by an individual designated in paragraph(a)(4) of this section shall satisfy the duty as to that individual. (c) No evaluation as to compliance with this section will be made by theOffice except as provided below: (1) In a reissue application where the Office is presented with clear andconvincing evidence of deceptive intent in obtaining a patent, such asa judicial determination of fraud or inequitable conduct or an admissionof facts conclusively establishing fraud or inequitable conduct withoutconducting an investigation; or (2) In a disciplinary proceeding against a practitioner under Part 10.(d) Failure of a registered patent attorney or agent to comply with theduty of candor and good faith may be cause for instituting disciplinaryaction under andSection; 10.131 for misconduct. <T3>See also </T3>andSection; 10.23(c)(10). 7. In andSection; 1.63 paragraphs (a)(1), (b)(3), and (d) are proposed tobe revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.63 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Oath or declaration. </ITAG>(a) * * * (1) Be signed, dated and executed in accordance with andSection;andSection;1.64 and 1.66 or 1.68; <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) * * * (3) Acknowledges the duty to disclose information in accordance with andSection;1.57. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) In any continuation-in-part application filed under the conditionsspecified in 35 U.S.C. 120 which discloses and claims subject matter inaddition to that disclosed in the prior copending application, the oathor declaration must also state that the person making the oath or declarationacknowledges the duty to disclose information in accordance with andSection;1.57 which occurred between the filing date of the prior application andthe national or PCT international filing date of the continuation-in-partapplication.8. Section 1.67 is proposed to be amended to add paragraph (c) to readas follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.67 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Supplemental oath or declaration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) A supplemental oath or declaration meeting the requirements of andSection;1.63 must also be filed if the application was altered after the oath ordeclaration was signed or if the oath or declaration was signed: (1) In blank; (2) Without review thereof by the person making the oath or declaration;or (3) Without review of the specification, including the claims, as requiredby andSection; 1.63(b). 9. Section 1.97 is proposed to be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.97 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Filing of information disclosure statement. </ITAG>(a) An information disclosure statement shall be filed within the timeperiods set forth in this section in each: (1) National patent application; and (2) PCT-based national stage application to disclose all information whichany individual charged with the duty of disclosure in andSection; 1.57(a)knows or should have known renders unpatentable any claim pending in theapplication at the time the information disclosure statement is filed.If there is no such information, an information disclosure statement isnot required. (b) An information disclosure statement may also disclose other informationwhich an applicant would like the Office to consider in examining the application.(c) An information disclosure statement may be filed without a fee in anational patent application within 3 months of the filing date of the application.In a PCT-based national stage application, the statement may be filed withouta fee within 3 months of entry of the national stage application underandSection; 1.491. No extensions of time are permitted under andSection; 1.136except that if a <T3>bona fide </T3>attempt has been made to comply with andSection; 1.98but part of the required information was inadvertently omitted, additionaltime may be given to enable full compliance. (d) Any information disclosure statement filed under this section may be:(1) Filed in a paper separate from the specification of the application;or (2) Incorporated in the specification. (e) Unless an information disclosure statement contains an admission withinthe meaning of andSection; 1.106(c), the filing of an information disclosurestatement shall not constitute an admission that any information disclosedrenders unpatentable any claim pending in the application. Nor shall themere filing be construed as a representation that a patentability searchhas been made. (f) If, after the time for submitting an information disclosure statementunder paragraph (c) of this section has expired, there is information notof record which is required to be disclosed under andSection; 1.57(b), astatement shall be timely filed in the form required by andSection; 1.98.The statement may also include other information which the applicant wouldlike to have considered. Any statement filed under this paragraph willbe deemed timely only if it is filed prior to the mailing of an examiner'sfinal action under andSection; 1.113 or of a notice of allowance under andSection;1.311, whichever occurs first. No extensions of time are permitted underandSection; 1.136 except that if a <T3>bona fide</T3> attempt has been made to comply with andSection; 1.98but part of the required information was inadvertently omitted, additionaltime may be given to enable full compliance. (g) The information disclosure statement under paragraph(f) of this sectionshall be accompanied by the fee set forth in andSection; 1.17(p) unless thestatement certifies that, within 3 months prior to the date the statementis filed in the Office, the date of either one of the following eventsoccurred: (1) The mailing of a communication from a foreign patent office in a counterpartforeign patent application first citing all the patents, publications,and other material disclosed in the statement; or (2) The first knowledge by any person charged with the duty of disclosurein andSection; 1.57(a) of all the patents, publications, and other materialdisclosed in the statement if they were not cited earlier by a foreignpatent office in a counterpart foreign patent application. (h) Any information disclosure statement which does not comply with andSection;1.98 except for inadvertent omissions considered under paragraphs (c) and(f) of this section or any statement which is not timely filed as requiredby this section, will be: (1) Deemed not to satisfy any applicable duty of disclosure owed underandSection; 1.57 if a patent subsequently issues; (2) Returned to the applicant; and (3) Considered only if: (i) The application is abandoned, and (ii) The information is disclosed in an information disclosure statementtimely filed in a continuing application. 10. Section 1.98 is proposed to be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.98 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Content of information disclosure statement. </ITAG>(a) The information disclosure statement shall include: (1) A list of all the patents, publications, or other material requiredor permitted to be disclosed under andSection; 1.97 (a), (b), and (f); and(2) A concise explanation of why each patent, publication, or other materialis listed.(b) The information disclosure statement shall be accompanied by: (1) A legible copy of: (i) Each U.S. Patent; (ii) Each publication or foreign patent or that portion of which causedit to be listed; and (iii) All other material, except patent application files, or that portionof which caused it to be listed; or (2) A statement that a copy is not in the possession, custody, or controlor is not readily available to any individual designated in andSection; 1.57(a).(c) Each U.S. patent listed in an information disclosure statement shallbe identified by patentee(s), patent number and issue date. Any foreignpatent or published foreign patent application shall be identified by thecountry or patent office which issued the patent or published the application,an appropriate document number, and a publication date indicated on thepatent or published application. Each publication shall be identified byauthor(s), if any, title of publication, relevant pages of the publication,date and place of publication. (d) When the disclosures of two or more patents or publications requiredto be reported in an information disclosure statement are substantivelycumulative, a single copy of one patent or publication may be submittedand the other patents or publications merely listed in the statement providedthat an explanation is included about the omission of the copies of thecumulative information. If an English language translation of a foreignlanguage document, or portion thereof, is within the possession, custodyor control of, or is readily available to any individual designated inandSection; 1.57(a), a copy of the translation shall accompany the statement.<ITAG tagnum="71">[OMB Control No. 0651-0011]</ITAG>11. Section 1.99 is proposed to be removed and reserved. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.99</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Reserved] </ITAG>12. Section 1.175(a)(7) is proposed to be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.175</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reissue oath or declaration. </ITAG>(a) * * * (7) Acknowledging a duty to disclose information in accordance with andSection;1.57. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>13. Section 1.193(c) is proposed to be removed and reserved: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.193</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Examiner's answer. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) [Reserved] 14. Section 1.291 (a) and (c) are proposed to be revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.291</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Protests by the public against pending applications. </ITAG>(a) Protests by a member of the public against pending applications willbe referred to the examiner having charge of the subject matter involved.A protest specifically identifying the application to which the protestis directed will be entered in the application file if (1) the protestis timely submitted; and (2) the protest is either served upon the applicantin accordance with andSection; 1.248, or filed with the Office in duplicatein the event service is not possible. Protests raising duty of disclosureissues will be placed in the application file without comment on theseissues. Further, protests which do not adequately identify a pending patentapplication will not be considered by the Office but will be disposed of.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) An acknowledgment of the entry of a protest under paragraph (a) ofthis section in a reissue application file will be sent to the member ofthe public filing the protest. A member of the public filing a protestunder paragraph (a) of this section in an application for an original patentwill not receive any communications from the Office relating to the protest,other than the return of a self-addressed postcard which the member ofthe public may include with the protest in order to receive an acknowledgmentby the Office that the protest has been received. The Office will communicatewith the applicant regarding any protest entered in the application fileand may require the applicant to supply information, including responsesto specific questions raised by the protest, in order for the Office todecide any issues raised by the protest. The active participation of themember of the public filing a protest pursuant to paragraph (a) of thissection ends with the filing of the protest and no further submission onbehalf of the protestor will be acknowledged or considered unless suchsubmission raises new issues which could not have been earlier presented,and thereby constitutes a new protest. 15. Section 1.313(b) is proposed to be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.313</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Withdrawal from issue. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) When the issue fee has been paid, and the patent to be issued has receivedits issue date and patent number, the application will not be withdrawnfrom issue for any reason except (1) a mistake on the part of the Office;(2) an illegality in the application; (3) unpatentability of one or moreclaims; or (4) consideration of identified information under andSection;1.57 in a continuing application.16. Section 1.555 is proposed to be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1.555</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duty of disclosure in reexamination proceedings. </ITAG>(a) The duty of candor and good faith owed to the Office in a reexaminationproceeding is the same as that provided in andSection; 1.57, but the dutyis not violated unless a claim either confirmed or allowed in a reexaminationcertificate would be rendered unpatentable by the withheld informationknown at the time a notice of intent to issue a reexamination certificateunder andSection; 1.570 is mailed. Any information disclosure statement bringingpatents or printed publications to the attention of the Office shall bein the form required by andSection; 1.98 and may be filed without a fee withintwo months of the date of the order for reexamination under andSection; 1.525.An information disclosure statement limited to information not of recordas of the date of the order for reexamination will not be considered tobe a patent owner's statement pursuant to andSection; 1.530. (b) Upon payment of the fee set forth in andSection; 1.17(p), an informationdisclosure statement may be filed after two months from the date of theorder for reexamination but no later than the mailing of the intent toissue a reexamination certificate. The fee in andSection; 1.17(p) will notbe required if the statement certifies that, within two months prior tothe date the statement is filed in the Office, the date of either one ofthe following events occurred: (1) The mailing of a communication from a foreign patent office in a counterpartforeign patent application first citing all the patents, publications,and other material disclosed in the statement; or (2) The first knowledge by any person charged with the duty of disclosurein andSection; 1.57(a) of all the patents, publications, and other materialdisclosed in the statement if they were not cited earlier by a foreignpatent office in a counterpart foreign patent application. (c) No extensions of time are permitted under either paragraph (a) or (b)of this section except that, if a <T3>bona fide </T3>attempt has been made to comply with andSection; 1.98but part of the required information was inadvertently omitted, additionaltime may be given to enable full compliance. <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 10_REPRESENTATION OF OTHERS BEFORE THE PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE</ITAG>17. The authority citation for Part 10 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>5 U.S.C. 500; 15 U.S.C. 1123; 35 U.S.C. 6, 31, 32,41.</ITAG>18. Section 10.23(c), paragraphs (10) and (11) are proposed to be revisedto read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 10.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Misconduct. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) * * * (10) Violating the duty of candor or good faith requirements of andSection;1.57 (a) and (b) and andSection; 1.555(a) of this subchapter. (11) Knowingly filing, or causing to be filed, an application containingany material alteration made in the application papers after the signingof the accompanying oath or declaration. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: February 2, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Donald J. Quigg,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary and Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-6223 Filed 3-16-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-16-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>