<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891017-0020 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-17-89.f2.A1019</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 199 / Tuesday, October 17, 1989/ Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Public Health Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">45 CFR Part 60</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[RIN 0905-AC 51]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">National Practitioner Data Bank for Adverse Information on Physiciansand Other Health Care Practitioners</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Public Health Service, HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This rule sets forth criteria and procedures for informationto be collected in and released from a National Practitioner Data Bank,in accordance with the requirements of title IV, part B, of the HealthCare Quality Improvement Act of 1986. These regulations govern the reportingand release of information concerning: (1) Payments made for the benefitof physicians, dentists, and other health care practitioners as a resultof medical malpractice actions and claims; and (2) certain adverse actionstaken regarding the licenses and clinical privileges of physicians anddentists.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>These regulations will be effective on the dateon which the National Practitioner Data Bank is operational. The Secretarywill publish this date in an announcement in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.A separate announcement will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> when the Department obtains Office of Managementand Budget approval for andSection; 60.6(b) which contains information collectionrequirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Daniel D. Cowell, M.S., Director,Division of Quality Assurance and Liability Management, Bureau of HealthProfessions, Health Resources and Services Administration, Room 8-15, ParklawnBuilding, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20857; telephone number:301 443-2300.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On March 21, 1988, the Secretary publisheda Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) to implement the Health Care QualityImprovement Act of 1986 (the Act), title IV of Public Law 99-660, throughthe establishment of a National Practitioner Data Bank (the Data Bank).The Department received more than 140 comments which were postmarked onor before May 20, the end of the comment period, from health professionals'organizations, hospitals, health maintenance organizations, State licensingboards, other units of State government, insurers, health care consultants,attorneys, physicians, and others.The Secretary would like to thank the respondents for the quality and thethoroughness of their comments. As a result of the comments, many modificationshave been made to the NPRM. The comments and the Department's responseto the comments are discussed below. For clarity, the comments and responsesare arranged according to the section numbers and titles of the NPRM towhich they pertain. We note that a new andSection; 60.6 has been added tothe final regulations, which results in renumbering the sections followingnew andSection; 60.6.As the Secretary indicated in the March 21, 1988 NPRM, the Act does notrequire the application of these provisions to Federal health care entities,physicians, dentists, and other health care providers. However, the intentof the law appears clear that coverage be as broad as possible, and hencethat Federal providers be included to the extent feasible. Accordingly,the Secretary has signed Memoranda of Understanding with the Departmentof Defense and the Drug Enforcement Administration of the Department ofJustice, and is pursuing the execution of such a memorandum with the Departmentof Veterans Affairs. Also, the Secretary is developing a policy and procedureregarding the manner in which health care providers in the Department ofHealth and Human Services will participate in the Data Bank.Subpart A_General ProvisionsSection 60.1 The National Practitioner DataBankThe Department has revised the title of ``The National Data Bank,'' to``The National Practitioner Data Bank'' to more precisely represent thepurpose of the Data Bank. Accordingly, references to the Data Bank havebeen so revised throughout these regulations.Section 60.3 DefinitionsSeveral respondents indicated that the reference to ``failing to renewState licensure'' in the definition of ``adversely affecting'' was incorrect,since ``adversely affecting'' is used in the body of the regulations onlyin connection with professional review actions concerning clinical privilegesand membership in a professional society.The Department agrees with the comments and has deleted the phrase ``failingto renew State licensure'' from this definition.A large number of respondents indicated that the definition of ``adverselyaffecting'' was overbroad in its incorporation of actions by specialtyboards. ``Adversely affecting,'' as proposed, referenced specialty boardsfor consistency with the proposed definition of ``health care entity,''which included specialty boards. These respondents similarly felt thatincluding ``specialty board'' within ``health care entity'' was an overexpansionof the Act.In response, the Department has deleted the references to ``specialty board''both from the term ``adversely affecting'' and from ``health care entity.''A more detailed explanation of the comments and the basis for these revisionsis contained in the discussion below of the term ``health care entity.''A board of dental examiners stated that the definition of ``dentist'' wasinaccurate. The board indicated that D.M.D. means ``doctor of dental medicine,''not ``doctor of medical dentistry,'' as proposed. It was also indicatedthat some dentists, generally foreign graduates, may hold a degree otherthan doctor of dental surgery or doctor of dental medicine which qualifiesthem to hold licenses and practice in a State.In response, the Department has deleted the abbreviations for degrees andretained the statutory references for the credentials of a dentist. Forconsistency, the Department has made the same revisions in the definitionof ``physician.'' The definition of ``dentist'' was also expanded to includedentists with degrees equivalent to doctor of dental surgery or doctorof dental medicine who otherwise meet the statutory criteria.Numerous attorneys, associations, and medical boards found the definitionof ``health care entity'' to be unclear and questioned whether variousorganizations, such as Individual Practice Associations and Preferred ProviderOrganizations, would fall within the term.In clarification, the Department's intent is that an entity apply the criteriaof paragraph (b) of the definition of ``health care entity'' to itselfin order to make a factual determination of whether the definition wouldencompass it. Specifically, these criteria are that an entity: (1) Provideshealth care services; and (2) engages in professional review activity througha formal peer review process for the purpose of furthering quality healthcare. The Department prefers to define this term broadly, rather than toattempt to focus on the myriad of health care organizations, practice arrangements,and professional societies, so as to ensure that the regulations includeall the entities within the scope of the statute. In keeping with thisintent, the Department has revised the description of ``group medical practice''in the definition of ``health care entity'' to delete the specific criteriaof shared facilities, personnel, medical records, and responsibilities,and incomes set by contract. The modification generalizes the definitionto indicate that a health care entity includes any group or prepaid medicalpractice which meets the criteria of paragraph (b).As previously mentioned, the Department has further revised ``health careentity'' to delete the reference to ``specialty board'' based on numerouscomments that the proposal was overly broad. In addition, respondents pointedout that membership in a specialty board is voluntary, and that curtailmentof this membership does not necessarily reflect lack of competence. Thecomments generally indicated that equating ``specialty board'' with ``professionalsociety'' within the definition of ``health care entity'' was not withinthe intent of the Act.Several respondents questioned the definition of licensed ``health carepractitioner'' as it refers to ``an individual who is licensed or otherwiseauthorized by a State to provide health care services.'' The Departmentused ``otherwise authorized'' to include disciplines for which States grantauthority to provide health care services by mechanisms other than licensure,such as registration and certification. All health care practitioners authorizedby a State to provide health care services by whatever formal mechanismthe State employs are included within this definition. The Act similarlyuses ``otherwise authorized'' to define ``licensed health care practitioner.''Some respondents requested the Department to include a list of health carepractitioners subject to these regulations. To include such a list in theregulations would be unfeasible since regulatory amendments would thenbe necessary each time the list would require revisions. However, the Departmentdoes intend to make available to members of the public, upon request, alist by State of those practitioners who are the subject of these regulations.Numerous respondents found the definition of ``medical malpractice actionor claim'' to be in need of clarification. Several comments questionedwhether this term was limited to claims or actions filed in court or includedadministrative claims. Other respondents questioned the meaning of ``otheradjudicative body'' as used in this term in reference to where a medicalmalpractice action or claim may be filed.In response to these comments, the Department has adopted some of the suggestedrevisions to clarify the definition as follows: ``Medical malpractice action or claim'' means a written complaint or claimdemanding payment based on a physician's, dentist's, or other health carepractitioner's provision of or failure to provide health care services,and includes the filing of a cause of action based on the law of tort,brought in any State or Federal court or other adjudicative body. This definition, as did that in the NPRM, includes the filing of medicalmalpractice claims on an administrative level, as well as judicial claimsand actions. The revised definition more closely tracks the language ofthe Act. ``Other adjudicative body,'' as used in this definition, is intended tospecify medical malpractice actions which are brought before arbitrationboards and other dispute resolution mechanisms prior to or instead of aformal court action. Two associations opposed the definition of ``professional review action.''One stated that including within the term ``a formal decision not to takean action or to make a recommendation'' was inappropriate, since this phraseis relevant to the immunity provisions of part A of the Act but not thereporting provisions of part B. The other association found that the definitionimplied that a decision to not take an action should be reported. The Department agrees with these comments. Since these regulations implementonly the reporting provisions of part B of the Act and not the immunityprovisions of part A, the Secretary has revised the definition of ``professionalreview action'' to delete the above-referenced phrase. However, the Secretarypoints out that ``a formal decision not to take an action or to make arecommendation'' which would result in the voluntary surrender of clinicalprivileges would be reported under andSection;60.9(a) (i) and (ii). The Departmenthas similarly deleted the reference to ``professional review activitiesrelated to a professional review action'' as being unnecessary in the implementationof the reporting requirements of part B. Numerous respondents requested clarification of the meaning of ``professionalcompetence or conduct'' as used in the definition of ``professional reviewaction.'' They inquired whether revocation or suspension of privilegesrelated to nonclinical factors would be reportable, such as failure toattend staff meetings or to complete medical records or billing forms.Another respondent questioned whether it would include criminal activitiescommitted by the professional outside the employment setting. In response, the Department has revised the form of the definition of ``professionalreview action'' to stress that it encompasses only professional competenceor conduct which affects or could affect adversely the health or welfareof a patient. Hence, ``professional review action'' does not include anaction taken against a physician, dentist, or other health care practitionerbased on a technical or administrative failing unrelated to the healthor welfare of patients. With respect to criminal activities, it would obviouslybe necessary to analyze the criminal action to make a determination whetherthe health or welfare of a patient was or could be adversely affected bythe situation. In short, the Department believes that ``professional reviewaction'' is best defined in generic terms which allows each health careentity to make its own factual determinations. Several respondents found the definition of ``professional review activity''to be unclear. They felt, for example, that a health care entity couldhave many reasons unrelated to professional competence for making an initialdetermination not to grant clinical privileges. For example, it may havea sufficient number of anesthesiologists currently on its staff and notneed the services of another. Another comment stated that many hospitalsroutinely grant initial privileges on a probationary basis. The Department clarifies that, as used in the Act as well as in the NPRM,the definition of ``professional review activity'' is not descriptive ofthe reasons for modification or curtailment of clinical privileges or membershipbut relates only to various types of actions that may or may not lead tomodification or curtailment of clinical privileges and membership. Thisdefinition's significance is in how it relates to the definition of ``professionalreview action.'' It is only ``professional review actions,'' not ``professionalreview activities,'' which are reportable under Part B of the Act. Thedefinition of ``professional review action'' encompasses only professionalreview activities which are related to the professional competence or conductof a physician, dentist, or other health care practitioner and which couldadversely affect the health or welfare of a patient. In fact, paragraph(d)(5) specifically excludes from the definition of ``professional reviewaction'' matters that do not relate to the competence or professional conductof a physician, dentist, or other health care practitioner. Thus, it isclear that although the definition of ``professional review activities''does not by its own terms exclude such actions as refusing privileges toan anesthesiologist because a health care entity already has enough suchpractitioners, such actions would not be reportable under andSection;60.9.Subpart B_Reporting of Information Section 60.4 How Information Must BeReported. To improve the clarity of the structure of these regulations, the Secretaryhas moved the portion of proposed andSection;60.4 that related to errorsand omissions in reports to a new andSection;60.6. Section 60.5 When Information Must Be ReportedThere were approximately 40 comments on this section. Most of them addressedthe timing of reports. Some respondents found the time periods outlinedin the NPRM too stringent; others, particularly insurers, proposed alternatereport submission schemes or the submission of reports in batches; stillothers asked for clarification of the events which trigger the time periods.With the few exceptions noted below, the Department has decided to retainthe language of the NPRM in the final rule. In this decision, the Departmentwas guided both by the language of the Act which specifies that reportsshall be made ``not less often than monthly,'' and by the importance ofmaintaining current information for the protection of the public.Several respondents questioned why andSection;60.5(c), as proposed, requiredhealth care entities to report adverse actions within 20 days, whereasother reports were required within a 30-day timeframe. The rationale forthe 20-day period is that the reporting of adverse actions is a two-stepprocess, with the health care entity making a report to the Board of MedicalExaminers, and the Board then submitting this report to the Data Bank,both of which actions are to be accomplished within a single 30-day timeframe.Several respondents opposed andSection;60.5(c) on the basis that the 10-daytimeframe for reports by Boards of Medical Examiners to the Data Bank placedan undue burden on Boards whose resources are limited.The Department is sympathetic to the difficulties of meeting a 10-day deadlineand, in response, has revised andSection;60.5(c) to shorten the time forhealth care entities to file reports with Boards of Medical Examiners from20 to 15 days and increase the time for Boards to file their reports from10 to 15 days. Nevertheless, we stress that this particular type of reportingsimply requires Boards of Medical Examiners to pass through informationwhich they have received from the health care entity in the form that theyreceived it and does not require the preparation of a new document or Boardaction on the contents of the report.With respect to inquiries concerning the triggering event of the applicabletime period for reporting, the Department views the events as follows:(1) For malpractice payments (andSection;60.7)_the date of the check in paymentof the medical malpractice action or claim.(2) For licensure and adverse actions (andSection;60.8 and andSection;60.9)_thedate of formal approval of the adverse action by the Board's or entity'sauthorized official.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The Department will be issuing guidelines to explain these pointsfurther, as well as other regulatory provisions in need of greater discussion,and provide examples.The Secretary emphasizes that individuals and entities will not be heldresponsible for reporting any information under these regulations or theAct until the Data Bank has been established and the Secretary has announcedthe date of the beginning of its operation in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The reporting requirements are not retroactivefrom November 14, 1987, the statutory date on which the Data Bank was tohave been in operation.Section 60.6 Reporting Errors, Omissions, and Revisions (New)As stated earlier, the Department reorganized these regulations, movingthe provision concerning errors and omissions from andSection;60.4. One medicalassociation had commented on the lack of any reference to time in reportingan omission or error. Several respondents expressed concern about the accuracyof the information in the Data Bank.The Secretary is sensitive to the importance of accuracy of the informationin the Data Bank, for the protection of the users of the information, thesubjects of the reports, and the public. In response to the comments onthe proposed andSection;60.4, the Department has added ``as soon as possible''to indicate the urgency of correcting reports on file.The Secretary has added the requirement that individuals and entities whofile reports must update them when they learn of revisions, such as thereinstatement of a license or the reversal or modification of a professionalreview action. The procedures for reporting revisions will be the sameas those which applied to the reporting of the original event.To increase the accuracy of the information in the Data Bank, all reportswhich are filed will be held for 30 days after receipt prior to releaseto any parties other than to the subjects of the reports. This period willprovide opportunity for disputes, corrections, or revisions to be filedprior to release of the information. In addition, the Data Bank will maintaina record of all inquiries made to it and any information provided as aresult of an inquiry. It will then issue corrections or supplementary reportsto all who have received erroneous or incomplete information.Section 60.7 (Proposed andSection;60.6) Reporting Medical Malpractice PaymentsMore than 50 respondents commented on proposed andSection;60.6 (andSection;60.7below). The majority of comments expressed concern over the burden of reportingall payments, regardless of size. About one-fourth of the respondents suggestedsetting a floor for the size of medical malpractice payments below whichreporting would not be required. For example, several respondents recommendedthat payments below $30,000 not be reported.The Department cannot accept these comments due to the statutory requirementthat medical malpractice payments of any size be reported. However, asstated in the NPRM, the Secretary will be filing a report with Congresson whether information on small payments should continue to be collected.These comments will be considered when making this report.Numerous comments were made regarding the interpretation of malpracticepayments. Respondents pointed out that nuisance or frivolous claims arefrequently settled by small payments which do not reflect on the professionalcompetence or conduct of the physician, dentist, or other health care practitionerin issue.The Secretary agrees with these comments and therefore has revised andSection;60.7to include a new paragraph (d) entitled ``Interpretation of information.''This paragraph reiterates section 427(d) of the Act, which states thata payment in settlement of a medical malpractice action or claim shallnot be construed as creating a presumption that medical malpractice hasoccurred.Several associations requested that the ``acts or omissions'' which mustbe reported under andSection;60.7 be described as ``alleged'' acts or omissions.These respondents stated that if a payment were made in a settlement, then``alleged'' should be used as a modifier because the acts or omissionsmay never have occurred. They also felt that to add ``alleged'' would beconsistent with the statutory provision of section 427(d) of the Act, thata payment in settlement of a medical malpractice claim shall not be construedas creating a presumption that medical malpractice has occurred.The Department has not accepted these comments. The Secretary believesthat andSection;60.7, as proposed, is closer to the statutory intent andlanguage. For example, section 421(b)(4) of the Act requires a report ona payment on a medical malpractice claim or action to contain ``a descriptionof the acts or omissions and injuries or illnesses upon which the actionor claim was based.'' The Department has, however, revised andSection;60.7(a)so that it reflects the language of the Act. Further, as mentioned above,the Department has included a new paragraph (d) in andSection;60.7 to setforth the interpretation of medical malpractice payments contained in section427(d).Several respondents suggested that information in the Data Bank be ``purged''after a periodic interval of, perhaps, 5 years.The Department has not accepted these comments because the deletion ofreports from the Data Bank would be inconsistent with the statutory purposeof protecting the public. However, the Secretary wishes to make every effortto maintain the accuracy of the information and thus, as discussed earlier,has added new andSection;60.6 to require the filing of updated information.The Department acknowledges that data retained over very long periods oftime can lose practical utility. For that reason, the Department will assessthe desirability of indefinite retention of information in the Data Bank.An association of insurers requested clarification of andSection;60.7(a)to emphasize that reportable payments are those for medical malpracticeclaims or actions and for the benefit of a physician, dentist, or otherhealth care practitioner. This respondent was concerned that a suit couldinclude multiple defendants and multiple allegations, such as libel orslander.The Department has accepted this comment and has revised andSection;60.7(a)accordingly.Numerous health care entities inquired whether the waiver of an outstandingbill to settle a medical malpractice claim or action would be requiredto be reported under andSection;60.7.Both the Act and these regulations require the reporting of payments inresponse to medical malpractice claims or actions. The Department interprets``payment'' as meaning an exchange of money; therefore, the waiver of adebt as described above would not be a reportable event. The Departmenthas revised andSection;60.7(a) to clarify this point.Several insurers and professional organizations opposed the requirementsof andSection;60.7(b)(1), subitems (iii), (vii) and (viii) to report thehome address, the license number, and the Drug Enforcement Administrationregistration number of the subject of the report. They indicated that thisinformation is neither routinely collected nor readily known.In response, the Department has modified andSection;60.7(b)(1)(viii) to allowfor the reporting of the Drug Enforcement Administration registration number,if known. Since an individual's home address could be a useful identifier,it has been retained but has been modified to be required only if it isknown. The reporting data of andSection;60.8 and andSection;60.9 for licensureand adverse actions have been similarly revised. The Department has retainedthe requirement of the license number, since it is an important provideridentifier.The Department is requiring the reporting of additional information todistinguish more precisely among individual physicians, dentists, and otherhealth care practitioners on whom information is reported to the Data Bank.The additional personal identifiers to be reported are: Date of birth;name of each professional school attended and year of graduation; the fieldof licensure and the name of the State or Territory in which the licenseis held. The reporting requirements in andSection;60.8 and andSection;60.9for licensure and adverse actions have been similarly revised.As previously mentioned, the Secretary is sensitive to the importance ofaccuracy of the information in the Data Bank. The combination of identifiersrequired to be reported to the Bank will help prevent errors in distinguishingamong more than one practitioner with the same name.To correct the references to the Privacy Act in the proposed rule at andSection;andSection;60.6(b)(1)(v),60.7(b)(5), and 60.8(a)(3)(v), the Secretary has removed from those sectionsthe phrase, ``* * * and released in accordance with applicable provisionsof the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a) * * *'' and has inserted in its placethe phrase, ``in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974.''Numerous respondents expressed concern over andSection;60.7(b)(3)(viii),which stated that the Secretary would require other information from timeto time, as announced in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. They opposed this provision as omitting therulemaking requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act.The Secretary never intended these additional data requirements to be imposedwithout public notice and comment. This section, and the parallel provisionsof andSection;60.8 and andSection;60.9, have been revised to clarify that anysuch additional requirements would be proposed in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> for public comment.Many insurers sought clarification on how payments should be reported whenthey are made on a periodic basis or on behalf of more than one individual.In response, the Department interprets andSection;60.7 as requiring reportingonly at the time of the first payment of periodic payment terms. The accompanyingreport would indicate the expectation of periodic payments. In the caseof a payment on behalf of multiple individuals, the insurer would reportthe total payment, list the details concerning each health care provider,and indicate that the payment was made on behalf of all the listed providers.The Department will be issuing guidelines with illustrative examples toadvise individuals and entities in the filing of all required reports.Several respondents expressed a need for a uniform system of classificationof medical malpractice claims to assist in reporting.The Department recognizes this need and has added new andSection;60.7(b)(3)(vii).This requirement is similar to proposed andSection;60.7(b)(8) which requiresthe reporting of the classification of licensure actions in accordancewith a reporting code to be adopted by the Secretary. The Department isconsulting with liability insurers and others to develop a system to classifyacts or omissions upon which a medical malpractice claim or action is based.A classification for each category of reportable actions, such as malpracticeclaims and licensure actions, will be developed with an opportunity forpublic comment in accordance with the review procedures of the PaperworkReduction Act of 1980.The Secretary notes that the procedures for the imposition of sanctionsfor failure to report malpractice payments, as referenced in andSection;60.7(c)were proposed in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on March 21, 1988. Final regulations for thelatter will be published separately in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG),Department of Health and Human Services, shortly after the publicationof these Title IV regulations. The OIG regulations will be codified at42 CFR part 1003.Section 60.8 (Proposed andSection;60.7) Reporting Licensure Actions Takenby Boards of Medical ExaminersThe majority of comments on proposed andSection;60.7 (andSection;60.8 below)criticized this section for requiring licensure actions which are unrelatedto professional conduct or competence to be reported. As proposed, andSection;60.8(a)(1) and (3) required a Board of Medical Examiners to report actions whichrevoke or suspend a physician's or dentist's license or under which suchlicense is surrendered. Only andSection;60.8(a)(2), which requires the reportingof an action to censure, reprimand or place on probation a physician ordentist, conditioned the clause with ``reasons relating to the physician'sor dentist's professional competence or professional conduct.'' Insurers,associations, and boards pointed out that a license may be surrenderedsimply due to retirement or relocation. Also, licensure actions may betaken for reasons related to licensees' fees, or advertising, which donot relate to professional competence or conduct.The Department has accepted these comments. Since the purpose of the DataBank is to improve the quality of medical care by restricting the abilityof certain physicians and dentists to continue to change practice locationswithout the disclosure or discovery of their previous incompetent performanceor misconduct, the Secretary intends to collect only data relating to professionalcompetence or conduct. The regulations have been revised accordingly.Several associations found andSection;60.8(b)(11) to be unclear. This sectionrequires a report to contain a classification of the action per State reportingcode.In response, the Department has revised this section to delete the referenceto ``State,'' and to note that the code will be one adopted by the Secretary.The Department intends to develop a code or codes for reporting licensureactions to the Data Bank and to distribute this code to reporting agenciesand entities. To the extent feasible, the reporting scheme which is mostcommonly used by Boards will be incorporated.The Department notes that andSection; 60.8(b) (3) and (8) have been revised,as explained in the preamble discussion of andSection; 60.7, entitled ``Reportingmedical malpractice payments.''Section 60.9 (Proposed andSection; 60.8) Reporting Adverse Actions on ClinicalPrivilegesThe Department received nearly 50 comments on proposed andSection; 60.8 (andSection;60.9 below). The vast majority addressed andSection; 60.9(c), concerningsanctions for noncompliance with reporting requirements. The comments generallyrequested clarification of some provisions but also contained many helpfulsuggestions. As noted in preceding discussion pertaining to andSection; 60.7(c),final regulations regarding sanctions for failure to comply with thesereporting requirements will be published shortly and codified at 42 CFRpart 1003.Numerous respondents expressed dismay over their interpretation of andSection;60.9 as requiring the reporting of voluntary decisions to limit clinicalprivileges, such as a family practitioner's decision to stop acceptingobstetrical or minor surgical cases, when these decisions are not motivatedby investigations or threats of investigation of clinical competence orprofessional conduct.The Department shares the view of these respondents that the Data Bankshould contain only information which reflects adversely on a practitioner'sprofessional competence or conduct. However, andSection; 60.9, as proposed,achieves this purpose. A ``professional review action,'' as referencedin andSection; 60.9(a)(1)(i), requires, by definition, both a formal peerreview process and a relationship to professional competence or conduct.The same is true of andSection; 60.9(a)(1)(iii) for professional review actionsby professional societies. Thus, a physician's or dentist's voluntary reductionin clinical privileges for reasons of personal preference is not a reportableevent.Another respondent objected to andSection; 60.9(a)(1)(ii) as lacking clarity.This section requires the reporting of the ``surrender of clinical privileges''by a physician or a dentist in situations where the physician or dentistis under investigation for possible incompetence or improper professionalconduct, or where the physician or dentist surrenders clinical privilegesin return for not conducting such investigation. The respondent was concernedthat the reporting of the surrender of clinical privileges would not includea partial surrender of such privileges.The Department has accepted this comment and revised andSection; 60.9(a)(1)(ii)accordingly, to clarify that the restriction of clinical privileges inthose situations would be reported.A dental association commented on andSection; 60.9(a)(1)(iii) concerningprofessional review actions by professional societies. The associationsuggested the deletion of ``which adversely affects the membership of aphysician or dentist'' as being redundant with ``professional review action.''The Department has accepted this comment and revised this provision accordingly.A medical board supported andSection; 60.9 but suggested that the regulationsshould require the reporting of a loss of clinical privileges of any length,not just of 30 days or more. This respondent suggested that suspensionsof 29 days might become a common mechanism for avoiding the reporting requirement.The Secretary appreciates this concern. However, the provision has beenretained as proposed, since the 30-day time period is explicit in the Act.An association felt that ``appropriate'' as modifying ``Board of MedicalExaminers'' in andSection; 60.9(a)(1) was unclear.In response, the Department has revised this provision to require a healthcare entity to report to the ``Board of Medical Examiners <T3>in the State in which the health care entity is located</T3>'' (emphasisadded).Most of the comments on andSection; 60.9 addressed paragraph (c), which describesthe Department's procedures for imposing sanctions for noncompliance withreporting requirements of this section. With regard to requests for hearings,several respondents asked what constituted ``substantive and relevant''issues, and how the Department would determine whether the statement offactual issues submitted was ``frivolous or inconsequential.'' Some respondentsquestioned whether it was appropriate for the Department to deny hearingrequests, given the substantial nature of the sanction. Finally, many commentsopposed the provision of this subsection which requires that hearings beheld in the Washington, DC, area. These respondents stated that the requirementwill limit the opportunity for adequate representation during proceedingsand recommended that there be regional hearings instead.In response, the Department emphasizes that the intent of the proposalis to assure that the hearing process is administered as efficiently andcost-effectively as possible for the health care entities and the Department,and concludes that it is consistent with both due process and legislativerequirements.A determination of what constitutes a factual issue in dispute is directlytied to the reporting requirements in andSection; 60.9. An example of a factualissue in dispute would be a case where a health care entity alleges factswhich, if true, would undercut the Department's determination that thehealth care entity has not met the requirements of the reporting provision.Such a case would involve a material, factual issue in dispute that wouldbe appropriate for resolution through a hearing.The proposed procedure for determining whether a hearing must be conductedis essentially an administrative ``summary judgment'' proceeding. It isa well-settled principle that an agency has the authority to deny a hearingwhen it appears from the request that no substantial issue of fact is indispute. <T3>Weinberger </T3>v. <T3>Hynson, Westcott andamp; Dunning</T3>, 412 U.S. 609 (1973); <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Storer Broadcasting Co.</T3>, 352 U.S. 192, 202-205 (1956); <T3>Pineapple Growers Association of Hawaii </T3>v. <T3> F.D.A.</T3>, 673 F.2d 1083 (9th Cir. 1982).Section 411(b) of the Act, which requires the Secretary to provide an opportunityfor a hearing, does not constitute a bar to such summary judgment. Whenit is apparent from a request that there are no substantive issues in dispute,no purpose could be served by holding a public hearing. In upholding asimilar summary judgment provision promulgated by the Food and Drug Administration,the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit articulated the rationalefor the provision as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21">* * * The hearing is solely for the purpose of receiving evidence``relevant and material to the issues raised by such objections.'' Certainly,then the objections, in order to be effective and necessitate the hearingrequested, must be legally adequate so that, if true, the order complainedof could not prevail. The objections must raise ``issues.'' The issuesmust be material to the question involved; that is, the legality of theorder attacked. They may not be frivolous or inconsequential. Where theobjections stated and the issues raised thereby are, even if true, legallyinsufficient, their effect is a nullity and no objections have been stated.Congress did not intend the governmental agencies created by it to performuseless or unfruitful tasks. If it is perfectly clear that the petitioner'sappeal for a hearing contains nothing material and the objections stateddo not abrogate the legality of the order attacked, no hearing is requiredby law. <T3>Dyestuffs and Chemicals, Inc., </T3>v. <T3>Flemming</T3>, 271 F.2d 281 (8th Cir. 1959), <T3>cert. denied </T3>362 U.S. 911 (1960).</ITAG>With regard to the recommendation for regional hearings, the Secretarycontinues to believe that the location of hearings for most cases mustbe limited to the Washington, DC, metropolitan area due to constraintsin departmental resources.Several respondents noted that andSection;60.9(c)(1) as proposed, concerningsanctions for health care entitles, omitted the statutory language of ``substantially''as used to modify ``failed to report information in accordance with andSection;60.9.'' The Department acknowledges this oversight and has revised this provisionaccordingly.  Another respondent pointed out that andSection;60.9(c)(1) as proposed alsoomittted the statutory requirement that the Secretary must give a healthcare entity an opportunity to correct noncompliance before imposing a sanction. The Secretary accepts this comment and has revised the provision accordingly. Subpart C_Disclosure of Information by the National Practitioner Data Bank Section 60.10 (Proposed andSection;60.9) Information Which Hospitals MustRequest From the National Practitioner Data Bank  Several respondents opposed the requirement that hospitals ``obtain information,suggesting that it be replaced by ``request.'' They asserted that hospitalscould only be held responsible for making requests from the Data Bank andshould not be held responsible if they fail to receive it due to a deficiencyon the part of the Data Bank.  The Secretary accepts these comments and has revised andSection;60.10 accordingly. Another respondent opposed as burdensome the requirement that a hospitalrequest information from the Data Bank every 2 years for its medical staffand those who have clinical privileges.   The Department is unable to accept this comment since this requirementis mandated by the Act.  A dental association pointed out that dentists had not been included inthe requirement of andSection;60.10(a)(2) that a hospital query the DataBank every 2 years concerning its staff.  The Department has corrected this oversight by revising andSection;60.10(a)(2)accordingly.  Several associations requested that andSection;60.10 be revised to include``authorized agents'' of hospitals as entities who may query the Data Bank.These respondents pointed out that many hospitals rely on centralized medicalstaff application and reappointment programs operated by local medicalsocieties.  The Secretary has accepted these comments and has revised andSection;60.10(a)accordingly. However, it should be noted that andSection;60.11(a) alreadyspecifically provides that ``authorized agents'' of persons or entitiesmay request and obtain information from the Data Bank. The Secretary hasnevertheless made the requested changes for additional clarity.  Section 60.11 (Proposed andSection;60.10) Requesting Information From theNational Practitioner Data Bank  The Department received over 80 comments on this section.  Several respondents suggested that the regulations provide for timely responsesby the Data Bank to requests for information.  The Secretary emphasizes that all efforts will be made by the Departmentand the contractor who will be operating the Data Bank to insure that requestsfor information are fulfilled on a timely basis. However, at this timeit is not feasible to incorporate a response time in these regulationsbecause the Data Bank has not been established. It is the intent of theSecretary to establish a timeframe for the Data Bank to respond to requestsafter it is in operation. This information will be available to the publicat that time.  Several insurers and an educational institution requested access to informationin the Data Bank.  The Secretary cannot expand access to the Data Bank beyond what the Actauthorizes. It should be noted that individuals are permitted to obtaininformation about themselves and may share this information with a potentialemployer or insurer. In addition, information requested in a form thatdoes not identify any health care entity or health care practitioner willbe available to anyone making such a request.  Numerous respondents questioned what information would be given in responseto authorized requests concerning physicians, dentists, or other healthcare practitioners.  Persons and entities who make such requests will be given the substantivecontent of all reports on the subject individual which are contained inthe Data Bank.  The majority of the respondents expressed concern over verification ofthe identity of individuals and entities who request information from theData Bank. Some suggested procedures involving identification codes forverification of requestors.The Secretary shares these concerns about maintaining the confidentialityof the information in the Data Bank and will take measures necessary toinsure the proper release of this information. Since the Data Bank hasnot been established at this time, it is impossible to detail the preciseprocedures which will be used for the verification of the identity of requestors.At the time of operation of the Data Bank, the Department intends to providethis information to the public in the form of guidelines.The Department notes that it will be maintaining a list of all requestsfor information on each individual in the Data Bank. Upon request, thesubject individual may receive a copy of the list of requestors.Several comments stated that andSection; 60.11(a)(3), as proposed, was confusingand that Boards of Medical Examiners and State licensing boards shouldbe separated from health care entities.The Department has accepted these comments and revised andSection; 60.11(a)accordingly.The majority of comments received on this section expressed great concernover andSection; 60.11(a)(5), which provides for access by attorneys to informationin the Data Bank. Many respondents requested its deletion. Others requestedthat it be narrowed as much as possible. Some comments indicated that attorneyaccess is contrary to the intent and purpose of the Act_that of promotingeffective professional peer review and furthering quality health care.Most respondents felt that attorney access threatened the confidentialityof the Data Bank records.In response, the Secretary stresses that andSection; 60.11(a)(5) implementssection 427(b)(1) of the Act as narrowly as possible. Access by attorneyscannot be eliminated without an amendment to the Act. The Department pointsout that attorney access to the Data Bank is extremely limited. To clarify,a plaintiff's attorney (or a person representing himself or herself ina medical malpractice action) may request information from the Data Bankon a health care provider if, and only if, he or she meets these tests:(1) The attorney or individual has filed a medical malpractice action orclaim in a State or Federal court or other adjudicative body against ahospital and requests information regarding a specific physician, dentistor other health care practitioner also named in the action or claim; <T3>and</T3>(2) The attorney or individual produces evidence that the hospital failedto request information from the Data Bank on the physician, dentist orother health care practitioner, as required by these regulations.The information so obtained may be used solely with respect to the actionor claim against the hospital. In short, the applicability of andSection;60.11(a)(5) is limited to judicial cases filed against a hospital wherethe hospital failed to make a request from the Data Bank, as required underandSection; 60.10. In this instance, the hospital is then presumed, undersection 425(b) of the Act, to have knowledge of the information containedin the Data Bank. Thus, if the attorney who filed the action against thehospital could not obtain the information at issue from the Data Bank,the parties and the court would not know what information must be imputedto the defendant hospital and could not effectively litigate the case.Several comments questioned the purpose of providing access in andSection;60.11(a)(5) to an individual ``acting on his own behalf'' and suggestedclarification of the provision.In response, the Department intended simply to allow access to <T3>pro se </T3>litigants, as well as attorneys, for purposes of andSection;60.11(a)(5). This section has been revised for greater clarity.One respondent requested access for the defendant's attorney, as well asthe plaintiff's, in andSection; 60.11(a)(5).In response, no revision is necessary for this purpose because the defendantphysician, dentist, or other health care practitioner can always obtaininformation about himself, or the hospital can obtain the information whichit should have requested under andSection; 60.10.Numerous respondents requested clarification of what ``evidence'' of ahospital's failure to request information would be required to obtain informationfrom the Data Bank. Many comments suggested that a court order to thiseffect would be appropriate.The Secretary agrees that evidence of an objective, factual nature shouldbe required to obtain access under andSection; 60.11(a)(5). Due to the varietyof possible forums for these medical malpractice actions_State courts,Federal courts, county courts, etc., and their accompanying varying proceduralrules_the Department prefers to retain the general requirement of ``evidence''in this provision. This would permit an attorney to present a court order,a deposition, a response to an interrogatory, an admission, or other evidenceof the failure of a hospital to request information. The Department willbe providing guidance of this nature in guidelines for the Data Bank.A few respondents indicated concern about possible breaches of confidentialityunder andSection; 60.11(a)(7), the release of information for research purposes.Others requested clarification. This regulation explicitly states thatinformation released for research purposes will be released only in a formwhich will not allow the identification of an individual health care entity,physician, dentist or health care practitioner.The Department has deleted the word ``patient'' from this provision. Itsinclusion may have given the mistaken impression that the Bank would collectinformation that would allow the identification of patients. This is notthe case. The Department wishes to emphasize that no information that wouldallow patient identification will be contained in the Data Bank.The Department wants to take this opportunity to notify the public thatit plans to request additional information regarding reported adverse actionsto support important medical liability and malpractice research. In theDepartment's publication, ``Report of the Task Force on Medical Liabilityand Malpractice,'' August 1987, the Task Force found a significant needfor additional data (part IV: Research Issues). The type of informationthat the Department plans to request will be specified through the rulemakingprocess with an opportunity for public comment.It should be noted that giving researchers access to Data Bank informationdoes not imply that the Data Bank will act as a research service, but itsdata, without identifiers, will be available to researchers who requestit. As in other requests for data information, appropriate user fees willbe charged according to andSection; 60.12Section 60.12 (Proposed andSection; 60.11) Fees Applicable to Requests forInformationThe Department received 15 comments on andSection; 60.12. Most of these stressedthe importance of keeping fees at a ``reasonable'' level or requested thatfunds be waived or reduced for various classes of users. Several respondentsnoted the limited financial resources of State Boards. One associationsuggested that fees for statutorily required requests, such as those byhospitals under andSection; 60.10, be at a lower scale than ``optional''requests.In response, the Department recognizes these concerns, Although andSection;60.12 has not been revised, the Secretary wishes to assure the public that,as the regulation states, fees will be based on the costs of processingrequests and providing information. It should be noted, however, that thePresident's Budget for Fiscal Year 1990 proposes appropriation languagethat would require fees for the disclosure of information from the DataBank to be calculated so that the full costs of operating the Data Bankcan be recovered.The Department will endeavor to keep costs associated with operating theData Bank, and the consequent costs of querying it, as low as possible.Section 60.13 (Proposed andSection; 60.12) Confidentiality of National PractitionerData Bank Information Several respondents requested clarification of the confidentiality provisionsin andSection; 60.13. One State board suggested a revision to clarify thepoint that information from the Data Bank may only be used for the purposefor which it was provided, whether the information was received directlyfrom the Data Bank or received indirectly from the requesting party. Agroup of insurers suggested that this section be revised to forbid therequesting party from disclosing the information received from the DataBank. In response, the Department has revised andSection; 60.13 to emphasize thatthe confidentiality restrictions apply to parties who receive informationfrom the Data Bank indirectly, as well as directly. However, it has notaccepted the suggestion to forbid further disclosure of information froma requesting party because this is contrary to the intent of the Act. Anindividual or entity who receives information from the Data Bank is permittedto disclose it further in the course of carrying out the activity for whichit was sought. For example, a hospital may request information from theData Bank on a physician who is applying for a staff position and may sharethis information with the officials who make the employment review anddecision on this physician's application. Nevertheless, the confidentialitylimitations of the Act apply both to the initial hospital staff who receivethe information and to the specific department staff who subsequently reviewit. They may each only use and disclose the information with respect tothe employment decision. Section 60.14 (Proposed andSection; 60.13) How to Dispute the Accuracy ofthe National Practitioner Data Bank Information Numerous respondents opposed the procedures for disputing the accuracyof information in the Data Bank. Some found them to be vague. Several commentssuggested withholding information from parties who make requests pendingresolution of a dispute. In response, the Secretary has made some revisions to clarify the proceduresfor disputing information. Section 60.14 now explicitly states that theSecretary will routinely mail copies of reports to the subject individual.In order to determine the accuracy of Data Bank information in an expeditiousmanner, andSection; 60.14(b) now provides a 60-day time period within whichto challenge a report. The Department has not accepted the suggestion that information in disputebe withheld from requestors pending the resolution of the dispute. TheSecretary believes that labeling the report as ``disputed'' provides sufficientnotice that the report is in question. The Secretary further believes thatthe potential threat to the public of withholding valuable informationwhich may well be accurate is not outweighed by a possible detriment tothe subject physician, dentist, or other health care practitioner. Several respondents were disturbed by the statement that, in resolvinga dispute, the Secretary would review ``related information which is available,including, but not limited to, that available from malpractice insurers,test examination results, State administrative procedures and judicialdecisions, and the Health Care Financing Administration.'' These respondentsfelt that the Secretary's review should be limited to the statements onfile by the reporting and disputing parties, since they would have no furtheropportunity to challenge this information. The Secretary has accepted these comments and revised andSection; 60.14 accordingly.Numerous comments indicated that the Secretary should not continue to labelreports as ``disputed'' if the Secretary determines that the informationis accurate. The comments stated that in such a case this label would bemisleading. The Secretary has accepted this comment and has revised andSection; 60.14(c)(2)(i)to indicate that when the information is determined to be accurate, itwill simply contain a statement by the subject individual describing thebasis for challenge and an explanation of the Secretary's decision.The Secretary wishes to point out that section 5 of the Medicare and MedicaidPatient and Program Protection Act of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-93), enacted August18, 1987, requires that States have in effect a system of reporting informationto the Secretary with respect to formal proceedings concluded against healthcare practitioners or entities by authorities responsible for the licensingof health care practitioners or entities. This Act requires the Secretaryto provide for the maximum appropriate coordination in implementing section5 and the Health Care Quality Improvement Act. Proposed regulations implementingsection 5 are being developed. When issued, those regulations will complementthese final regulations.The Department will be republishing in the<T4> Federal Register</T4> for public comment the notice of a new systemof records for the Data Bank, with proposed routine uses. Although a PrivacyAct systems of records notice had been published on September 14, 1987(52 FR 34721), legislative amendments necessitate the republication ofthis notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act and Executive Order 12291</ITAG>The Secretary certifies that these regulations do not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities, and thereforedo not require a regulatory flexibility analysis under the Regulatory FlexibilityAct of 1980.Regulatory Flexibility ActConsistent with the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-354,5 U.S.C. 604(a)), the Department prepares and publishes an initial regulatoryflexibility analysis for proposed regulations unless the Secretary certifiesthat the regulation would not have a significant economic impact on a substantialnumber of small business entities. The analysis is intended to explainwhat effect the regulatory action by the agency would have on small businessesand other small entities and to develop lower cost or burden alternatives.As indicated above, these final regulations would not have a significanteconomic impact. While some of the penalties and fees the Department couldimpose as a result of these regulations might have an impact on small entities,the Department does not anticipate that a substantial number of these smallentities would be significantly affected by this rulemaking. Therefore,the Secretary certifies that these final regulations would not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities.Executive Order 12291Executive Order 12291 requires the Department to prepare and publish aninitial regulatory impact analysis for any proposed major rule. A majorrule is defined as any regulation that is likely to: (1) Have an annualeffect on the economy of $100 million or more; (2) cause a major increasein costs or prices for consumers, individual industries, government agencies,or geographic regions; or (3) result in significant adverse effects oncompetition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or on theability of United States-based enterprises to compete with foreign-basedenterprises in domestic or export markets.The Department has determined that these regulations do not meet the criteriafor a major rule as defined by section 1(b) of Executive Order 12291. Thisfinal regulation establishes procedures for the reporting and releasingof information from the Data Bank. As such, the regulations would havelittle direct effect on the economy or on Federal or State expenditures.Consequently, the Department has concluded that an initial regulatory impactanalysis is not required.<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980</ITAG>Section 60.4 of this regulation requires that information to be reportedunder andSection;andSection; 60.7, 60.8 and 60.9 shall be provided in the formand manner prescribed by the Secretary. Section 60.11(b) provides thatrequests for information from the Data Bank, including those required underandSection; 60.10, shall be made in the form and manner prescribed by theSecretary. The actual forms to be used for reporting information to orrequesting information from the Data Bank will be submitted to the Officeof Management and Budget for review and public comment in accordance withthe Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 as soon as they are available.Sections 60.6(a), 60.7, 60.8, 60.9, 60.10, and 60.14 contain informationcollection requirements which have been approved by the Office of Managementand Budget (OMB) under section 3504(h) of the Paperwork Reduction Act of1980 and assigned control number 0915-0126.Section 60.6(b) contains information collection requirements which aresubject to OMB review. We have submitted an information request to OMBfor approval under section 3504(h) of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980.These requirements will not be effective until the Department obtains OMBapproval, at which time a notice will be published in the<T4> Federal Register</T4> to notify the public of such action.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 45 CFR Part 60</ITAG>Health professions, Malpractice, Insurance companies.Accordingly, the Department of Health and Human Services adds a new part60 to title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: September 7, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">James O. Mason,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Health.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Approved October 11, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis W. Sullivan,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 60_NATIONAL PRACTITIONER DATA BANK FOR ADVERSE INFORMATION ONPHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONERS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Subpart A_General Provisions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.1 The National Practitioner Data Bank.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.2 Applicability of these regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.3 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Subpart B_Reporting of Information</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.4 How information must be reported.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.5 When information must be reported.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.6 Reporting errors, omissions, and revisions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.7 Reporting medical malpractice payments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.8 Reporting licensure actions taken by Boards of Medical Examiners.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.9 Reporting adverse actions on clinical privileges.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Subpart C_Disclosure of Information by the National Practitioner DataBank</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.10 Information which hospitals must request from the National PractitionerData Bank.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.11 Requesting information from the National Practitioner Data Bank.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.12 Fees applicable to requests for information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.13 Confidentiality of National Practitioner Data Bank information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">60.14 How to dispute the accuracy of National Practitioner Data Bankinformation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority : </T4>Secs. 401-432 of the Health Care Quality ImprovementAct of 1986, Pub. L. 99-660, 100 Stat. 3784-3794, as amended by section402 of Pub. L. 100-177, 101 Stat. 1007-1008 (42 U.S.C. 11101-11152).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_General Provisions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">The National Practitioner Data Bank.</ITAG>The Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (the Act), title IV ofPub. L. 99-660, as amended, authorizes the Secretary to establish (eitherdirectly or by contract) a National Practitioner Data Bank to collect andrelease certain information relating to the professional competence andconduct of physicians, dentists and other health care practitioners. Theseregulations set forth the reporting and disclosure requirements for theNational Practitioner Data Bank.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability of these regulations.</ITAG>These regulations establish reporting requirements applicable to hospitals;health care entities; Boards of Medical Examiners; professional societiesof physicians, dentists or other health care practitioners which take adverselicensure or professional review actions; and individuals and entities(including insurance companies) making payments as a result of medicalmalpractice actions or claims. They also establish procedures to enableindividuals or entities to obtain information from the National PractitionerData Bank or to dispute the accuracy of National Practitioner Data Bankinformation.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><T3>Act </T3>means the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986, titleIV of Pub. L. 99-660, as amended.<T3>Adversely affecting</T3> means reducing, restricting, suspending, revoking,or denying clinical privileges or membership in a health care entity.<T3>Board of Medical Examiners</T3>, or ``Board,'' means a body or subdivisionof such body which is designated by a State for the purpose of licensing,monitoring and disciplining physicians or dentists. This term includesa Board of Osteopathic Examiners or its subdivision, a Board of Dentistryor its subdivision, or an equivalent body as determined by the State. Wherethe Secretary, pursuant to section 423(c)(2) of the Act, has designatedan alternate entity to carry out the reporting activities of andSection;60.9 due to a Board's failure to comply with andSection; 60.8, the term ``Boardof Medical Examiners'' or ``Board'' refers to this alternate entity.<T3>Clinical privileges </T3>means the authorization by a health care entityto a physician, dentist or other health care practitioner for the provisionof health care services, including privileges and membership on the medicalstaff.<T3>Dentist</T3> means a doctor of dental surgery, doctor of dental medicine,or the equivalent who is legally authorized to practice dentistry by aState (or who, without authority, holds himself or herself out to be soauthorized).<T3>Formal peer review process</T3> means the conduct of professional reviewactivities through formally adopted written procedures which provide foradequate notice and an opportunity for a hearing.<T3>Health care entity</T3> means:(a) A hospital;(b) An entity that provides health care services, and engages in professionalreview activity through a formal peer review process for the purpose offurthering quality health care, or a committee of that entity; or (c) A professional society or a committee or agent thereof, including thoseat the national, State, or local level, of physicians, dentists, or otherhealth care practitioners that engages in professional review activitythrough a formal peer review process, for the purpose of furthering qualityhealth care.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">For purposes of paragraph (b) of this definition, an entity includes:a health maintenance organization which is licensed by a State or determinedto be qualified as such by the Department of Health and Human Services;and any group or prepaid medical or dental practice which meets the criteriaof paragraph (b).<T3>Health care practitioners </T3>means an individual other than a physicianor dentist, who is licensed or otherwise authorized by a State to providehealth care services.<T3>Hospital</T3> means an entity described in paragraphs (1) and (7) ofsection 1861(e) of the Social Security Act.<T3>Medical malpractice action or claim</T3> means a written complaintor claim demanding payment based on a physician's, dentists or other healthcare practitioner's provision of or failure to provide health care services,and includes the filing of a cause of action based on the law of tort,brought in any State or Federal Court or other adjudicative body.<T3>Physician</T3> means a doctor of medicine or osteopathy legally authorizedto practice medicine or surgery by a State (or who, without authority,holds himself or herself out to be so authorized).<T3>Professional review action </T3>means an action or recommendation ofa health care entity:(a) Taken in the course of professional review activity;(b) Based on the professional competence or professional conduct of anindividual physician, dentist or other health care practitioner which affectsor could affect adversely the health or welfare of a patient or patients;and(c) Which adversely affects or may adversely affect the clinical privilegesor membership in a professional society of the physician, dentist or otherhealth care practitioner.(d) This term excludes actions which are primarily based on:(1) The physician's, dentist's or other health care practitioner's association,or lack of association, with a professional society or association;(2) The physician's, dentist's or other health care practitioner's feesor the physician's, dentist's or other health care practitioner's advertisingor engaging in other competitive acts intended to solicit or retain business;(3) The physician's, dentist's or other health care practitioner's participationin prepaid group health plans, salaried employment, or any other mannerof delivering health services whether on a fee-for-service or other basis;(4) A physician's, dentist's or other health care practitioner's associationwith, supervision of, delegation of authority to, support for, trainingof, or participation in a private group practice with, a member or membersof a particular class of health care practitioner or professional; or(5) Any other matter that does not relate to the competence or professionalconduct of a physician, dentist or other health care practitioner.<T3>Professional review activity </T3>means an activity of a health careentity with respect to an individual physician, dentist or other healthcare practitioner:(a) To determine whether the physician, dentist or other health care practitionermay have clinical privileges with respect to, or membership in, the entity;(b) To determine the scope or conditions of such privileges or membership;or(c) To change or modify such privileges or membership.<T3>Secretary </T3>means the Secretary of Health and Human Services andany other officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Servicesto whom the authority involved has been delegated.<T3>State </T3>means the fifty States, the District of Columbia, PuertoRico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern MarianaIslands.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart B_Reporting of Information</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">How information must be reported.</ITAG>Information must be reported to the Data Bank or to a Board of MedicalExaminers as required under andSection;andSection; 60.7, 60.8, and 60.9 insuch form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">When information must be reported.</ITAG>Information required under andSection;andSection; 60.7, 60.8, and 60.9 mustbe submitted to the Data Bank within 30 days following the action to bereported, beginning with actions occurring on or after the effective dateof these regulations or the date of the establishment of the Data Bank,whichever is later, as follows:(a) <T3>Malpractice Payments (andSection; 60.7). </T3>Persons or entities mustsubmit information to the Data Bank within 30 days from the date that apayment, as described in andSection; 60.7, is made. If required under andSection;60.7, this information must be submitted simultaneously to the appropriateState licensing board.(b) <T3>Licensure Actions (andSection; 60.8). </T3>The Board must submit informationwithin 30 days from the date the licensure action was taken.(c) <T3>Adverse Actions (andSection; 60.9). </T3>A health care entity must reportan adverse action to the Board within 15 days from the date the adverseaction was taken. The Board must submit the information received from ahealth care entity within 15 days from the date on which it received thisinformation. If required under andSection; 60.9, this information must besubmitted by the Board simultaneously to the appropriate State licensingboard in the State in which the health care entity is located, if the Boardis not such licensing Board.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reporting errors, omissions, and revisions.</ITAG>(a) Persons and entities are responsible for the accuracy of informationwhich they report to the Data Bank. If errors or omissions are found afterinformation has been reported, the person or entity which reported it mustsend an addition or correction to the Data Bank or, in the case of reportsmade under andSection; 60.9, to the Board of Medical Examiners, as soon aspossible.(b) An individual or entity which reports information on licensure or clinicalprivileges under andSection;andSection; 60.8 or 60.9 must also report any revisionof the action originally reported. Revisions include reversal of a professionalreview action or reinstatement of a license. Revisions are subject to thesame time constraints and procedures of andSection;andSection; 60.5, 60.8,and 60.9, as applicable to the original action which was reported.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Section 60.6(a) approved by the Office of Management and Budget undercontrol number 0915-0126)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reporting medical malpractice payments.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Who must report. </T3>Each person or entity, including an insurancecompany, which makes a payment under an insurance policy, self-insurance,or otherwise, for the benefit of a physician, dentist or other health carepractitioner in settlement of or in satisfaction in whole or in part ofa claim or a judgment against such physician, dentist, or other healthcare practitioner for medical malpractice, must report information as setforth in paragraph (b) to the Data Bank and to the appropriate State licensingboard(s) in the State in which the act or omission upon which the medicalmalpractice claim was based. For purposes of this section, the waiver ofan outstanding debt is not construed as a ``payment'' and is not requiredto be reported.(b) <T3>What information must be reported. </T3>Persons or entities describedin paragraph (a) must report the following information:(1) With respect to the physician, dentist or other health care practitionerfor whose benefit the payment is made_(i) Name,(ii) Work address,(iii) Home address, if known,(iv) Social Security number, if known, and if obtained in accordance withsection 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974,(v) Date of birth,(vi) Name of each professional school attended and year of graduation,(vii) For each professional license: the license number, the field of licensure,and the name of the State or Territory in which the license is held,(viii) Drug Enforcement Administration registration number, if known,(ix) Name of each hospital with which he or she is affiliated, if known;(2) With respect to the reporting person or entity_(i) Name and address of the person or entity making the payment,(ii) Name, title, and telephone number of the responsible official submittingthe report on behalf of the entity, and(iii) Relationship of the reporting person or entity to the physician,dentist, or other health care practitioner for whose benefit the paymentis made;(3) With respect to the judgment or settlement resulting in the payment_(i) Where an action or claim has been filed with an adjudicative body,identification of the adjudicative body and the case number,(ii) Date or dates on which the act(s) or omission(s) which gave rise tothe action or claim occurred,(iii) Date of judgment or settlement,(iv) Amount paid, date of payment, and whether payment is for a judgmentor a settlement,(v) Description and amount of judgment or settlement and any conditionsattached thereto, including terms of payment,(vi) A description of the acts or omissions and injuries or illnesses uponwhich the action or claim was based,(vii) Classification of the acts or omissions in accordance with a reportingcode adopted by the Secretary, and(viii) Other information as required by the Secretary from time to timeafter publication in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and after an opportunity for public comment.(c) <T3>Sanctions. </T3>Any person or entity that fails to report informationon a payment required to be reported under this section is subject to acivil money penalty of up to $10,000 for each such payment involved. Thispenalty will be imposed pursuant to procedures at 42 CFR part 1003.(d) <T3>Interpretation of information. </T3>A payment in settlement of a medicalmalpractice action or claim shall not be construed as creating a presumptionthat medical malpractice has occurred.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number0915-0126)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reporting licensure actions taken by Boards of Medical Examiners.</ITAG>(a) <T3>What actions must be reported. </T3>Each Board of Medical Examinersmust report to the Data Bank any action based on reasons relating to aphysician's or dentist's professional competence or professional conduct-(1) Which revokes or suspends (or otherwise restricts) a physician's ordentist's license,(2) Which censures, reprimands, or places on probation a physician or dentist,or(3) Under which a physician's or dentist's license is surrendered.(b) <T3>Information that must be reported. </T3>The Board must report the followinginformation for each action:(1) The physician's or dentist's name,(2) The physician's or dentist's work address,(3) The physician's or dentist's home address, if known,(4) The physician's or dentist's Social Security number, if known, andif obtained in accordance with section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974,(5) The physician's or dentist's date of birth,(6) Name of each professional school attended by the physician or dentistand year of graduation,(7) For each professional license, the physician's or dentist's licensenumber, the field of licensure and the name of the State or Territory inwhich the license is held,(8) The physician's or dentist's Drug Enforcement Administration registrationnumber, if known,(9) A description of the acts or omissions or other reasons for the actiontaken,(10) A description of the Board action, the date the action was taken,and its effective date,(11) Classification of the action in accordance with a reporting code adoptedby the Secretary, and(12) Other information as required by the Secretary from time to time afterpublication in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and after an opportunity for public comment.(c) <T3>Sanctions. </T3>If, after notice of noncompliance and providing opportunityto correct noncompliance, the Secretary determines that a Board has failedto submit a report as required by this section, the Secretary will designateanother qualified entity for the reporting of information under andSection;60.9.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number0915-0126)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.9</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reporting adverse actions on clinical privileges.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Reporting to the Board of Medical Examiners.</T3>_(1) <T3>Actions that must be reported and to whom the report must be made.</T3>Each health care entity must report to the Board of Medical Examinersin the State in which the health care entity is located the following actions:(i) Any professional review action that adversely affects the clinicalprivileges of a physician or dentist for a period longer than 30 days;(ii) Acceptance of the surrender of clinical privileges or any restrictionof such privileges by a physician or dentist_(A) While the physician or dentist is under investigation by the healthcare entity relating to possible incompetence or improper professionalconduct, or(B) In return for not conducting such an investigation or proceeding; or(iii) In the case of a health care entity which is a professional society,when it takes a professional review action.(2) <T3>Voluntary reporting on other health care practitioners.</T3> A healthcare entity may report to the Board of Medical Examiners information asdescribed in paragraph (a)(3) of this section concerning actions describedin paragraph (a)(1) in this section with respect to other health care practitioners.(3) <T3>What information must be reported.</T3> The health care entity mustreport the following information concerning actions described in paragraph(a)(1) of this section with respect to the physician or dentist:(i) Name,(ii) Work address,(iii) Home address, if known,(iv) Social Security number, if known, and if obtained in accordance withsection 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974,(v) Date of birth,(vi) Name of each professional school attended and year of graduation,(vii) For each professional license: the license number, the field of licensure,and the name of the State or Territory in which the license is held,(viii) Drug Enforcement Administration registration number, if known,(ix) A description of the acts or omissions or other reasons for privilegeloss, or, if known, for surrender,(x) Action taken, date the action was taken, and effective date of theaction, and(xi) Other information as required by the Secretary from time to time afterpublication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and after an opportunity for public comment.(b) <T3>Reporting by the Board of Medical Examiners to the National PractitionerData Bank.</T3> Each Board must report, in accordance with andSection;andSection;60.4 and 60.5, the information reported to it by a health care entity andany known instances of a health car entity's failure to report informationas required under paragraph (a)(1) of this section. In addition, each Boardmust simultaneously report this information to the appropriate State licensingboard in the State in which the health care entity is located, if the Boardis not such licensing board.(c) <T3>Sanctions</T3>_(1) <T3>Health care entities.</T3> If the Secretary has reason to believe thata health care entity has substantially failed to report information inaccordance with andSection; 60.9, the Secretary will conduct an investigation.If the investigation shows that the health care entity has not compliedwith andSection; 60.9, the Secretary will provide the entity with a writtennotice describing the noncompliance, giving the health care entity an opportunityto correct the noncompliance, and stating that the entity may request,within 30 days after receipt of such notice, a hearing with respect tothe noncompliance. The request for a hearing must contain a statement ofthe material factual issues in dispute to demonstrate that there is causefor a hearing. These issues must be both substantive and relevant. Thehearing will be held in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area. The Secretarywill deny a hearing if:(i) The request for a hearing is untimely,(ii) The health care entity does not provide a statement of material factualissues in dispute, or (iii) The statement of factual issues in dispute is frivolous or inconsequential.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">In the event that the Secretary denies a hearing, the Secretary willsend a written denial to the health care entity setting forth the reasonsfor denial. If a hearing is denied, or if as a result of the hearing theentity is found to be in noncompliance, the Secretary will publish thename of the health care entity in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. In such case, the immunity protections providedunder section 411(a) of the Act will not apply to the health care entityfor professional review activities that occur during the 3-year periodbeginning 30 days after the date of publication of the entity's name inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>.(2) <T3>Board of Medical Examiners.</T3> If, after notice of noncomplianceand providing opportunity to correct noncompliance, the Secretary determinesthat a Board has failed to report information in accordance with paragraph(b) of this section, the Secretary will designate another qualified entityfor the reporting of this information.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number0915-0126)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart C_Disclosure of Information by the National Practitioner DataBank </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.10</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Information which hospitals must request from the National PractitionerData Bank.</ITAG>(a) <T3>When information must be requested.</T3> Each hospital, either directlyor through an authorized agent, must request information from the DataBank concerning a physician, dentist or other health care practitioneras follows:(1) At the time a physician, dentist or other health care practitionerapplies for a position on its medical staff (courtesy or otherwise), orfor clinical privileges at the hospital; and(2) Every 2 years concerning any physician, dentist, or other health carepractitioner who is on its medical staff (courtesy or otherwise), or hasclinical privileges at the hospital.(b) <T3>Failure to request information.</T3> Any hospital which does not requestthe information as required in paragraph (a) of this section is presumedto have knowledge of any information reported to the Data Bank concerningthis physician, dentist or other health care practitioner.(c) <T3>Reliance on the obtained information.</T3> Each hospital may rely uponthe information provided by the Data Bank to the hospital. A hospital shallnot be held liable for this reliance unless the hospital has knowledgethat the information provided was false.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number0915-0126)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 60.11</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Requesting information from the National Practitioner Data Bank</ITAG>.(a) <T3>Who may request information and what information may be available</T3>.Information in the Data Bank will be available, upon request, to the personsor entities, or their authorized agents, as described below:(1) A hospital that requests information concerning a physician, dentistor other health care practitioner who is on its medical staff (courtesyor otherwise) or has clinical privileges at the hospital,(2) A physician, dentist, or other health care practitioner who requestsinformation concerning himself or herself,(3) Boards of Medical Examiners or other State licensing boards,(4) Health care entities which have entered or may be entering employmentor affiliation relationships with a physician, dentist or other healthcare practitioner has applied for clinical privileges or appointment tothe medical staff,(5) An attorney, or individual representing himself or herself, who hasfiled a medical malpractice action or claim in a State or Federal courtor other adjudicative body against a hospital, and who requests informationregarding a specific physician, dentist, or other health care practitionerwho is also named in the action or claim. Provided, that this informationwill be disclosed only upon the submission of evidence that the hospitalfailed to request information from the Data Bank as required by andSection;60.10(a),and may be used solely with respect to ligitation resulting from the actionor claim against the hospital. (6) A health care entity with respect to professional review activity,and (7) A person or entity who requests information in a form which does notpermit the identification of any particular health care entity, physician,dentist, or other health care practitioner. (b) <T3>Procedures for obtaining National Practitioner Data Bank information.</T3>Persons and entities may obtain information from the Data Bank by submittinga request in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe. Theserequests are subject to fees as described in andSection;60.12 <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;60.12 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Fees applicable to requests for information </ITAG>(a) <T3>Policy on Fees.</T3> The fees described in this section apply to allrequests for information from the Data Bank, other than those of individualsfor information concerning themselves. These fees are authorized by section427(b)(4) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C.11137). They reflect the costs of processing requests for disclosure andof providing such information. The actual fees will be announced by theSecretary in periodic notices in the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>(b) <T3>Criteria for determining the fee.</T3> The amount of each fee willbe determined based on the following criteria: (1) Use of electronic data processing equipment to obtain information_theactual cost for the service, including computer search time, runs, printouts,and time of computer programmers and operators, or other employees. (2) Photocopying or other forms of reproduction, such as magnetic tapes_actualcost of the operator's time, plus the cost of the machine time and thematerials used, (3) Postage_actual cost, and (4) Sending information by special methods requested by the applicant,such as express mail or electronic transfer_the actual cost of the specialservice. (c) <T3>Assessing and collecting fees.</T3> (1) A request for information fromthe Data Bank will be regarded as also an agreement to pay the associatedfee. (2) Normally, a bill will be sent along with or following the deliveryof the requested information. However, in order to avoid sending numeroussmall bills to frequent requesters, the charges may be aggregated for certainperiods. For example, such a requester may receive a bill monthly or quarterly.(3) In the event that a requester has failed to pay previous bills, therequester will be required to pay the fee before a request for informationis processed. (4) Fees must be paid by check or money order made payable to ``U.S. Departmentof Health and Human Services'' or to the unit stated in the billing andmust be sent to the billing unit. Payment must be received within 30 daysof the billing date or the applicant will be charged interest and a latefee on the amount overdue. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;60.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Confidentiality of National Practitioner Data Bank information. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Limitations on disclosure.</T3> Information reported to the Data Bankis considered confidential and shall not be disclosed outside the Departmentof Health and Human Services, except as specified in andSection;60.10, andSection;60.11and andSection;60.14. Persons and entities which receive information fromthe Data Bank either directly or from another party must use it solelywith respect to the purpose for which it was provided. Nothing in thisparagraph shall prevent the disclosure of information by a party whichis authorized under applicable State law to make such disclosure. (b) <T3>Penalty for violations.</T3> Any person who violates paragraph (a)shall be subject to a civil money penalty of up to $10,000 for each violation.This penalty will be imposed pursuant to procedures at 42 CFR part 1003.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;60.14 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">How to dispute the accuracy of National Practitioner Data Bank information.</ITAG>(1) <T3>Who may dispute National Practitioner Data Bank information.</T3> Anyphysician, dentist or other health care practitioner may dispute the accuracyof information in the Data Bank concerning himself or herself. The Secretarywill routinely mail a copy of any report filed in the Data Bank to thesubject individual. (b) <T3>Procedures for filing a dispute.</T3> A physician, dentist or otherhealth care practitioner has 60 days from the date on which the Secretarymails the report in question to him or her in which to dispute the accuracyof the report. The procedures for disputing a report are: (1) Informing the Secretary and the reporting entity, in writing, of thedisagreement, and the basis for it. (2) Requesting simultaneously that the disputed information be enteredinto a ``disputed'' status and be reported to inquirers as being in a ``disputed''status, and (3) Attempting to enter into discussion with the reporting entity to resolvethe dispute. (c) <T3>Procedures for revising disputed information.</T3> (1) If the reportingentity revises the information originally submitted to the Data Bank, theSecretary will notify all entities to whom reports have been sent thatthe original information has been revised. (2) If the reporting entity does not revise the reported information, theSecretary will, upon request, review the written information submittedby both parties (the physician, dentist or other health care practitioner),and the reporting entity. After review, the Secretary will either_ (i) If the Secretary concludes that the information is accurate, includea brief statement by the physician, dentist or other health care practitionerdescribing the disagreement concerning the information, and an explanationof the basis for the decision that it is accurate, or (ii) If the Secretary concludes that the information was incorrect, sendcorrected information to previous inquirers.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number0915-0126) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-24425 Filed 10-16-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4140-15-M  </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>