<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89327-0017 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-27-89.f2.A1016</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Food and Drug Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">21 CFR Parts 201, 211, 514, and 559 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 83N-0076] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Approval of Bulk New Animal Drug Substances for Use by Licensed Veterinarians;Withdrawal of Proposed Rule </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Food and Drug Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Withdrawal of proposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is withdrawingits proposed rule that would have amended the animal drug regulations toestablish criteria and procedures for approving new animal drug applications(NADA's) for bulk new animal drug substances that could be compounded foruse by or on the prescription of licensed veterinarians. The agency hasconcluded that the proposed rule should be withdrawn based on the recentenactment of the Generic Animal Drug and Patent Term Restoration Act, anevaluation of the comments received, and on a reevaluation of its positionon the proposed rule. FDA finds: that there is little interest among drugcompanies in sponsoring such NADA's, that veterinarians may lack trainingor equipment to compound finished drug products, that the need and anticipatedbenefits of the proposed rule have not been established, that many of thenew animal drug substances that could have been made available under theproposed rule should be available in lower priced safe and effective genericformulations as a result of new legislation, and that the effect of theregulation could be contrary to the interests of the public health. Reliablecompounding and appropriate use of new animal drugs are essential to theprotection of the public health and effective implementation of the FederalFood, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Issues raised by the comments have led theagency to conclude that significant questions exist as to the adequacyof the proposed rule's provisions in terms of maintaining the level ofpublic and animal health protection envisioned by the statute's requirementsfor premarket approval, good manufacturing practices, and other measuresdesigned to ensure the quality and appropriate use of new animal drugs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Donald A. Gable, Center for VeterinaryMedicine (HFV-130), Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville,MD 20857, 301-443-1414.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Introduction </ITAG>In the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of July 1, 1985 (50 FR 27016), FDA publisheda proposal to amend its regulations to set forth criteria and proceduresfor the approval of NADA's for bulk new animal drug substances that areto be compounded into finished dosage form by or on the prescription oflicensed veterinarians for use in their professional practices. FDA extendedthe comment period until November 14, 1985, in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of October 3, 1985 (50 FR 40405). Applicationsfor such products would have been required to meet the general premarketingapproval requirements of section 512 of the Federal Food, Drug, and CosmeticAct (21 U.S.C. 360b) (the act). That is, the applicants would have to showthrough submission of data that the finished dosage form drugs, as theywere to be compounded by veterinarians or pharmacists, would be safe andeffective for one or more veterinary medical indications. The documentationto have been submitted would have been that required for new animal drugsunder the act. The applicant also would have had to provide adequate labeling for thebulk new animal drug substance. The labeling would have been required tobear adequate directions for prescription use, including directions forcompounding the finished dosage form drug and the following statement:``Caution: Federal law restricts this drug substance to compounding anduse by or on the prescription of a licensed veterinarian.'' The applicantwould also have had to provide evidence to show that the bulk new animaldrug substance would be manufactured, and the finished dosage form couldbe compounded, under the standards of quality required by the act. In viewof the foregoing requirements, the agency anticipated that such NADA'swould have been submitted by persons who manufacture the bulk new animaldrug substance, or who would have supplied it to veterinarians or pharmacists.FDA issued the proposal for several reasons. Some veterinarians and drugdistributors had asked FDA to permit distribution of bulk new animal drugsubstances to veterinarians for compounding and use in the veterinarians'practices. Neither the drug substance nor the finished dosage form wouldhave been subject of an approval. FDA has consistently refused to sanctionsuch a practice, based on its view that the act does not authorize thepractice, and has taken regulatory action to prevent distribution of unapprovedbulk new animal drug substances to veterinarians. In 1981, the PresidentialTask Force on Regulatory Relief requested that FDA reevaluate its bulknew animal drug substance policy and the restrictions it places on useof bulk pharmaceuticals by veterinarians. FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine(CVM) formed a Bulk Drug Task Force, and asked the Bulk Drug Task Forceto review CVM's policy, explore alternatives, and recommend a course ofaction. The Bulk Drug Task Force concluded that the language, as well asthe purpose of the act, supported the existing FDA policy. It stronglyopposed any amendment to the act that would permit the unrestricted saleof such substances to veterinarians. The Bulk Drug Task Force was concernedthat the distribution of bulk new animal drug substances for use in unapprovedfinished dosage form products could compromise the safety and wholesomenessof food products from treated animals and thus jeopardize the health ofthe consumer. Based on these concerns, the Bulk Drug Task Force concluded that continuedrefusal to sanction distribution to veterinarians of unapproved bulk newanimal drug substances intended for use in animals in necessary. Nevertheless,because of the continued interest of some veterinarians in the use of bulknew animal drug substances, and because the Bulk Drug Task Force believedthat veterinarians were qualified to compound certain drugs into finisheddosage form, the task force recommended the development and implementationof a premarket approval procedure for bulk new animal drug substances.The agency concurred, and published the proposed regulation. On November 16, 1988, the President signed into law the Generic AnimalDrug and Patent Term Restoration Act (Pub. L. 100-670, 102 Stat. 3971).FDA believes that the new law will lead to increased competition and therebyhelp lower the cost of many animal drugs, achieving greater potential benefitsthan anticipated under the proposed rule and further decreasing incentivesfor marketing bulk new animal drug substances under the proposal. Manyof the bulk new animal drug substances that the agency perceived couldbe made available under the proposed rule should be available in lowerpriced generic formulations, without the potential adverse effects on publichealth that comments suggested might ensue from adoption of the proposal.<ITAG tagnum="84">Comments on the Proposal </ITAG>The agency received 17 comments on the proposed rule. The comments weresubmitted by four pharmaceutical companies, five trade or professionalassociations, three consultants, a manufacturer of medicated animal feeds,the Federal Trade Commission, a private research organization, and twoveterinary practitioners. Three of the comments favored the proposal, withcertain qualifications and reservations. The remainder of the commentsexpressed varying degrees of opposition to the proposal. Only one distributorof bulk drugs submitted comments, and that firm appears to distribute bulkdrugs primarily for use in human drugs. FDA based its decision to propose the regulations on a number of assumptions,including: (1) Veterinarians have the training and equipment to compounda number of finished drugs for safe and effective use, (2) FDA could continueto protect the public health by approving NADA's under the proposed regulations,(3) there is a significant, identified need for the compounding of bulkdrugs by veterinary practitioners, and (4) enough drug manufacturers wouldbe interested in submitting NADA's to make the program viable. These assumptionswere based, in part, on the views of veterinarians, veterinary drug distributors,and others as expressed to FDA in recent years. The comments, however,raise serious questions about the validity of these assumptions. As a result,FDA has decided not to adopt the proposed regulations. In proposing the regulation, FDA assumed that Congress intended that drugscompounded by veterinarians for use in their practices would be approvedby FDA, unless the finished drugs were not new animal drugs or were grandfatheredand therefore not subject to the approval requirements. After FDA publishedthe proposal, two Federal district courts held that drugs compounded byveterinarians need not be approved by FDA. However, the decision in onecase has been reversed, <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>9/1 Kg Containers, More or Less, of an Article of Drug for VeterinaryUse, </T3>674 F. Supp. 1344 (C.D. Ill. 1987), <T3>rev'd </T3>No. 88-1233 (7th Cir. July 27, 1988), and an appeal is pendingin the other case, <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Algon Chemical, Inc., </T3>No. 87-1820 (D. N.J. April 12, 1988), <T3>appeal docketed, </T3>No. 88-5478 (3d Cir. June 17, 1988f). The agencycontinues to believe that drugs compounded by veterinarians must be approvedby the agency unless the finished drug qualifies for one of the exceptionsfrom the aproval requirements. <ITAG tagnum="84">Veterinarians' Ability to Compound Drugs </ITAG>The comments strongly questioned the ability of veterinarians to compounddrugs so that the drugs could be used safely and effectively, especiallybecause the compounding would not be subject to the current good manufacturingpractice (CGMP) regulations. Of particular significance is the fact theveterinary school faculty members who teach veterinary students about theuse of drugs believe that veterinarians lack the necessary qualificationsfor compounding complex drug formulations. 1. Seven comments opposed the proposed rule because the comments believethat, because of lack of expertise or equipment, veterinarians could notcompound finished dosage form drugs under the same conditions of qualitycontrol as could a commercial pharmaceutical manufacturing facility. Oneof those comments was from the American Academy of Veterinary Pharmacologyand Therapeutics (AAVPT), whose membership consists primarily of veterinaryschool faculty members. The comment reported that none of the members ofthe AAVPT Advisory Committee favored the proposal. The comment stated thatveterinarians do not receive training in compounding complex drug formulationsthat is adequate to justify the proposed regulations, although veterinariansmight be qualified to do simple compounding. On the other hand, one veterinarianexpressed the opinion that veterinarians would be qualified to compoundsome drugs, and several other comments implied the same view. Under the proposed rule, applications for bulk new animal drug substancesthat would have required complex compounding procedures or extensive knowledgewould not likely have been approved by FDA. Nevertheless, FDA does notdispute the comments, which appear generally to have opposed any agencysanction of compounding by veterinarians. While the agency believes thatveterinarians and pharmacists may be able to compound some of the lesscomplex finished drugs, the comments suggest that the qualify could belower than the finished dosage form as manufactured by the holder of anapproved NADA. 2. Several comments questioned whether pharmacists would be able to compounddrugs in an adequate manner. A comment from the Federal Trade Commissionquestioned whether the proposal would require that both veterinarians andpharmacists be qualified to compound a particular drug, and urged FDA toconsider whether pharmacists might be qualified to compound some drugsthat veterinarians could not. The agency does not believe that the question of the extent to which pharmacistswould be qualified to compound drugs under the proposed regulations wasfully resolved by the comments. However, the agency notes that no pharmacistsor pharmacists' organizations submitted comments indicating, perhaps, alack of interest among pharmacists in the proposal. 3. Nine comments opposed the provision in proposed 21 CFR 559.4(f) thatwould have exempted veterinarians and pharmacists from compliance withthe CGMP regulations. The comments expressed considerable concern that,because there would be no recordkeeping or other accountability, therecould be no assurance that the final product would be safe. Further, fourcomments were opposed to the provisions in proposed 21 CFR 559.4(e) exemptingveterinarians and pharmacists from registration and consequent regularFDA inspections. The comments stated that pharmaceutical and manufacturingfacilities are subject to FDA inspections and audits, and that inspectionsprovide the best assurance that proper procedures are being followed. Thecomments also suggested that the exemption would invite drug misuse becausethere would be no way to identify the veterinarian responsible for misuse.One comment stated that there would be no way to determine whether a mistakein formulation had occurred, and another stated that FDA would know lessthan it does not about who is making the approved finished dosage formdrugs, and how those drugs are made. Five comments opposed the proposedrule because it would create a double standard, one for the manufacturerand distributor and another for the veterinarian and pharmacist. The commentsincluded the argument that either everyone should comply with the CGMPand registration provisions of the act, or all should be exempt. As stated in the preamble to the proposed regulation (50 FR 27021), theagency has interpreted the statutory CGMP provision as not applying tomedical practitioners, including veterinarians. Also, the agency has notapplied the existing CGMP regulations to pharmacists provided they areoperating within the scope of their authorized practice. Further, the statuteitself exempts practitioners from the registration requirements under theconditions included in the proposal. The agency had contemplated use ofadulteration and misbranding provisions of the act related to actual lackof safety or effectiveness, and the provisions relating to withdrawal ofNADA approval, to control any instances of improper compounding. Impositionof an elaborate regulatory scheme on veterinary and pharmacy practitionerswould clearly constitute a significant new burden on veterinary healthprofessionals, and on agency field resources, a burden that does not appearwarranted by the incremental benefits likely to result from adoption ofthe proposal and the potential availability of bulk drug substances toverterinarians and pharmacists. If, as the comments suggest, practitionersand pharmacists would not be able generally to compound drugs in an adequatemanner without CGMP compliance, regulation, and inspection, the regulationsshould not be adopted. <ITAG tagnum="84">Effect on FDA'S Regulation of Drug Use </ITAG>A number of comments argued that the proposal would lessen FDA's abilityto prevent the distribution and use of unapproved drugs, and unlawful useof approved drugs. Two comments stated explicitly that the proposal wouldlead to greater risks to human health because of illegal drug residues,and a number of other implied that the same result would occur. 4. Several comments stated that the proposal would exacerbate the currentproblems with illegal importations of bulk drugs, and the illicit manufactureand distribution of drugs in the United States. Comments suggested thatthe agency should achieve control of these problems before consideringthe implementation of the proposal. 5. Several comments expressed concern that FDA has been unable to preventthe misuse of drugs by the ultimate user, and argued that under the proposedregulations FDA would have less ability to monitor extra label drug use.One comment stated that it would be unrealistic to expect practitionersto use the compounded drugs only for approved indications, and anothercomment stated that it would be impossible to determine whether the directionsfor use are being followed by veterinarians. Others argued that compoundingor repacking and distributing drugs outside the practice of medicine wouldoccur. Still others stated that the regulations would be understood aslegitimizing illegal sale and use of the drugs. A number of comments statedthat the proposal could not be enforced adequately, and that it would leadto ``bath-tub'' concoctions. The National Milk Producers Federation statedthat the result would be an increase in the incidence of illegal drug residuesin the milk supply because the proposed regulations would provide a widerlatitude for individual veterinary discretion with regard to compoundingbulk new animal drug substances. The comment stated that illegal drug residueshave occurred in the past as a result of veterinarians prescribing unapprovedcombinations of drugs. The proposal, according to the comment, would leadto a requirement for more regulatory controls and greater use of enforcementresources.6. One comment argued that FDA should permit the unrestricted compoundingof unapproved bulk drugs for animal use, and other comments asumed thatFDA now permits the compounding of ``compendial'' drugs (those listed inthe United States Pharmacopeia or National Formulary), including antibiotics,without approval on the ground that the drugs are ``old drugs'' or thatFDA has a list of ``old drugs.''The agency believes that it must avoid taking any action that would makemore difficult the regulation of unapproved drugs, and the unapproved useof approved drugs. Although the agency has no direct evidence that theproposal, if adopted, would necessarily result in an increase in unlawfulactivity, the fact that a number of comments from those who are familiarwith the use of drugs suggested that illegal use of drugs would increaseis of concern. Further, the agency finds particularly disturbing the factthat several firms, in the course of regulatory discussions held sincethe proposal was published, have expressed to the agency the opinion thatthe proposed regulations would legitimize the sale of unapproved bulk newanimal drug substances to veterinarians. This assertion is incorrect, butits expression supports FDA's decision to withdraw the proposal.Also of concern to FDA is the fact that several of the comments suggestedthat FDA now allows a number of bulk drugs to be sold to veterinarianson the ground that they are ``old drugs.'' FDA wishes to correct the impressionthat there is a list of such drugs. Any exemptions form the requirementof approval for a bulk new animal drug substance would have to be proven,on a drug-by-drug basis, by the person who is interested in marketing orusing the drug.FDA is currently attempting to stop what appears to be widespread use ofbulk new animal drug substances that are never subject to an approval.The comments suggest that, if bulk drugs are to be made available to veterinarians,even under provisions of an NADA, the drugs are likely not to be used fortheir labeled indication. Such a result would undermine FDA's current regulatoryefforts.In deciding whether to adopt the proposed regulations, the agency mustconsider its responsibility for protecting the public from unsafe drugresidues. As the Bulk Drug Task Force stated:<ITAG tagnum="21">Because there is inadequate information in the open literature relatingto residues or withdrawal times for most drugs used in food-producing animals,veterinarians in clinical practice generally do not have adequate informationto use untested and/or inadequately labeled drugs safely in food-producinganimals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * Because bulk drugs would not have preclearance testing theycould not be labeled with a proper withdrawal period; in fact, they areordinarily devoid of directions for use and warning and caution statements,resulting in an increased likelihood of tissue residue violations. Becausesome bulk drugs may not have a counterpart approved drug for use in food-producinganimals there may not be approved methodology to detect the residue andthus [the U.S. Department of Agriculture] may be unable to test for thepresence of the drug in slaughtered animals.</ITAG>Even if there is an approved for a finished dosage form drug containingthe same active ingredient as the bulk drug, and even assuming that theveterinarian followed the directions that are on the approved drug whenusing the bulk drug, the public is at risk. During the process of approvinga finished dosage form animal drug, FDA establishes a tolerance and a withdrawaltime based on studies conducted with a finished dosage form drug that hasbeen formulated and manufactured in a specified way, and whose active ingredientcomes from a specified source and has been manufactured under specifiedconditions. There is no assurance that finished dosage forms compoundedby veterinarians would have the same quality control and hence biovailabilityfrom batch to batch and would therefore consistently deplete in the samemanner, resulting in the same residue patterns. It is for this reason,among others, that the act requires that the finished drug product be pretestedto determine whether it is safe, as well as effective, and that standardsbe in place to assure uniform batch manufacture.<ITAG tagnum="84">Extent of Use</ITAG>Although some comments supported the proposal, suggesting that the bulkdrug would be used by veterinarians, the primary incentive was thoughtto be economic, and other comments suggest that cost savings would be limited.7. Three comments, submitted by the American Veterinary Medical Association(AVMA), the Federal Trade Commission, and an individual veterinarian, supportedthe intent of the proposed rule. The comments' consensus was that the benefitof the proposal was that it would result in lower drug costs to the veterinarypractitioner, and ultimately lower food costs for the public. However,the AVMA support was contingent on there being a significant reductionin cost, an outcome that is in question in light of the comments discussedabove, and the other comments' support was qualified in one or more ways.Further, several comments opposed the proposed rule because the proposaldid not establish a need for the drugs. The comments argued that veterinariansalready have access to all the new animal drugs that are needed. One commentargued that the cost of drugs could be lowered by reducing the cost ofa conventional application.If the agency received the kinds of applications it visualized when theproposed rule was published (e.g., supplements for pre-1962 drugs and forother drugs that require limited compounding for finished dosage form),it is unlikely that the proposed regulations would fill any gaps in therapeuticneeds. The primary gain from the regulations would therefore be economicin that the regulations would result in some finished drugs at lower prices.However, as stated, it appears that cost savings may not be as significantas first projected. No comment submitted a detailed justification for theprogram, either in terms of the need for specific drugs, or in the formof an estimate of the amount of savings that would occur. It appears fromthe comments that the cost of a sponsor's development of a bulk new animaldrug application, and the resources (time and equipment) required for theveterinarian or pharmacist to compound the bulk substance into final dosageform would result in negligible cost reduction to the animal owner andto the ultimate consumer of animal food products. Further, in view of thefact that there was only limited support for the proposal, it appears thatthe procedures would be used only infrequently. Most importantly, as describedfurther above, other comments have raised questions as to potential adverseeffects that adoption of the proposal could have on the agency's abilityto protect human and animal health.<ITAG tagnum="84">Drug Manufacturers' Interest in Sponsoring NADA's for Bulk Drugs</ITAG>Drug manufacturers who submitted comments expressed serious reservationsabout the proposal, indicating a reluctance on their part to submit NADA'sunder the regulations.8. Drug companies and the Animal Health Institute (AHI) argued that underthe proposed regulations drug firms would be subjected to private (product)liability and regulatory liability even if the veterinarian did not followthe compounding directions in the labeling. Further, these comments fromindustry argued that because the drug companies cannot control the actionsof the veterinarians and because the proposal did not require the veterinarianto comply with current good manufacturing practice (CGMP), or to keep recordsof the procedures that were used in compounding, there would be no reliableway to determine whether the veterinarian followed the directions on thebulk product. However, a comment by a veterinarian's professional groupstated that the sponsor's liability would end when the veterinarian receivedthe drug and that ``the veterinarian would assume a great deal of legalresponsibility.''Several comments discussed in some detail the reasons for their positionson product and regulatory liability. Although the agency has not undertakento assess in any detail the validity of the arguments, the comments withregard to liability suggest reluctance on the part of sponsors to submitNADA's under the regulations.9. Several comments disagreed with FDA's analysis of the economic impactof the proposed rule, which was made part of the administrative recordfor the proposal. The comments stated the analysis greatly underestimatedthe costs associated with supplemental NADA's (those that would be submittedby sponsors who already hold approved NADA's for finished dosage form products)and abbreviated NADA's (for drugs that are the equivalent of drugs thatwere approved before October 1962), and that small businesses will findit next to impossible to enter this market because of the costs. Severalcomments provided cost estimates to support their comments.The agency is aware that the sponsors may be in a better position thanthe agency to estimate the costs associated with drug applications. Therefore,the agency does not have a sound basis for disagreeing with the contentionthat the economic impact assessment as discussed in the proposed rule mayunderestimate the costs involved, especially for firms that do not currentlymarket finished dosage forms containing active ingredients that would bethe subject of bulk drug NADA's. To the extent that the comments are correctin projecting higher costs of compliance with the proposed rule, of course,cost savings anticipated under the proposal would be lessened. Again, thecomments suggest reluctance on the part of sponsors to submit bulk drugNADA's.10. Several comments argued that implementation of the proposed regulationswould not be practical. For example, comments argued that it would be difficultto establish the reliability of proposed compounding procedures, and toassure that the drugs would be compounded correctly. FDA views these commentsas further evidence of a reluctance on the part of drug companies to sponsorNADA's under the regulations. The agency believes that reliable compoundingand appropriate use of new animal drugs are essential to the protectionof public health and effective implementation of the statutory scheme.Thus, these comments suggest that the system of bulk drug approval anduse envisioned by the proposal may not be adequate to ensure effectiveimplementation of the act's provisions for premarket approval, good manufacturingpractices, and other measures to ensure the quality of new animal drugs.11. Four comments opposed the provision of the proposed regulations thatwould exempt veterinarians and pharmacists from the reporting requirementsof 21 CFR 510.300. The comments stated that it would be unreasonable forthe drug sponsor to be responsible for reporting drug experiences, becauseveterinarians and pharmacists would compound the final product and thesponsor would not have control over the ultimate compunding, storing, anduse of the finished dosage form. The comments also stated that there wouldbe no way to identify individuals who are responsible for incorrectly compoundingproducts that result in adverse reactions or illegal drug residues.The agency proposed to exempt veterinarians from the requirement of reportingadverse reactions directly to FDA, on the belief that veterinarians wouldcontinue, as they have in the past with respect to finished drugs, to reportthe reactions to the NADA sponsors, who in turn would report them to FDA.The comments imply that veterinarians might be reluctant to do so if theybelieved adverse reactions could be due to the manner in which they compoundedthe drugs. Again, the agency believes that the concerns raised by thesecomments raise significant public health questions, since FDA's abilityto monitor adverse effects and conduct effective postmarketing surveillanceis dependent upon adverse effect reporting. Moreover, the comments reflectanother reason why sponsors might be reluctant to participate in the program.<ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion</ITAG>The agency has given careful consideration to the comments that were received,and has reevaluated the proposed rule. For the reasons stated above, theagency is withdrawing the proposed rule published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of July 1, 1985 (50 FR 27016).<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 9, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Frank E. Young,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Commissioner of Food and Drugs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Otis R. Bowen,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[Fr Doc. 89-7207 Filed 3-24-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>