<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891205-0102 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.12-05-89.f2.A1101</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">UNITED STATES INFORMATION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Grants Program for Private, Non-Profit Organizations in Support ofInternational Professional and Cultural Activities</ITAG>The following announcement supersedes the one appearing in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, Volume 54, Number 108 of Wednesday, June 7,1989, pp. 24462-24463.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary</ITAG>The Office of Private Sector Programs announces a program of grant-supportto U.S. non-profit organizations for projects that link their internationalexchange interests with counterpart institutions/groups in other countriesin ways supportive of the aims of the Bureau of Educational and CulturalAffairs. Interested applicants are urged to read the complete <T4>Federal Register</T4> announcement prior to addressing inquiries tothe Office.The Office of Private Sector Programs of the United States InformationAgency (USIA) announces a program to support the international exchangeobjectives of the United States by stimulating and encouraging increasedprivate sector commitment, activity, and resources through limited grantsto non-profit U.S. institutions. The Office is a networking instrumentthat serves to link the international exchange interests of U.S. privatesector non-profit institutions with counterpart institutions and organizedgroups in other countries. The Office gives high priority to project proposalsthat establish or promote linkages between American and foreign professionalorganizations and major cultural institutions.Projects must include an international people-to-people component, havea professional and cultural focus, and demonstrate a substantial contributionto long-term communication and understanding between the United Statesand other countries. USIS post consultation is strongly recommended for all purposes.The Office of Private Sector Programs works with U.S. non-profit organizationson cooperative international group projects that introduce American andforeign participants to one another's traditions, arts, social, economicand political structures, and international interests. The Office willaccord priority status to international projects involving leaders or potentialleaders in various fields and professions, including leaders of culturalinstitutions, urban planners, jurists, specialized journalists (economicand cultural journalism, international affairs), business professionals,parliamentarians and economic officials. Since these programs focus onsubstantive issues of mutual interest, we recommend the coordination ofthese activities with academic institutions. The Office's projects areintellectual and cultural, not technical. Proposals falling in technicalfields must have as their focus the role and function of the profession/activitywithin American society.Each private sector activity must maintain its nonpolitical character andshall be balanced and representative of the diversity of American political,social, and cultural life. Programs under the authority of the Bureau shallmaintain their scholarly integrity and shall meet the highest standardsof academic excellence or artistic achievement.Proposals for projects taking place in the United States or oversees arewelcome for topics that involve any area of the world. However, the Officewould encourage those that involve Eastern Europe, the Near East, Southand Southeast Asia, and Africa.USIA grant assistance constitutes only a portion of total project funding.Proposals should list other anticipated sources of support_both financialand in-kind. Budget submissions should be presented in multi-column formatand clearly display cost-sharing support of proposed projects. Programsgenerally range from one to six weeks; the duration of the entire grantperiod does not normally exceed one year.Funding assistance for these discretionary grants is limited to participanttravel and per diem requirements, with modest USIA funding available tocover administrative costs (salaries, benefits, other direct and indirectcosts) which may not exceed 20% of the total funds requested. The granteeagency may wish to cost-share any of these expenses.Creative Arts Competition The Office of the Private Sector Program (E/P) also strongly encouragesproject proposals from U.S. non-profit organizations or institutions inthe creative arts, including arts councils and humanities committees. Proposalsshould include an international exchange of persons component. The Officewill accord priority status to projects involving international leadersof cultural institutions, cultural commentators and critics, arts administrators,specialists in historic preservation and art conservation, architects,and practicing artists in institutional projects that directly engage artistsin the creation of their particular art forms. Thematic areas include:Music, Dance, Theater, Literature, Visual Arts, Folk Arts, Crafts and Folklore,Museum Exchanges, Historical Conservation, Supportive Arts Organizations,and Arts-oriented Philanthropies. Proposed arts exchanges may operate either to or from the United States,preferably in both directions. Proposals that potentially lead to institutinallinkages will receive priority consideration in the review process. Arts projects co-funded and co-sponsored by the E/P office would ideallyenlist the participation of U.S. cultural officers in our embassies inthe countries involved. In the case of proposals for bringing creativearts professionals to the United States, USIS officers abroad may nominatecandidates for the proposed activities, while the creative arts granteesin the United States will make the final selection of award-winning candidates.The E/P office seeks professionalism, fairness, and some measures of balancein the distribution of awards among world areas. The E/P office does not accept proposals for the support of performingarts tours, film festivals, independently-operating international competitions,exhibits, or academic arts programs. Only in exceptional cases, those thatforge continuing collaboration between institutions, will conferences orsymposia be considered. Additional Guidelines and Restrictions The E/P office requires co-funding with grantees in all projects. Proposalswith less than 33% cost-sharing must have especially strong justificationeven to receive consideration. E/P grants are not ordinarily given to support projects whose focus ispurely technical, research projects, or professional training, independently-operatinginternational competitions, youth or youth-related activities, or publicationsfunding. Student and/or teacher/faculty exchanges or projects which arescholarly or academic in purpose should in most cases be directed to USIA'sOffice of Academic Programs. Youth or youth-related projects should bedirected to USIA's Office of International Youth Exchange. Proposals focusingon technical aspects of science and technology do not fall within the domainof the Office and should be referred to relevant federal agencies for consideration.Deadlines The Office of Private Sector Programs will accept proposals from November22, 1989 through March 2, 1990, for funding prior to October 1, 1990. Projectproposals must be received a minimum of four months in advance of the activitydate and will be accepted for review only when they are fully in accordwith Project Proposal Information Requirements (OMB andplusmin;3116-0175).For projects that would begin after December 31, 1990, competition detailswill be announced in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on or about May 15, 1990. Inquiries are welcome prior to submission of applications. Only under highlycompelling circumstances will the Office of Private Sector Programs considerapplications outside the above-mentioned timeframe. The Office of Private Sector Programs offers the following additional guidanceto prospective applicants: 1. As stated, the Office of Private Sector Programs guidelines indicatethat full and complete proposals must be submitted a minimum of four monthsprior to the start of a program. This is necessary for two reasons. First,the Office's Congressional mandate may often be best served when U.S. privatesector organizatioins work with U.S. Information Service (USIS) posts inother countries in developing projects that build ongoing institutionallinkages between foreign and U.S. institutions. Projects usually servethese ends best when USIS officers have reasonable time and opportunityto lay the groundwork for successful educational and cultural programming.Second, the review process for proposals submited to USIA is multilayeredand time-consuming. The four-month minimum timeframe stipulated betweenthe receipt of proposals and the date of the proposed activity is justbarely sufficient to make a project work for the benefit of all concerned.2. Projects supported by the Office of Private Sector Programs are intendedto support USIA goals abroad as well as to assist U.S. private sector organizationsin their efforts to advance international understanding in areas identifiedas important for bilateral relations. While the Office welcomes clearlydefined projects in the wide gamut of U.S. private-sector fields, it givespreferential consideration to projects that involve USIS posts in the nominationof foreign participants with a few toward building ongoing institutionallinkages between foreign and U.S. institutions. Applicants should be awarethat proposals for bilateral programs are subject to review and commentby the USIS post in the relevant country, and that pre-selected participantswill also be subject to USIS post review. 3. The Office of Private Sector Programs gives preferential considerationto proposals for activities in other countries when USIS posts are consultedin the design of the proposed program and in the choice of the most suitablevenues for such programs. 4. The Office of Private Sector Programs does not encourage proposals forthe partial support of conferences. The Office evaluates such proposalsin the light of benefits going beyond the context of the conference itself,most importantly their potential for creating and strengthening enduringlinkages between foreign and U.S. organizations, and the extent to whichtopics of priority interest to USIA are discussed. Conference proposalsshould include a detailed agenda, clearly identified speakers/presenters(and the professional/academic credentials thereof), and a careful explanationof the role of participants from other countries in the conference. Theparticipation of a respected university or scholarly organization wouldin many cases be advantageous. Further, the themes addressed in such meetingsmust be of long-term importance rather than focussed on current eventsof short-term issues. In every case, a substantial rationale for such meetingsmust be presented as part of the proposal, one that clearly indicates thedistinctive and important contribution the conference or symposium willyield. Projects that duplicate what is routinely carried out by privatesector and/or public sector operations will not be considered. 5. Because of limited resources, the Office of Private Sector Programsencourages project proposals involving more than one country. However,single-country projects that are clearly defined and possess the potentialfor creating and strengthening continuing linkages between foreign andU.S. institutions are also welcome, provided they address the priorityinterests of the USIA. For additional information and planning assistance, prospective applicantsmay wish to contact Dr. Raymond H. Harvey, or for creative-arts proposals,Dr. Anne-Imelda Marino Radice. Office of Private Sector Programs, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs,United States Information Agency, 301 4th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20547,or call (202) 485-7348.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: November 13, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Stephen J. Schwartz, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Office of Private Sector Programs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-28144 Filed 11-30-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 8230-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>