<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891103-0117 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-03-89.f2.A1116</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7968] et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Exemptions; Liberty House Restaurant Corporation Profit SharingPlan, et al. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of Proposed Exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Liberty House Restaurant Corporation Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan),Located in Atlanta, Georgia </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Application No. D-7968</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the Plan's proposedcash sale (the Sale) of certain improved real property (the Property) locatedin Atlanta, Georgia to Richard Lewis (the Applicant), a party in interestwith respect to the Plan; provided that the cash consideration paid onthe date of the sale by the Applicant to the Plan is the greater of eitherthe appraised fair market value of the Property or the Plan's aggregatecost of acquisition, financing and holding of the Property as of the dateof the Sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan with 52 participants as of September14, 1988 and assets totalling $1,256,567.31 as of April 30, 1989. The Applicantis the Plan's trustee and administrator, He is also the owner of 60% ofthe issued and outstanding common stock of Liberty House Restaurant Corporation(the Employer), the Plan's sponsor, and a member of the Employer's boardof directors.2. The Property is located at 758 West Paces Ferry Road in the Buckheadsection of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia. The Property consists of aluxury residence with the swimming pool situated on a heavily-landscapedacre lot in an Atlanta residential neighborhood.3. The Plan acquired the Property on August 20, 1987 from Richard and EllenClapp (the Clapps). The Applicant represents that the Clapps are unrelatedto any employee of the Employer, or the Applicant; have never been employedby the Employer; and have had no business relationships with either theEmployer, or the Applicant. The Plan paid the Clapps $465,000 for the Property,which was encumbered by a $265,000 mortgage from the Buckhead Bank (theBank).4. Beginning on August 20, 1987, the date of the Plan's purchase of theProperty, the Applicant directed extensive construction and renovation(the Improvements) to the Property. The Plan has paid $627,167.15 for theImprovements through March 1989. In order to finance the Improvements directedby the Applicant, the Property was additionally encumbered by a $235,000construction loan from the Bank.5. The Plan has leased the Property to the Applicant under a written lease(the Lease) dated July 1, 1988.\1\<NOTE/> The Lease provides that, in addition to the Applicant, anotheremployee of the Employer, a party in interest with respect to the Plan,may reside at the Property. The Lease term is thirty-six months and permitstwo optional renewals for five years each. The base monthly rental is $6,000.In addition to the base rent, the Applicant is responsible for utilities,including garbage, water, sewage, electricity and gas. The Applicant hasrepresented that all amounts due under the Lease have been paid.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The Department is not, in this notice, proposing to grantexemptive relief for any prior prohibited transactions involving the Property,including the Lease or any use of the Plan's assets to benefit a partyin interest. In this regard, the Applicant has represented that a Form5330, Return of Initial Excise Tax Relating to Pension and Profit SharingPlans, will be filed with the Internal Revenue Service and that applicableexcise tax in connection with any prior prohibited transactions will bepaid by the Applicant within 60 days of the Department's grant of an exemption.6. Joseph L. Walker, S.R.A., M.A.I., of Joseph L. Walker and Associates,Inc., real estate appraisers and consultants in Atlanta, Georgia, reviewedthe monthly rental payment of $6,000 for the Property as of April 7, June21 and July 13, 1989. He found the Applicant's payment to the Plan to representthe fair market rental value of the Property.7. The Applicant now proposes to purchase the Property for cash at a pricewhich will be the greater, on the date of the Sale, of either the aggregatecost of the Plan's acquisition, financing and holding of the Property orits appraised fair market value. The Applicant will also pay all fees,commissions and expenses in connection with the Sale.8. During the course of its ownership of the Property, the Applicant representsthat the aggregate cost to the Plan for the acquisition, financing andholding of the Property through April 20, 1989 amounts to $1,191,706,70.9. The Property was appraised by Terrence L. Love, M.A.I., of the firmof Land Development Analysts. Mr. Love determined the fair market valueof the Property to be $1,130,000 as of June 26, 1989.10. In summary, the Applicant represents that the transaction meets thestatutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) The Sale willbe a one-time transaction; (b) The Sale will be consumated for cash; (c)The Plan will pay no fees, commissions or expenses in connection with theSale; (d) The Plan will receive the greater, on the date of the Sale, ofeither the aggregate cost to the Plan of the acquisition, financing andholding of the Property or its appraised fair market value; (e) The Salewill enable the Plan to divest itself of the Property and pursue alternativeinvestments; and (f) The Applicant will file Form 5330, Return of InitialExcise Tax Relating to Pension and Profit Sharing Plans, with the InternalRevenue Service and pay applicable excise tax in connection with past prohibitedtransactions concerning the Property within 60 days of the grant of thisproposed exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Howard Simon and Associates, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan),Located in Deerfield, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7984]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="82">Proposed exemption</ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to: (1) the purchase,by the individually-directed accounts (the Rollover Accounts) in the Planof Mr. Howard Simon (Mr. Simon) and his spouse, Mrs. Elizabeth M. Simon(Mrs. Simon) of certain computer equipment (the Equipment), for the totalcash consideration of $14,625; (2) the leasing (the Lease) of the Equipmentby the Rollover Accounts to Dudley Enterprises, Inc. (DEI), a party ininterest with respect to the Plan; (3) the guarantee of rental paymentsunder the Lease by Mr. and Mrs. Simon; and (4) the future sale of the Equipmentby the Rollover Accounts to DEI pursuant to an option to purchase (thePurchase Option), provided the terms of the transactions are at least asfavorable to the Rollover Accounts as those obtainable in arm's lengthtransactions with unrelated parties. Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan with total assets of $121,944 as ofMarch 31, 1989. As of August 14, 1989, the Plan had ten participants. Thetrustees of the Plan (the Trustees) are Mr. and Mrs. Simon and Mr. MarkSchwechter.2. Both Mr. and Mrs. Simon have regular accounts (the Regular Accounts)and rollover accounts in the Plan, the latter of which were merged intothe Plan from a predecessor plan. As of March 31, 1989, Mr. and Mrs. Simonhad $21,001 and $576, respectively, in their Regular Accounts. Also asof March 31, 1989, Mr. and Mrs. Simon had total assets of $55,649 and $2,929,respectively, in their Rollover Accounts. Although Mr. and Mrs. Simon arepermitted to direct investments in their Regular Accounts, they and theother participants have elected to have the Trustees make decisions involvingPlan investments in the Regular Accounts. Mr. and Mrs. Simon, may, however,direct investments in their Rollover Accounts. Mr. and Mrs. Simons' RolloverAccounts are the only accounts that will be involved in the subject transactionsand are described below.3. Howard Simon and Associates, Inc. (HSAI) is the sponsor of the Plan.HSAI is an actuarial consulting firm that maintains its principal placeof business at 425 Huehl Road, Building No. 20, Northbrook, Illinois. DEI,which is located in Des Plaines, Illinois, is in the video rental business.DEI is 100 percent owned by Mrs. Simon.4. In May 1989, HSAI purchased certain IBM computer hardware and relatednetwork items for $33,275 from an unrelated party, Unique Business SystemsCorporation of Santa Monica, California. The purchase was made in threeseparate installments, all of which were related to the delivery of theEquipment. At present, HSAI is not indebted to the seller.5. To provide the Rollover Accounts with a higher income-yielding investment,HSAI proposes to sell the following Equipment to the Rollover Accountsfor cash: 1 IBM PS/2 Model 70, 60 MB Hard Disk, IBM Ram, 1.44 MB Floppy;3 IBM 8512 Color Monitors; 1 Bar Code Reader; 1 Cash Drawer; 1 Okidata182 andamp; Printer w/Cable; 1 IBM DOS 3.3; 1 80386 Memory Expansion; 1 NovellELS Network Software (4-User Limit); 1 Puredata ArcNet Card; 1 RG62 25andmin16;Cable; 1 Continuous Power Supply (450 watt); 1 Maynard External Tape Backup(60MB); 1 Hayes 2400 Baud Internal Modem; 2 IBM PS/2 Model 286 W/1 MB RAM,1.44 MB Floppy. The total sales price for the Equipment will be $14,625.This amount reflects the fair market value of the Equipment as determinedon August 15, 1989 by Mr. James Sherwood (Mr. Sherwood), an independentcomputer dealer who is affiliated with Technical Software Development Companyof Des Plaines, Illinois. Both Rollover Accounts will hold proportionateinterests in the Equipment and such interests will not exceed 25 percentof the assets that are contained in each account. Thus, Mr. Simon's RolloverAccount will invest $13,894 for a 95 percent interest in the Equipmentand Mrs. Simon's Rollover Account will invest $731 for a 5 percent interestin the Equipment. In addition, neither Rollover Account will be requiredto pay any fees or commissions in connection therewith.6. Following the acquisition, the Rollover Accounts will lease the Equipmentto DEI under the provisions of a written lease. The terms of the Leasewill be those that are commonly used by commercial leasing companies andwill provide for an arm's length dealings between the Rollover Accountsand DEI. The Lease will be for a duration of five years and at a monthlyrental of $308 in accordance with Mr. Sherwood's determination of the fairmarket rental value of such Equipment. The Lease will require that DEIgive the Plan a security deposit that will be equal to one month's rent.In addition, the Lease will require that DEI maintain adequate insuranceon the Equipment and designate the Rollover Accounts as the loss payeesof such insurance. Further, the Lease will provide that DEI bear all coststhat are incidental to the repair and maintenance of the Equipment. Inthe event DEI makes any improvements to the Equipment, the Lease will providethat such improvements belong to the Rollover Accounts. Finally, becauseDEI is a start-up business, Mr. and Mrs. Simon propose to guarantee rentalpayments under the Lease should a rental delinquency or default occur onthe part of DEI. As of February 15, 1989, Mr. and Mrs. Simon had a combinednet worth that was in excess of $2.3 million.7. At the end of the Lease term, DEI will have an option to purchase theEquipment, for cash, from the Rollover Accounts. The proposed sales pricefor the Equipment will be the greater of the fair market value of the Equipmentas determined by a qualified, independent appraiser or $1,232 representingthe Equipment's salvage value. In calculating the fair market value ofthe Equipment, the independent appraiser will consider the value of anyimprovements that are affixed to the Equipment. The Rollover Accounts willnot be required to pay any fees or commissions in connection with the PurchaseOption transaction. In the event DEI does not exercise the Purchase Option,the Rollover Accounts will sell the Equipment to an unrelated party.8. In addition to calculating the fair market value and fair market rentalvalue of the Equipment, Mr. Sherwood represents that the Equipment wouldbe a very sound investment for the Rollover Accounts and have a maximumpotential resale value. Mr. Sherwood also states that the salvage valueof the equipment would equal four months rent.9. In summary, it is represented that the proposed transactions will satisfythe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) The Rollover Accounts will purchase the Equipment from HSAIfor cash; (b) the sales price for the Equipment that will be acquired bythe Rollover Accounts will be based on the independently appraised valueof the Equipment as determined by Mr. Sherwood; (c) the Rollover Accountswill receive rent under the Lease that is based upon the fair market rentalvalue of the Equipment as determined by Mr. Sherwood; (d) Mr. and Mrs.Simon will guarantee rental payments under the Lease in the event of arental default or delinquency by DEI; (e) DEI will purchase the Equipment,for cash, at the conclusion of the Lease pursuant to the Purchase Optionfor the greater of the Equipment's fair market value as determined by aqualified, independent appraiser or $1,232, representing the Equipment'ssalvage value; (f) the Rollover Accounts will not be required to pay anyfees or commissions in connection with the sale or the exercise of thePurchase Option; and (g) Mr. and Mrs. Simon, who are the only participantsin the Plan whose accounts will be affected by the transactions proposedherein, have determined that the proposed transactions will be in the interestof their Rollover Accounts and they desire that such transactions be consummated.<T3>Notice to interested persons:</T3> Because Mr. and Mrs. Simon are theonly participants in the Plan whose individual accounts will be affectedby the proposed transactions, it has been determined that there is no needto distribute the notice of proposed exemption to interested persons. Therefore,written comments and requests for a public hearing are due 30 days fromthe date of publication of this notice of proposed exemption in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Ocmulgee Fields, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (the Plan) Locatedin Macon, Georgia</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7996]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406 (a) and (b) (1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the Plan's proposedcash sale (the Sale) ot Ocmylgee Fields, Inc. (the Employer), the Plan'ssponsor and, as such, a party in interest with respect to the Plan, ofa certain parcel of improved real property (the Property) located in Macon,Georgia; provided that the terms and conditions of the proposed Sale areat least as favorable to those obtainable by the Plan in an arm's-lengthtransaction between unrelated parties.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan with approximately 100 participants.As of May 31, 1988, the Plan held total assets of $1,198,535. The trustee(the Trustee) of the Plan is Charles H. Jones, who is also an officer anddirector of the Employer. He is also the father of Jeff Jones, the presidentof the Employer. The Employer is in the business of buying, selling, developingand managing real property with a specialization in hotel, motel, restaurant,and convention center developments. The Employer is currently the owner,developer, and manager of several different hotel and motel properties.2. The Property is located on the western side of Holiday North Drive inMacon, Georgia, and is legally described as Land Lot 346 of the ThirteenthLand District of Bibb County. The Property consists of 7.148 acres of unimprovedland. The Employer currently owns two hotels and a conference center onland adjacent to the Property.3. The Property was purchased by the Plan on October 10, 1985 for a totalconsideration of $607,580.00 from Clarence S. and Linton S. Lundy, who,the applicant, represents are unrelated parties. The Property was purchasedby the Plan as part of a development strategy to create a hotel/motel/conferencecenter complex. The Property has produced no income and the Trustee repesentsthat it has not been used by any party-in-interest with respect to thePlan. Since its acquisition, the Plan has incurred $129,239.82 in interestcosts; $7,479.03 in taxes; $22,738.50 for engineering, legal closing costs,clearing and grading. The Plan's aggregate cost of acquisition and holdingthe Property $767,037.35 as of July 19, 1989.4. Robert H. Gerhardt, MAI, SREA, CPM of Gerhardt and Contemporaries, inMacon, Georgia, and his associate James L. Green, (the Appraisers) haveappraised the Property. The Appraisers repesent that they are independentof the Trustee, the Employer and the Plan. The Appraisers determined that,as of February 28, 1989, the fair market value of the Property was $715,000.00.Because the Property is contiguous to other real estate owned by the Employer,Mr. Gerhardt performed an updated appraisal to determine the special valueof the Property to the Employer. Mr. Gerhardt determined that, as of May19, 1989, a special value reflecting an additional 25% premium to the Saleprice should be added to the earlier appraisal. Accordingly, the resultantappraised value of the Property, including the special value to the Employer,totals $893,500 pursuant to Mr. Gerhardt's updated report of July 26, 1989.At its appraised special value, the Property currently constitutes approximately66% of Plan assets.5. The Employer now proposes to purchase the Property from the Plan forcash at the greater of $893,500 or the appraised value (including specialvalue to the Employer) as of the date of the Sale. No fees, commissionsor expenses will be paid by the Plan in connection with the Sale. The Trusteehas determined that the highest and best use of the Property would be developmentinto commerical property and that it is in the Plan's best interest tosell the Property to the Employer rather than attempt to have the Plandevelop the Property itself. The Employer intends to build a hotel on theProperty.6. In summary, the Applicant represents that the proposed transaction willmeet the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (1) TheSale will be a one-time transaction; (2) The Sale will be consummated forcash; (3) The Plan will receive the greater of $893,500 or the value ofthe Property (including special value to the Employer) as determined bya qualified independent appraiser as of the date of Sale; (4) The Planwill pay no fees commissions or expenses in connection with the Sale; (5)The Plan will divest itself of an investment which constitutes approximately66% of Plan assets; and (6) The Trustee has decided that the Sales is inthe best interest of the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Yehudi M. Felman, M.D., P.C. Defined Benefit Pension Plan (the Plan)Located in Brooklyn, New York </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-8023]</ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption if granted, the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of theCode, shall not apply to the purchase of certain shares in a cooperativecorporation by the Plan from Yehudi M. Felman, M.D., P.C. (the Employer),a disqualified person with respect to the Plan, and the subsequent leaseof an apartment from the Plan to the Employer, provided that the termsof the transactions are no less favorable than the Plan could obtain inarm's-length transactions with an unrelated party and that the transactionsrepresent no more than 25 percent of the assets of the Plan at the timeof purchase.\2\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Because Yehudi Felman is the sole shareholder of the Employerand he and his wife, Brenda Felman, are the only participants in the Plan,there is no jurisdiction under Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b).However, there is jurisdiction under Title II of the Act under section4975 of the Code. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Employer is a professional corporation, having subchapter S statusunder the Code, engaged in the practice of medicine since 1971. The Planis a defined benefit plan having assets of $1,389,841 as of June 30, 1989.Yehudi Felman (Felman) is the sole owner of the Employer and is also atrustee of the Plan. Felman and his wife, Brenda Felman, are the only participantsin the Plan. 2. The Employer has entered into a subscription agreement with Bay ParkwayOwners Corp. (Bay Parkway), a cooperative corporation owning an apartmentbuilding, for the purchase of 1,815 shares of Bay Parkway allocated toa professional apartment. The apartment consists of eight rooms and approximately1,400 square feet. The subscription price under the agreement is $205,000.The apartment is presently leased to the Employer. 3. The Plan proposes to purchase the 1,815 shares of Bay Parkway by assumptionof the subscription agreement for the subscription price of $205,000. Thepurchase will not account for more than 25 percent of the assets of thePlan at the time of the transaction. The Plan will pay no more than fairmarket value for the shares at the time of purchase, based on an independentappraisal of the shares to be updated at the time of closing. The Plan obtained an appraisal on the apartment from Anthony Giuliano (Giuliano),a real estate broker located in Brooklyn, New York. The applicant representsthat Giuliano is independent of the Plan and the Employer. According toGiuliano, the fair market value of the apartment as of November 2, 1988,was the same as the subscription price of $205,000. The $205,000 purchaseprice will be paid in cash by the Plan and no indebtedness will be involvedin the purchase. Also, the Plan will pay no fees or commissions in regardto the purchase. 4. Following the purchase of the shares by the Plan, the Plan proposesto lease the apartment to the Employer. The Employer will pay no less thanfair market rent as established by independent appraisal. The lease willbe net of expenses to the Plan. The initial lease will be for three years,with renewals every three years based on an updated independent appraisalas to fair market rent. The total lease tem will be for nine years, withtwo renewal options of three years each to be exercised by the Employer.In a letter dated August 31, 1989, Giuliano stated that two comparablefacilities to the apartment currently rented for $30 and $25 per squarefoot. Accordingly, the applicant proposes that the initial lease of theapartment to the Employer will be for no less than $27.70 per square foot,which is a weighted average of the two comparable leases. 5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionswill satisfy the statutory criteria of section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because:(1) The Plan will pay no more than fair market value for the 1,815 sharesof Bay Parkway at the time of purchase; (2) the fair market value of theshares and the fair market rent of the apartment will be established byan appraiser who is independent of the Plan and the Employer; (3) the transactionswill account for no more than 25 percent of the assets of the Plan; and(4) the purchase of the shares will be entirely for cash and the Plan willpay no fees or commissions in regard to the transactions. <T3>Notice to Interested Persons:</T3> Because Felman is the applicantand he and his wife are the only participants in the Plan, it has beendetermined that there is no need to distribute the notice of pendency tointerested persons. Comments and requests for a hearing must be receivedby the Department within 30 days of the date of publication of this noticeof proposed exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Paul Kelty of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Great Southern Printing and Manufacturing Company Profit Sharing Planand Trust (the Plan), Located in Frederick, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-8093]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedcash sale by the Plan of certain improved real property (the Property)to Great Southern Printing and Manufacturing Company (the Employer), for$143,000, provided the amount paid for the Property is not less than itsfair market value at the time the transaction is consummated.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan with 225 participants and total assetsof $3,597,040 as of December 31, 1988. The trustee of the Plan (the Trustee)is Mr. George B. Delaplaine, Jr., who is an officer of the Employer. Investmentdecisions for the Plan are made by an administrative committee comprisedof eight employee/participants among whom include the Trustee. The Employer,which maintains its headquarters at 438 West Patrick Street, Frederick,Maryland, is engaged, through its various subsidiaries, in newspaper publishingas well as in the provision of cable television services to subscribersin Maryland, West Virginia and Pennsylvania.2. On April 12, 1978, the Plan purchased, for investment purposes, certainresidential property located at 704 East Patrick Street, Frederick, Maryland.The Property, which is contiguous to other unimproved property owned bythe Employer, consists of a 12,599 square foot parcel of land on whichis situated a two-story masonry dwelling that has been subdivided intotwo apartments. Also comprising the Property are a small brick buildingat the rear of the dwelling, a wood frame barn, an asphalt driveway anda chain link fence. The Plan purchased the Property at a public auctionfrom the Estate of Ada Nusbaum, an unrelated party. The Plan paid the seller$35,000 in cash. At present, the Property is not encumbered by a mortgage.3. Since the Plan has owned the Property, it has incurred operating expensesin excess of $29,000 and it has expended approximately $50,000 in capitalimprovements, none of which have been financed. Also since the time ofacquisition, the Plan has leased the Property to unrelated parties andthere has been no use of such Property by parties in interest. With respectto the leasing of the Property, the Plan has received rental income ofapproximately $60,205. At present, Ms. Louis Anne Morley and Mrs. Eve Tagalangoccupy the demised premises and they pay the Plan $320 and $290, respectively,in monthly rent.4. The Trustee realizes that the Plan's assets that are invested in theProperty would be enhanced if they were placed in other investment vehicles.Accordingly, the Trustee requests an administrative exemption from theDepartment in order to sell the Property to the Employer for the totalcash consideration of $143,000. It is believed that the proposed sale willenable the Employer to expand its operations, increase its future revenuesand permit greater contributions to the Plan.5. The Property was appraised by Mr. Leslie U. Hutzell (Mr. Hutzell), Realtor-Appraiserand Certified Appraiser/Senior, an independent appraiser, who is affiliatedwith Hutzell's Realty Associates and Appraisal Service of Frederick, Maryland.On February 11, 1989, Mr. Hutzell placed the fair market value of the Propertyat $130,000. In an addendum to the appraisal dated August 25, 1989, Mr.Hutzell represented that the Property would have no unique or special valueto the Employer by reason of its proximity to other property owned by theEmployer.\3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The applicant represents that the amount by which thepurchase price for the property exceeds its fair market value, if treatedas an Employer contribution to the Plan when added to the balance of theannual additions to such Plan, will not exceed the limitation prescribedby section 425 of the Internal Revenue Code.6. To evidence the proposed sale transaction, the Plan and the Employerwill enter into an agreement of purchase and sale (the Agreement). TheAgreement provides that the Property will be sold to the Employer in an``as is'' condition for $143,000. The Agreement also requires the Employerto make a $5,000 downpayment and pay the balance of the purchase pricein cash, certified check or title company check at closing which will occurwithin 60 days after the Plan and the Employer execute the Agreement. Atthe time of closing, the Plan will give exclusive possession of the Propertyto the Employer. The Agreement further requires the Plan to convey goodand merchantable title to the Employer; states that the Employer will acceptthe existing leases on the Property and insure the premises; and stipulatesthat real estate taxes, water, rent, sewer charges and other public chargeswill be apportioned as of the closing. Finally, the Agreement providesthat the Employer will pay all expenses and commissions that are associatedwith the proposed sale.7. In summary, it is represented that the proposed sale will satisfy thecriteria for an administrative exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) The sale will be a one-time transaction for cash; (b) theProperty has been appraised by Mr. Hutzell, a qualified, independent appraiser;(c) the sales price for the Property will be greater than the fair marketvalue of the Property as determined by Mr. Hutzell; (d) the Plan will notbe required to pay any real estate fees or commissions in connection withsuch sale; and (e) the proposed transaction will allow the Plan to reinvestits assets in higher-yielding investment vehicles.Tax Consequences of TransactionThe Department of the Treasury has determined that if a transaction betweena qualified employee benefit plan and its sponsoring employer (or affiliatethereof) results in the Plan either paying less than or receiving morethan fair market value such excess may be considered to be a contributionby the sponsoring employer to the plan and therefore must be examined underapplicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, including sections401(a)(4), 404 and 415.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Jan D. Broady of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Bi-County Radiology Medical Group, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan and Trust(the Plan), Located in Yuba City, California</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-8113]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code,shall not apply to the proposed sale of certain real property (the Property)by the Plan to Bi-County Radiology Medical Group, Inc., (the Employer),a party in interest with respect to the Plan, provided the Plan receivesthe greater of $149,000 or the fair market value as determined at the timeof the sale by an independent qualified appraiser.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan, established on February 1, 1970, is a defined contributionprofit sharing plan, which as of September 30, 1988, had 21 participantsand $3,413,640 in net assets. The current trustees are Robert Wallace,M.D., Lynn Frink, M.D., Robert Wankmuller, M.D., Owen Van Kirk, M.D., andHenry Reimers, CPA (the Trustees). The Trustees, except for Robert Wallace,M.D., and Henry Reimers, CPA are also twenty percent owners of the Employer.The Employer is a California corporation engaged in the practice of radiology.2. On July 10, 1987, the Plan bought the Property for $145,000 from anunrelated third party The Property consists of three contiguous parcelsof unimproved vacant land located in Yuba City, California, and was originallypurchased in order to diversify the Plan's investment portfolio and toincrease the return to the Plan. The Property is adjacent to property ownedby the Employer, however, the applicant maintains that the Property hasnot been used by any parties in interest since its acquisition by the Plan.3. The applicant proposes to sell the Property to the Employer for cashwith no expenses related to the transfer to be paid by the Plan. An appraisalof the Property was prepared on March 31, 1989, by Forrest C. Geary, M.A.I.(Mr. Geary), an independent and qualified real estate appraiser and consultant.Mr. Geary determined that the fair market value of the Property as of March16, 1989, was $149,000. An update to this appraisal, prepared on September1, 1989 also by Mr. Geary, concluded that the adjacency of the Propertyto the Employer's property does not merit a premium above the fair marketvalue of the original three contiguous parcels.4. The applicant represents that the transaction is desirable for the Planas the sale will increase the liquidity of the Plan's investment portfolio.The transaction is protective of the Plan because the fair market valueof the Property was determined by a qualified independent appraiser. Theapplicant maintains that economic hardship will result if the transactionis denied as the Plan will forego an opportunity to invest in vehicleswith a higher return.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the transaction satisfiesthe statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2)of the Code because:(a) The proposed sale will be a one-time cash transaction;(b) The price paid to the Plan will be the greater of $149,000 or the fairmarket value as determined at the time of the sale by an independent qualifiedappraiser;(c) The Plan will pay no expenses associated with the sale;(d) The sale will allow the Plan to liquidate its assets and will providecash for investments with a higher yield.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact: </T2>Ekaterina A. Uzlyan of the Departmenttelephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Ed Miller andamp; Sons, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan (the PS Plan) and EdMiller andamp; Sons, Inc. Money Purchase Pension Plan (the MP Plan; together,the Plans), Located in Omaha, Nebraska</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application Nos. D-8160 and D-8161]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedloans (the Proposed Loans) of up to 25% of the assets of the PS Plan andof the MP Plan to Miller Developments (the Partnership), a party in interestwith respect to the Plans, under the terms and conditions described inthis notice of proposed exemption, provided such terms and conditions arenot less favorable to the Plans than those obtainable in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated party.<T3>Temporary nature of exemption: </T3>If the proposed exemption is grantedit will be effective as to loans entered into within four years from thedate of granting of this exemption.Summary of Facts and Representatives1. The Plans are both defined contribution plans which are sponsored byEd Miller andamp; Sons, Inc. (Miller), a corporation engaged in the constructionbusiness in Omaha, Nebraska. Each Plan currently has ten participants.As of April 30, 1988, the PS Plan had assets of $1,914,122 and the MP Planhad assets of $514,426.2. The Proposed Loans are to be made to the Partnership, a Nebraska generalpartnership, for the purpose of developing real estate. The Partnershipis composed of Miller, which has a 55% interest, and three individualswho are officers, directors and employees of Miller. The Partnership isthus a party in interest with respect to the Plans.3. The applicants have requested an exemption which would permit the Plansto loan up to 25% of their assets to the Partnership. The Proposed Loanswill require semi-annual payments of principal and interest such that theloans will be fully repaid over a 15 year term. The interest rate for thefirst of the Proposed Loans is expected to be at 10% per annum, as thishas been determined to be the current fair market rate of interest by thePlans' independent fiduciary (see rep. 6, below). The independent fiduciarywill review and, if necessary, renegotiate the interest rate for each ofthe Proposed Loans at the time such loan is actually made, in order thateach Proposed Loan will be at the fair market interest rate.4. Each Plan participant will be given the opportunity to participate inthis investment. Each participant will initially be offered the opportunityto invest a pro rate portion of his or her account balance in the ProposedLoan, up to 25% of his or her account balance. If any participants decline,their share will be offered to those participants who wish to invest, providedthat no participant in either plan will be permitted to invest more than25% of his or her account balance in the Proposed Loans.5. The Proposed Loans will be secured by a First Trust Deed on improvedreal property in the Horizon West Industrial Park located at 156th Streetand Center Road, Omaha, Nebraska (the Property). The Property consistsof three Lots, Lots 10, 11 and 12. Lot 12 has been appraised by Mr. LeonF. Black, an independent real estate appraiser in Omaha, Nebraska, as havinga fair market value of $760,000 as of July 22, 1989. The first of the ProposedLoans will be secured by a First Deed of Trust on Lot 12. The applicantsrepresent that the fair market value of Lot 12 as appraised by Mr. Blackrepresents more than 150% of the Proposed Loan on Lot 12. As Lots 10 and11 are developed, appraisals will be made of those Lots, and the appraisedvalue of the Lots will represent more than 150% of the value of any ProposedLoans with respect to those Lots. The First Trust Deeds will be recordedand otherwise perfected under local law.6. Norwest Bank Nebraska, N.A. (the Bank) presently acts as trustee ofthe Plans and has agreed to continue to act as the independent fiduciaryfor the Plans with respect to the Proposed Loans for their duration andwill undertake all actions to protect the Plans and safeguard their interests.Mr. John Atkins is a trust officer with the Bank and has had more than10 years experience as a plan fiduciary. Mr. Atkins represents that heunderstands his responsibilities, duties and liabilities as a fiduciaryunder the Act. The Bank will have the authority to monitor the collateralto ensure that its value remains at least 150% of the outstanding balanceof the Proposed Loans, and the Bank will act on behalf of the Plans torequire additional collateral should the existing collateral decrease invalue below the 150% limit. The applicants represent that the Bank is independentof Miller, the Partnership and its individual partners, and that less than1% of the net receipts of the Bank are derived from Miller, the Partnershipand its individual partners.7. Mr. Atkins has reviewed the terms of the Proposed Loans and has determinedthat the transactions are appropriate for the Plans and in the best interestsof the Plans. Mr. Atkins represents that the Proposed Loans would providea prudent diversification of the Plans' assets and that the interest rateon the Proposed Loans would be at fair market terms and would be favorableto the Plans. Mr. Atkins represents that the Proposed Loans will be adequatelysecured based upon Mr. Black's appraisal, and because the Property is ina viable commercial area.8. Mr. John Pearson is a vice president with the Bank and has reviewedthe Proposed Loans in his capacity as an experienced loan manager for theBank. Mr. Pearson represents that the interest rate and other terms ofthe Proposed Loans, and the security provided, are fair market terms. Mr.Pearson represents that based upon his experience as a corporate bank loanofficer of the Bank, he would grant a loan with similar terms and conditions.9. Prior to the Plans' entering into each of the Proposed Loans, the Bank'strustee and loan officer will each certify by letter to the Plans thatsuch loan would be an appropriate investment for the Plans, and that theterms of each loan are equal to or better than those which the Plans couldreceive in dealing with an unrelated party. Each loan made will be requiredto satisfy the terms and conditions described in this notice of proposedexemption.10. In summary, the applicants represent that the Proposed Loans satisfythe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (1) The Proposed Loanswill at no time represnt more than 25% of the assets of either of the Plansor of any individual account of any participant in either of the Plans;(2) the Proposed Loans will be adequately secured at all times by propertyhaving an appraised value of at least 150% of the amount of the loans;(3) the Plans' independent fiduciary, the Bank, has reviewed the termsof the Proposed Loans and determined that it would make a loan under similarterms and conditions, (4) the Bank has determined that the Proposed Loansare appropriate for the Plans and in the best interests of their participantsand beneficiaries; and (5) the Bank will monitor the Proposed Loans andwill take whatever action is necessary to protect the Plans' rights underthe loans.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Gary H. Lefkowitz of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Vinings Chemical Company, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (theVinings Profit Sharing Plan) and Vinings Industries, Inc. Section 401(k)Retirement Savings Plan and Trust (the Vinings 401(k) Plan; collectively,the Vinings Plans), Located in Atlanta, Georgia</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application Nos. D-8201 through D-8203]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) and 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedcash sale (the Sale) by the Vinings Plans of certain securities (the Securities)to Laporte, Inc., a party in interest with respect to the Vinings Plans,provided that the consideration paid for the Securities is either the greaterof the original consideration paid by the Vinings Plans for the acquisitionof the Securities or the fair market value of Securities on the date ofthe Sale. Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Vinings Plans are qualified defined contribution plans with theVinings Profit Sharing Plan having 49 participants and possessing totalassets of $1,470,000, as of December 31, 1988, and the Vinings 401(k) Planhaving 48 participants and possessing total assets of $1,300,000, as ofDecember 31, 1988. Vinings Industries, Inc. (Vinings) is the sponsor ofthe Vinings Plans. Mr. J. Robert Carpenter is president of Vinings andthe trustee of the Vinings Plans (the Trustee). He has exclusive authorityto manage, control, and invest the assets of the Vinings Profit SharingPlan. As the trustee of the Vinings 401(k) Plan, Mr. Carpenter must investits assets in accordance with general investment guidelines set forth inthe documents and instruments of the Vinings 401(k) Plan. These generalinvestment guidelines provide the Trustee with the authority to buy andsell the assets of the Vinings Plans.2. Prior to January 31, 1987, Vinings, a Georgia corporation, operatedunder the corporate and trade name of Vinings Chemical Company, Inc. Itsprincipal offices are located in Atlanta, Georgia and it is engaged inthe manufacture and sale of various chemical products to the pulp and paperindustry, primarily in the southeastern part of United States. Pursuantto a merger agreement, dated September 1, 1987, Vinings was acquired byLaporte, Inc. (Laporte), a Delaware corporation, which owns 100 percentof Vinings outstanding shares. Laporte has a number of subsidiaries inthe United States which are engaged in diverse businesses, involving themanufacture and sale of chemicals, cement products, silicon wafers, andvarious industrial sealants. Laporte's principal offices are located inCharlotte, North Carolina.3. On January 1, 1989, Laporte established a qualified profit sharing plan(the Laporte Profit Sharing Plan) and a qualified money purchase plan (collectively,the Laporte Plans) for its employees and the employees of some of its subsidiaries,including Vinings. At the same time Laporte established a master trustagreement (the Master Trust) for the purpose of holding for investmentthe assets of the Laporte Plans and the assets of retirement plans maintainedby certain subsidiaries of Laporte. As a consequence of these activitiesby Laporte, effective as of January 1, 1989, Vinings became a participatingaffiliate in the Laporte Plans. Thus, as soon as practicable, Vinings intendsto merge the Vinings Plans into the Laporte Profit Sharing Plan in orderto maximize administrative efficiency and to assure compliance with theparticipation requirements of the Code. In anticipation of the pendingmerger, both Laporte and the Trustee request an exemption for the Saleso as to avoid retaining certain securities in the portfolio of the ViningsPlans that have declined significantly in value since their acquisition.There is a concern by the applicants that the Securities will adverselyaffect the value of the assets of the Laporte Profit Sharing Plan whencommingled in the Master Trust upon the merger. The proposed Sale is designedto avoid a diminution of the value of the benefits which will be availablefor distribution to the participants and beneficiaries of the Vinings Plans.4. The Securities that the Vinings Plans propose to discontinue holdingand selling to Laporte include certificates of a .05 percent interest ina limited partnership designated as Enex Program I Partners, L.P. (EnexLP) in which the total sum of $44,446 was invested by the Vinings ProfitSharing Plan, and 12,658 shares of Landsing Pacific Funds (LPF), a realestate investment trust whose shares are traded on the American Stock Exchange,in which the total sum of $326,473 was invested by the Vinings Plans. EnexLP is engaged in the oil and gas businesses, owning wells and gas processingplants in the South and Southwest. LPF holds a variety of real propertythat is broadly distributed geographically and which includes office buildings,shopping malls, and industrial parks. The Securities have been appraisedby a qualified, independent appraiser, Robert A. Stanger andamp; Co., L.P.of Shrewsbury, New Jersey, and determined to have a fair market value,as of September 19, 1989, of $10,000 for the Enex LP certificates and $115,513for the LPF shares, respectively. The value of the LPF shares was determinedby their closing price on the American Stock Exchange. 5. It is represented by the applicants that the proposed Sale of the Securitiesis in the best interests of the participants and beneficiaries becausethe Sale will protect their separate accounts from a decline in value andenable the liquid funds received from the Sale to be invested in betterquality and higher yielding assets. The Sale will be a one-time transactionwith the full purchase price paid in cash by Laporte on the date of theSale. No commissions or other costs will be incurred by the Vinings Planswith respect to the Sale. For federal income tax purposes, if the considerationfor the Sale is greater than the current fair market value of the Securitieson the date of the Sale, Laporte intends to treat the difference as a specialocntribution to the Laporte Plans.\4\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The applicants represent that the proposed contributionwill not cause a violation of section 415 of the Code.6. In summary, the proposed Sale will satisfy the statutory criteria ofsection 408(a) of the Act because (a) the proposed Sale will be a one timetransaction for cash; (b) the Vinings Plans will receive as considerationthe greater of either their total investment in acquiring the Enex LP certificatesor the current fair market value of the Enex LP certificates on the dateof the Sale as determined by a qualified, independent appraiser and theconsideration the Vinings Plans will receive for the LPF shares will bethe greater of either the total investment in acquiring the LPF sharesor the closing price on the American Stock Exchange on the date of theSale; (c) the Vinings Plans will pay no commissions nor incur any expensesin connection with the proposed Sale; and (d) the separate accounts forthe participants and beneficiaries of the Vinings Plans will avoid retainingthe Securities which have significantly declined in value.Tax Consequences of Transaction The Department of the Treasury has determined that if a transaction betweena qualified employee benefit plan and its sponsoring employer (or an affiliatethereof) results in the plan either paying less or receiving more thanfair market value, such excess may be considered to be a contribution bythe sponsoring employer to the plan, and therefore must be examined underthe applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, including sections401(a)(4), 404, and 415.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Mr. C. E. Beaver of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="84">General Information </ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the follow: (1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansoley in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries; (2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and (3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction. (4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 31st day of October, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Ivan Strasfeld, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Exemption Determinations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc: 89-25973 Filed 11-2-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>