<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891012-0084 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-12-89.f2.A1083</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-272/311]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Public Service Electric andamp; Gas Co.; Consideration of Issuance ofAmendment to Facility Operating License and Proposed No Significant HazardsConsideration Determination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of amendments to Facility Operating Licenses Nos. DPR-70 and DPR-75,issued to Public Service Electric and Gas Company (the licensee), for operationof the Salem Generating Station, Units 1 and 2, located in Salem County,New Jersey.The amendments would revise the implementation schedule for License AmendmentNos. 101 and 78 for Salem, Units 1 and 2, respectively. As issued on August28, 1989, these license amendments were to be implemented within 45 daysafter issuance. By letter dated October 4, 1989, the licensee proposesthat License Amendments Nos. 101 and 78 be implemented prior to the respectivereactor startup following the next plant shutdown to Mode 3, Hot Standby.Soon after its receipt of License Amendment Nos. 101 and 78, the licenseediscovered that one of its surveillance provisions could not be satisfiedwithout incurring a shutdown of the Salem units. Upon discovery, the licenseepromptly informed the staff of the circumstance and then filed the subjectrequest for license amendments so that an unnecessary shutdown of the Salemunits need not be incurred.Before issuance of the proposed license amendments, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendments would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety.The proposed amendments would not involve a significant increase in theprobability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated becausethe vent system was used during the most recent refueling at each of theSalem units. The valves in question were verified open using an approvedvalve checklist prior to plant startup. Therefore, there is a high levelof assurance that the reactor vessel head vent systems are functional.The proposed amendments would not create the possibility of a new or differentkind of accident from any accident previously evaluated because the operationof the Salem units with or without implementation of License AmendmentsNos. 101 and 78 was acceptable and was authorized.The proposed amendments would not involve a significant reduction in amargin of safety for the same reasons as detailed above.The licensee has concluded and the staff agrees that the proposed amendmentsinvolve no significant hazards consideration. Accordingly, the Commission proposes to determine that this change doesnot involve a significant hazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 15 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555,and should cite the publication date and page number of the <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-223, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland,from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments received may beexamined at the NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L StreetNW, Washington, DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions forleave to intervene is discussed below.By November 13, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing withrespect to issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operatinglicense and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceedingand who wishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file awritten request for hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requestsfor a hearing and petitions for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordancewith the Commission's ``Rule of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings''in 10 CFR Part 2. Interested persons should consult a current copy of 10CFR 2.714 which is available at the Commission's Public Document Room,the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20555 and at theLocal Public Document Room located at Salem Free Public Library, 112 WestBroadway, Salem, New Jersey 08079.If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filedby the above date, the Commissioner or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board,designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety andLicensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition; and theSecretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issuea notice of hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceedng on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter. Each contention must consistof a specific statement of the issue of law or fact to be raised or controverted.In addition, the petitioner shall provide a brief explanation of the basesof the contention and a concise statement of the alleged facts or expertopinion which support the contention and on which the petitioner intendsto rely in proving the contention at the hearing. The petitioner must alsoprovide references to those specific sources and documents of which thepetitioner is aware and on which the petitioner intends to rely to establishthose facts or expert opinion. Petitioner must provide sufficient informationto show that a genuine dispute exists with the applicant on a materialissue of law or fact. Contentions shall be limited to matters within thescope of the amendments under consideration. The contention must be onewhich, if proven, would entitle the petitioner to relief. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If the amendment is issued before the expiration of 30-days, the Commissionwill make a final determination on the issue of no significant hazardsconsiderations. If a hearing is requested, the final determination willserve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves significanthazards considerations, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 15-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period, such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 15-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance. The Commission expects thatthe need to take this action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions arefiled during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1-(800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to Walter R. Butler: petitioner'sname and telephone number; date petition was mailed; plant name; and publicationdate and page number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Mark J. Wetterhahn, Esquire, Conner and Wetterhahn,Suite 1050, 1747 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20006, attorneyfor the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated October 4, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at the Local Public Document Room, SalemFree Public Library, 112 West Broadway, Salem, New Jersey 08079.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 5th day of Octobr 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Walter R. Butler,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate I-2, Division of Reactor Projects I/II,Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-24038 Filed 10-11-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>