<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89404-0093 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-04-89.f2.A1092</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7612] et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; South Shore Renal Physicians, P.C. Restated Employees'Pension Plan, et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="84">South Shore Renal Physicians, P.C. Restated Employees Pension Plan(the Plan) Located in Port Washington, New York</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7612]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, and restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b) (1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to a loan of moneyfrom the Plan to 256 Broadway Realty Co. (the Partnership), a party ininterest with respect to the Plan, provided that the terms of the loanare at least as favorable as the Plan could obtain in an arm's-length transactionwith an unrelated party.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined benefit pension plan having 60 participants andtotal assets of $1,130,715 as of March 31, 1988. South Shore Renal Physicians,P.C. (the Employer) provides professional medical care to patients at HuntingtonArtificial Kidney Center's dialysis facilities. The Partnership is an equalpartnership of four individuals who are also the sole stockholders of theEmployer and the four trustees of the Plan.2. The Plan proposes to make a loan of $150,000 to the Partnership to beused for general business purposes of the Partnership. The loan will befor a period of five years, with interest paid monthly and the principalpaid in full at the termination of the loan. The interest rate on the loanwill be three percent above the prime rate as quoted by the Citibank, N.A.branch located in Woodside, New York (the Bank). The applicant representsthat the Bank is unrelated to the Plan, the Employer and the Partnership.The Bank has stated by letter dated February 6, 1989, that it would bewilling to make a $150,000 loan on the same terms, secured by the collateralarrangement described below.3. The loan will be collateralized by a promissory note of the Partnershipand a security agreement which will be duly perfected in accordance withthe laws of the State of New York. The loan will be secured by a secondmortgage on certain real property (the Property) located in HuntingtonStation, New York. The Property, which is owned and maintained by the Partnership,consists of a two-story brick medical office building located on 1.1 acresat 256 Broadway. The only existing encumbrance on the Property is a purchase-moneyfirst mortgage having an outstanding balance of $266,677 as of November1, 1988. The Plan obtained an appraisal on the Property from Robert A.Brancato (Brancato), a real estate appraiser located in Rockville Centre,New York, who is independent of the Plan and the Employer. Utilizing thecost, income and comparable sales approaches to value, Brancato estimatedthe fair market value of the Property to be $1,600,000 as of October 4,1988. The applicant represents that the collateral will be maintained atno less than 150 percent of the combined amount of the balance of the loanand the existing encumbrance on the Property throughout the term of theloan.4. James H. Fletcher (Fletcher), an attorney located in Manhasset, NewYork, has agreed to serve as the independent fiduciary with respect tothe proposed transaction. The applicant represents that Fletcher is independentof the Employer and the Plan. Fletcher is licensed to practice law in theDistrict of Columbia and New York State. Fletcher has practiced principallyin the areas of trusts and estates, general corporate law and taxation.He has put into effect a considerable number of pension and profit sharingtrusts and has served as trustee of two profit sharing trusts and severalpersonal trusts. Fletcher states that he has reviewed the proposed loanand believes that it is a secure, soundly collateralized loan that willbe in the best interests of the Plan and its participants. He states thathe understands what it means to be a fiduciary under ERISA and that heassumes all the liability related to his function as independent fiduciarywith respect to this transaction. Fletcher will monitor the transactionthroughout the term of the loan and will assure that all the conditionsof the loan are met and that all loan payments are received by the Plantimely and in full. Fletcher will enforce the Plan's rights with respectto the loan and will, if necessary, bring appropriate process against theborrower in the event of default on any loan payments.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (1)An independent fiduciary of the Plan believes that the transaction is inthe best interests of the Plan and its participants and will assure thatall the loan payments are received timely by the Plan; (2) the loan willbe secured by a second mortgage on the Property, the fair market valueof which has been established by an independent appraisal; (3) the termsof the loan represent market rates, including the interest rate set atthree percent above the prime rate as quoted by an unrelated commercialbank, and (4) the collateral for the loan will at all times exceed 150percent of the combined balance of the loan and the existing encumbranceon the Property throughout the term of the loan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Paul Kelty of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Plastic andamp; Reconstructive Institute of Seattle, Inc. Profit SharingTrust (the Plan) Located in Seattle, Washington</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7686]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the Plan's proposed:1) Purchase (the Purchase) for cash of certain real property (the DiscreteSpace) from Dr. Eugene W. Goertzen (Dr. Goertzen) and his wife (the Applicants),parties in interest with respect to the Plan; and 2) lease-back of theDiscrete Space to Plastic andamp; Reconstructive Institute of Seattle, Inc.(the Employer), the Plan sponsor and, as such, a party in interest withrespect to the Plan; provided that the terms and conditions of the transactionsare at least as favorable to the Plan as to those obtainable by the Planin an arm's-length transaction with an unrelated party.Duration of Exemption: Ten years from the date of the grant of the proposedexemption.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution profit sharing plan with five participants.As of August 15, 1988, the Plan held assets of approximately $700,000.Dr. Goertzen is the sole shareholder of the Employer, a Washington professionalservice corporation practicing plastic surgery. Dr. Goertzen is also thesole member of the Plan committee, which gives written direction to theBank of California, the Plan's trustee (the Trustee).2. The Applicants are the owners of a medical office condominium (the Condo)located at Suite 1290, 1229 Madison Street, in Seattle, Washington. TheCondo consists of two suites of 4,679 square feet in the Elmer J. NordstromMedical Tower (the Tower) adjacent to the Swedish Medical Center. On December30, 1986, the Applicants acquired the Condo for $786,072 from the MadisonMedical Office Building Limited Partnership (the Madison LP). An estimated$436,852 was added in improvements to the Condo. On December 10, 1986,Richard J. McKown, MAI, and James A. Greenleaf, MAI, of Schueller, McKownandamp; Keenan, Inc. in Seattle (the Appraisers) estimated the fair marketvalue of the Condo to be $1,150,000. The Appraisers subsequently determinedthe Condo to have a fair market value of $1,250,000 as of June 25, 1987,and $1,345,000 as of September 1, 1988.3. The Applicants have requested an exemption to permit their sale to thePlan and the Plan's Purchase of the Discrete Space in the Condo consistingof 910 square feet, including the shell and improvements, for an all cashpurchase price of $168,000. The Applicants represent that a statutory warrantydeed will be executed and recorded upon the Department's final approvalof the exemption application.By update on September 30, 1988 to their prior analyses, the Appraisersdetermined that the Discrete Space is severable from the Condo becauseit has outside access to the building common areas and appears to be adaptableas a self-contained medical suite. The Appraisers have evaluated the DiscreteSpace as having a fair market value ``as is'' of $168,000 as a legallyseparate, physically divided, independent area. The Applicants representthat the Discrete Space ``as is'' would be readily marketable.4. The Applicants have further requested an exemption to permit the Planto lease-back the Discrete Space to the Employer under a ten-year lease(the Lease) for $34 per square foot, totalling $34,238 per annum. The Leaseprovides for annual rental increases in accordance with the Consumer PriceIndex and for an increase as determined by an independent appraiser ofthe fair market rental value at least every three years. The initial rateof $34 per square foot will serve as the floor below which the fair marketrental value will not be decreased. The Lease further provides that theEmployer will pay for maintenance, utilities, taxes and insurance.5. The terms of the Purchase and the Lease have been reviewed by John E.Mills, Property Manager, of Wright Runstad andamp; Company (WR) in Seattle.WR markets and manages the Discrete Space, the Tower, and other buildingsin Seattle and is the managing partner of Madison LP. He represents thathe and WR have no present or contemplated future interest in the DiscreteSpace or bias or personal interest with respect to the parties involved.He determined, on August 29, 1988, that the Lease is commercially consistentwith other landlord-tenant transactions in the Tower. In his analysis datedOctober 28, 1988, Mr. Mills stated that the Tower is 97% occupied and thatthe Plan could expect to lease or sell the Discrete Space at a reasonablemarket rate should it so desire. He reviewed the terms of the Purchaseand concurs with the Appraisers' value of the Purchase price of $185 persquare foot, including improvements.6. The Plan's directed Trustee has agreed to act as an independent fiduciarywith regard to the proposed transactions. As such, the Trustee has reviewedthe Purchase as of November 1, 1988 and has concluded it constitutes aprudent investment upon the Department's approval of the proposed exemption.The Trustee has determined that the Discrete Space would represent a minorityholding of less than 25% of the current market value of the Plan's assets.The Trustee acknowledges that the quality of the investment is supportedby documentation prepared by professionals in the Seattle real estate industry.Moreover, these professionals, according to the Trustee, have analyzedthe price, anticipated return on investments and risk, finding them tobe acceptable and competitive. The Trustee opines that, upon its reviewof all documentation, facts and circumstances, the Plan's investment isprudent and adequately diversified.7. The Trustee as independent fiduciary has represented it will monitorthe Lease for its duration and will take any and all appropriate actionsto safeguard the interests of the Plan. Moreover, the Trustee as independentfiduciary represents that it has the authority so to act.8. In summary, the Applicants represent that the proposed transactionsmeet the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) ThePurchase will be a one-time transaction consummated for cash; (b) The Purchaseprice has been determined by qualified independent appraisers; (c) TheDeed to the Discrete Space will be duly executed and recorded; (d) TheLease has been reviewed by a leasing agent in the locality and has beenfound to be commercially consistent with leases executed at arm's-lengthbetween unrelated parties; (e) The Plan's Trustee has agreed to act asan independent fiduciary with regard to the proposed transactions; (f)Said independent fiduciary has reviewed the transctions and determinedthat they are prudent; and (g) The independent fiduciary has representedthat it will monitor the Lease for its duration and will take any and allappropriate actions to safeguard the interests of the Plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free Number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Morgan andamp; Associates, M.D.'s P.C. Employees' Pension Plan and Trust(the Plan) Located in Bismarck, North Dakota </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">(Application No. D-7719) </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedsale (the Sale) by the segregated account (the Account) in the Plan ofMargaret Morgan, M.D. (Margaret Morgan) and Riffat Morgan, M.D. (collectively,the Applicants), to the Applicants, individually, parties in interest withrespect to the Plan, of certain real property located in Winnipeg, Canada(the Property), for cash in amount of the greater of the appraised fairmarket value or the U.S. dollar equivalent of $265,000 (Canadian) on thedate of the Sale; provided that the terms and conditions of the Sale areat least as favorable to the Plan as those obtainable by the Plan in anarm's-length transaction between unrelated parties. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a money purchase pension plan with 56 participants. As ofMarch 31, 1988, the Account held total assets of $2,582,518.50 and is theonly participant account to be affected by the proposed transaction. TheApplicants are Plan trustees and shareholders and officers of Morgan andamp;Associates, Inc. (the Employer), the Plan sponsor. Dr. Stan Diede is alsoa Plan trustee. The Employer operates a medical clinic in Bismarck, NorthDakota. 2. The Property is located at 124 Bannatyne Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba,Canada, and is rented as a parking lot. The Applicants represent that thecertificate of title to the Property is physically situated in a fireproofsafe in the office of the Employer in Bismarck, North Dakota.\1\<NOTE/> The title to the Property is recorded on the deed books ofthe Province of Manitoba, Canada, in the name of Margaret Morgan, individuallyand not in trust.\2\<NOTE/> The Applicants represent that Manitoba law prohibits theregister of deeds from making any entry in the deed registry containingnotice of trust, constructive or implied. Attorney F.J. DeVrieze of Thompson,Dorfman, Sweatman, Barristers and Solicitors, in Winnipeg, Canada has providedSection 78(1) of the Manitoba Real Property Act in support of the Applicants'representation. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\Section 404(b) of the Act provides that no fiduciary maymaintain the indicia of ownership of any assets of a plan outside the jurisdictionof the district courts of the United States. In this regard, the Departmentis expressing no opinion whether the Applicants have complied with section404(b) and the regulations thereunder. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\In this regard, the Department notes that section 403(a)of the Act requires that all assets of an employee benefit plan be heldin trust by one or more trustees. The Property was purchased on June 1, 1974 from Samuel Morris Golden, who,the Applicants represent, is unrelated to them for a price of $133,000.Since acquisition through August, 1988, the Plan expended $230,429 on insurance,taxes, mortgage interest, exchange, legal and management fees, and maintenance.Total rental income during the holding period has amounted to $376,597and netted out to $178,168. The average annual rate of return for the propertyduring the holding period has been 7.3%. Margaret Morgan, individually,owns contiguous real estate. 3. O.R. Friesen, AACI, FRI, an Appraisal Manager with S.S. Stevenson andamp;Co. (1972) Ltd. of Winnipeg, Manitoba, appraised the Property on March1, 1988 to have a fair market value of $265,000 (Canadian). On October7, 1988, by update to his appraisal, Mr. Friesen determined that MargaretMorgan's ownership of real estate contiguous to the Property did not imposeany special value on the purchaser. 4. The Applicants now propose to purchase the Property from the Accountat the greater of the appraised fair market value of the Property or U.S.dollar equivalent of $265,000 (Canadian) on the date of the Sale. No commissionsor fees will be paid by the Account in connection with the Sale. The Applicantsrepresent that, in 1986, two offers were made by parties unrelated to thethat, in 1986, two offers were made by parties unrelated to the Plan forthe purchase of the Property, one for $230,000 and the other for $250,000(Canadian). The Applicants represent that this is the best time for thePlan to sell the Property because the economy of Winnipeg will probablysuffer from the recent drought with commensurate negative effect on realestate values. 5. In summary, the Applicants represent that the transaction will meetthe statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: 1) It willbe a one-time transaction; 2) It will be consummated for cash; 3) The Accountwill receive the fair market value of the Property as determined by a qualifiedindependent appraiser; 4) The Account will pay no fees or commissions inconnection with the Sale; 5) The Account will divest itself of an illiquidinvestment in a geographic area with potential economic problems; and (6)The Applicants are the only participants in the Account to be affectedby the Sale and they desire that the transaction be consummated. <T3>Notice to Interested Persons:</T3> Because the Applicants are the onlyPlan participants to be affected by the transaction, the Department hasdetermined that there is no need to distribute the notice of pendency ofthe proposed exemption to interested persons. Comments and requests forhearing must be received within 30 days of the date of publication of thisnotice of proposed exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="84">Forbes Master Trust (the Master Trust) Located in Tacoma, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7778]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply to the acquisition, sale and redemptionof Units of beneficial interest (the Units) in the Master Trust, and open-end,non-bank collective investment fund, by employee benefit plans and individualretirement accounts participating in the Master Trust (the ParticipatingPlans) when Forbes Portfolio Management (the Investment Manager) is a serviceprovider and a fiduciary with respect to the assets of the ParticipatingPlans investing in the Master Trust, provided that:(a) A Participating plan pays no more or receives no less for such Unitthan such Participating Plan would have paid or received in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated party;(b) Such acquisition, sale or redemption is expressly authorized in writingby a fiduciary of a Participating Plan who is independent of the InvestmentManager and who has acknowledged in writing that such fiduciary is an ``accreditedinvestor'' and that such fiduciary has not relied upon the advice of theInvestment Manager with respect to the acquisition, sale or redemption;(c) No fees or commissions are paid to any person by a Participating Planby reason of the acquisition, sale or redemption of Units in the MasterTrust; and(d) The Master Trust is an exempt trust under section 501(a) of the Codeand only plans qualified under section 401(a) of the Code and individualretirement accounts qualified under section 408(e) of the Code are allowedto participate or continue to hold Units in the Master Trust.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE:</T2> If granted, this proposed exemption will be effectiveMarch 10, 1988.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Master Trust was organized on January 1, 1988 as a group trust describedin Rev. Rul. 81-100, 1981-C.B. 326. The Master Trust is an unregistered,open-end investment company organized under the laws of the State of Washington.The Master Trust provides qualified pension and profit sharing plans aswell as individual retirement accounts with a practical and convenientway to invest in a diversified pool of publicly-traded equity securitiesof large, well-capitalized companies. The Master Trust is exempt from Federalincome taxes under section 501(a) of the Code. With the exception of theindividual retirement accounts, the Participating Plans meet the qualificationrequirements of section 401(a) of the Code and are exempt from Federalincome taxation under section 501(a) of the Code. The individual retirementaccounts meet the requirements of section 408(e) of the Code.2. Pursuant to the terms of the Investment Advisory Agreement (the InvestmentAdvisory Agreement) entered into by the trustees of each ParticipatingPlan, the Investment Manageer serves as the investment manager for theParticipating Plans. The Investment Manager is located in Tacoma, Washington.It is a sole proprietorship owned by Mr. Thomas E. Bernhoft (Mr. Bernhoft).As of September 1988, the Investment Manager had total assets of $175,346and it managed assets totaling $35,092,911.3. Mr. Bernhoft is a certified public accountant and an investment adviserregistered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 and the laws of theState of Washington. Mr. Bernhoft has extensive securities experience.He has been doing business as Forbes Portfolio Management since January3, 1983. Mr. Bernhoft devotes a substantial portion of his working timeto the management of the Master Trust of which he serves as the sole trustee.Mr. Bernhoft is not a director, officer or sponsor of any of the ParticipatingPlans. Although Mr. Bernhoft may not be removed by a Participating Plan,such objecting plan may withdraw from the Master Trust upon giving theInvestment Manager 20 days' advance written notice.\3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ A Participating Plan may withdraw from the Master Trustas of a certain valuation date (the Valuation Date). The term ``ValuationDate'' is defined as the last business day of the month and each additionaldate as Mr. Bernhoft in his discretion as trustee of the Master Trust shalldetermine.4. The custodian of the Master Trust (the Custodian) is Seattle-First NationalBank, a national banking association maintaining its headquarters in Seattle,Washington. The custodian holds physical possession of the assets of theMaster Trust. The Custodian exercises no discretionary authority with respectto the investment of Master Trust assets and it is subject to the directionof the Investment Manager.5. The applicant requests retroactive and prospective exemption relieffor the acquisition, sale and redemption of Units in the Master Trust betweenthe Participating Plans and the Investment Manager since these transactionsmay result in the commission of prohibited transactions in violation ofthe Act. In particular, the applicant explains that a prohibited transactionmay arise from a Participating Plan's acquisition of Units in the MasterTrust in two different contexts. First, the applicant states that a prohibitedtransaction may arise if the Participating Plan has previously enteredinto an investment management agreement with the Investment Manager andthe Investment Manager is managing the Participating Plan's account onan individual basis. If the Participating Plan wishes to change the natureof its investment from an individual account investment to an investmentin the Master Trust, the applicant states that the initial purchase ofUnits in the Master Trust by the Participating Plan would give rise toa prohibited transaction because of the pre-existing service provider relationshipbetween the Investment Manager and the Participating Plan.Second, the applicant asserts that a prohibited transaction may arise upona subsequent purchase of Units in the Master Trust between a ParticipatingPlan and the Investment Manager. Although the applicant is aware of thefact that a Participating Plan's initial purchase of Units in the MasterTrust would not be a prohibited transaction in the absence of a party ininterest relationship existing between the Investment Manager and the ParticipatingPlan, the applicant notes that a subsequent purchase would give rise toa prohibited transaction inasmuch as the party in interest relationshipwould then be established.6. The decision of any Plan to invest in the Master Trust is made exclusivelyby a fiduciary of that Plan and not by Mr. Bernhoft, the Investment Manageror any of the Investment Manager's employees, officers and directors. TheParticipating Plan fiduciary must also acknowledge in writing that it isnot relying upon the advice of the Investment Manager. In making the decisionto invest in such Master Trust, the Participating Plan fiduciary is providedwith all of the Master Trust documents. Such fiduciary is afforded an opportunityto ask questions and receive answers from Mr. Bernhoft and the InvestmentManager concerning the terms and conditions of an investment in the MasterTrust and to obtain any additional information such fiduciary deems necessary.7. The applicant states that the Investment Manager exercises discretionwith respect to assets allocated to its control. However, the applicantrepresents that the Investment Manager does not act as an investment adviserwithin the meaning of section 3(21)(A)(ii) of the Act to a plan which proposesto invest in the Master Trust because, in each instance, the ParticipatingPlan trustee who makes the investment decision has not agreed by a writtencontract or conduct to rely on the Investment Manager's advice as a primarybasis for plan investments and such fiduciary is specifically requiredto so acknowledge. In every instance, the applicant represents that thedecision to invest is made by an unrelated plan fiduciary acting on thebasis of his own investigation.\4\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ To the extent that, in the ordinary course of business,the Investment Manager or any of its affiliates provide ``investment advice''to a Participating Plan within the meaning of regulation 29 CFR 2510.3-21(c)(1)(ii)(B)and recommends an investment of the Plan's assets in the Master Trust,the presence of an unrelated second fiduciary acting on the investmentadviser's recommendations on behalf of the plan is not sufficient to insulatethe adviser from fiduciary liability under section 406(b) of the Act. (SeeAdvisory Opinions 84-03A and 84-04A, issued by the Department on January4, 1984.) The Department is unable to conclude that fiduciary self-dealingof this type (if present) is in the interests or protective of plans andtheir participants and beneficiaries and, accordingly, has limited exemptiverelief for the acquisition, redemption or sales of Units in the MasterTrust to section 406(a) violations only.8. Interests in the Master Trust are being offered to the ParticipatingPlans pursuant to a Private Placement Memorandum (the Private PlacementMemorandum).\5\<NOTE/> This document describes, among other things, the Master Trust,the parties involved and their rights, the investment objectives of theMaster Trust and the operations and management of the Master Trust. Appendedto the Private Placement Memorandum is a copy of the Investment AdvisoryAgreement by which the trustees of the Participating Plans agree to employthe Investment Manager and assets are committed to the Master Trust. Alsoattached to the Private Placement Memorandum are the Master Trust Agreement(the Master Trust Agreement) and the Joinder Agreement (the Joinder Agreement).The Master Trust Agreement creates the Master Trust and declares the termsand conditions upon which it operates. Under the Joinder Agreement, thetrustees of the Participating Plans adopt the Master Trust and agree toallocate assets for purchase of Units in the Master Trust.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ The applicant represents that no company issuing a securitywhich is contained in the Master Trust's investment portfolio will be asponsor of a Participating Plan.9. Participation in the Master Trust is achieved by allowing each ParticipatingPlan to purchase Units of beneficial ownership. Purchase of whole or fractionalUnits is permitted. The price at which the Units are offered to the ParticipatingPlans is determined on the Valuation Date and is equal to the net assetvalue of the Unit. Each Participating Plan is required to make a minimuminvestment of $100,000. Said amount is payable in cash and no sales commissionsare charged.Until March 10, 1988, which was the closing date for the initial offering,subscriptions in the Master Trust were offered at a price of $10.00 perUnit. As of March 10, 1988, 191,435.984 Units in the Master Trust weresold to Participating Plans at a purchase price of $10.00 per Unit.10. The Units are privately-offered and are not being registered underthe Securities Act of 1933, in reliance upon an exemption from registrationfor transactions by an issuer not involved in any public offering. TheUnits are being offered only to investors who have the qualifications necessaryto permit the Units to be offered and are sold in reliance upon Rule 501of Regulation D of the Securities Act of 1933 and comparable exemptionsunder applicable state securities laws. Thus, each Participating Plan mustbe an ``accredited investor'' (within the meaning of Regulation D). Thefiduciary of the Participating Plan charged with making investment decisionsmust possess sufficient knowledge and experience in financial and businessmatters to enable the Participating Plan to evaluate the merits and risksof an investment in the Master Trust. Each Participating Plan must alsorepresent that the Units are being acquired for its own beneficial accountand for long-term investment purposes. As a further protection for theParticipating Plans, the Master Trust is limiting the interest of any ParticipatingPlan to ten percent of the total assets of the Master Trust.11. The Master Trust continually offers new Units for sale to qualifiedinvestors. The Master Trust may sell additional Units or admit additionalplans as of the close of business on the last day of each month, and onsuch additional date or dates as Mr. Bernhoft shall select, subject tocompliance with applicable securities laws, and provided that the additionalplans agree to be bound by the terms of the Master Trust documents. Theprice at which the additional Units are offered to the Participating Plansis equal to the net asset value per Unit. Units are also redeemable attheir net asset value. No sales commissions or redemption fees are charged.12. Pursuant to the Investment Advisory Agreement, the Investment Managerdoes not receive a separate fee for a particular transaction but insteadreceives a single fee for investment management services it performs.\6\<NOTE/> Such fee is based upon a percentage of assets under management.In addition, the applicant represents that the fee paid by a plan to theInvestment Manager will not differ depending upon whether or not the planelects to acquire Units in the Master Trust or to have its assets managedin a separate account.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ The Department is not proposing an exemption for the receiptof fees beyond that provided by section 408(b)(2) of the Act.13. At least once each year, an audit will be made of the investment fundsof the Master Trust by competent auditors who are independent certifiedpublic accountants retained by the custodian and who are responsible tothe Investment Manager and Mr. Bernhoft. It is anticipated that the independentauditor's report will be disseminated to fiduciaries of the ParticipatingPlans within sixty days following the fiscal year end of the Master Trust.14. In summary, it is represented that the subject transactions meet thestatutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Act because(a) Independent fiduciaries of the Participating Plans who are unrelatedto the Master Trust, Mr. Bernhoft, the Investment Manager or any otherrelated party maintain complete discretion with respect to the investmentof the Participating Plans' assets in the Master Trust; (b) the fiduciariesof the Participating Plans have the opportunity to withdraw their investmentspursuant to the procedures of the Master Trust Agreement and in such fiduciaries'individual discretion; and (c) the fees charged the Participating Plansare based upon a percentage of assets under management and the fees arethe same regardless of whether the Plans' are invested in the Master Trustor managed in a separate account.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATON CONTACT: </T2>Ms. Jan. D. Broady of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Proposed Extension of Prohibited Transaction Exemption (PTE) 82-184for Certain Transactions Involving the Alaska Teamster-Employer PensionTrust (the Plan) Located in Anchorage, Alaska</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7797]</ITAG>Proposed Extension of ExemptionThe Department is proposing to extend, for a period of five years, a portionof PTE 82-184 (47 FR 52246, November 19, 1982). Authority to grant theproposed extension of PTE 82-184 is given the Department under section408(a) of the Act, section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975).If the proposed extension of PTE 82-184 is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply to the sales of certain residential units(the Units) located near Palm Springs, California, by Desert Horizons,Inc. (Desert Horizons), a wholly owned corporation of the Plan, to partiesin interest with respect to the Plan who are not fiduciaries [within themeaning of section 3(21)(A) of the Act], provided the following conditionsare satisfied:1(A) Before a Unit may be sold to a non-fiduciary party in interest, theterms and conditions of the prospective sale to that party in interest,including the price and Unit/lot number and type, shall be advertised inthe <T3>Desert Sun </T3>newspaper. The advertisement also shall set forth theprice and the terms and conditions of comparable Units sold at Desert Horizonswithin a reasonable time prior to a prospective sale. Additionally, theadvertisement shall indicate that the Unit is available for purchase byall other non-party in interest members of the public at a price and onterms and conditions that are equal to the offer made by the party in interest.(B) For thirty days from the publication of the advertisement describedin paragraph 1(A), no sale of said Unit to the party in interest shallbe consummated, even if such party offers more than the advertised price.(C) During the period between publication and thirty days thereafter, ifany non-party in interest member of the public agrees to match or betterthe price or the terms and conditions advertised, that member (or thosemembers) of the public shall have a right to purchase the Unit that supersedesthe right of the party in interest. If, after a reasonable period of timesubsequent to the thirty day period, the member or members of the publicwho have gained the prior right do not prove that they are ready, willingand able to consummate the purchase, the Unit may be sold to the partyin interest at a price and on terms and conditions that are equal to orgreater than the advertised price and its terms and conditions.(D) If, after thirty days from the publication of the advertisement, nonon-party in interest member of the public offers to purchase the Unit,the party in interest who made the offer cited in the advertisement shallbecome an eligible purchaser but only at the advertised price and its termsand conditions or at a price and on terms and conditions that are morefavorable to Desert Horizons.(E) All prospective purchasers shall complete a questionnaire indicatingwhether they are a party in interest with respect to the Plan.(2) Prior to the execution of a contract for the sale of a residentialUnit to a party in interest, A.N. Advisors (Advisors) and any successorindependent fiduciary shall certify in writing that, based on all relevantmarket factors, the sales price and the terms and conditions for a Unitare not less than its fair market value. The written certification shallalso state that: (A) The advertisement procedures set forth in paragraphs1(A)-(E) have been met; and (B) the terms and conditions (including price)of such sale are at least as equal to those that the Plan could receivein a similar transaction with an unrelated party. In the event that Advisorsresigns or is terminated, or a replacement is chosen after its contractexpires, the Plan shall notify the Department's Office of Regulations andInterpretations of the name and qualifications of a prospective successorfiduciary and the reasons for the change. Solely for the purposes of continuingthe effectiveness of this exemption, appointment of such successor independentfiduciary shall not be effective until the receipt by Desert Horizons ofthe Department's approval.(3) The Plan and/or Desert Horizons shall maintain accurate records demonstratingcompliance with the conditions of this exemption for all party in interesttransactions. The Plan and/or Desert Horizons shall make available to theDepartment such records, including the written certification describedin paragraph (2).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATES: </T2>If granted, this proposed extension of PTE 82-184will expire five years from the date of the grant.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined benefit, collectively-bargained, multiemployerpension plan established in 1966 between certain contributing employersand Local Union 959 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs,Warehousemen and Helpers of America (the Union). The Plan is administeredby a board of trustees (the Trustees) consisting of four employer and fourunion representatives. As of December 1, 1988, the Plan had 5,000 participantsand total assets of $415 million. Investment decisions for the Plan aredivided primarily between the Trustees and Mercer Meidinger Company.2. Desert Horizons is a California corporation that owns certain real propertyin the City of Indian Wells, County of Riverside, State of California.Desert Horizons was created in 1977 under the general corporate law ofCalifornia. One hundred percent of the stock of Desert Horizons is ownedby the Plan.3. Desert Horizons was created to develop on the property it owns a residential,planned development consisting of single-family homes accompanied by agolf course/country club and clubhouse complex. Initially, Desert Horizonsbuilt and marketed 135 residential Units (typically priced in the $235,000to $375,000 range) along with memberships in the golf course and clubhouse.Subsequent to the marketing of these Units, Desert Horizons decided tochange its policy by constructing model homes and then building Units aftersales had been consummated. At present, Desert Horizons has constructed305 of a possible 496 residential Units. Approximately 290 of the 305 Unitsconstructed have been sold. In addition, the golf course and the clubhousehave been completed and are functioning.4. As noted above, on November 19, 1982, the Department granted PTE 82-184which conditionally permitted, until May 15, 1985, (a) the proposed salesof the Units to non-fiduciary parties in interest and (b) proposed extensionsof credit by the Plans to the parties in interest in connection with thesales. On February 7, 1986, the Department granted PTE 86-16 (51 FR 4828)in order to extend, temporarily, the sales portion of PTE 82-184 untilMay 15, 1988. It was anticipated that this extension would enable DesertHorizons to offer the Units to all eligible persons through three additionalprime (winter) selling seasons.\7\<NOTE/> Walker and Lee, an unrelated residential real estate companylocated in Santa Ana, California, was responsible for determining the priceof each Unit. In addition, until his resignation in July 1987, Mr. JayD. Wahlin (Mr. Wahlin), C.P.A. of Palm Desert, California, served as theindependent fiduciary on behalf of the Plan for the proposed sales transactions.\8\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ Because of the improved market for second home mortgages,the Plan no longer offers financing to new purchasers of homes at DesertHorizons. According to the applicant, prospective homebuyers are directedto arrange financing from other sources.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ Because of Mr. Wahlin's resignation, PTE 86-184 and thesubsequent extension thereof (PTE 86-16) could not be utilized after July1987.5. Since PTE 82-184 was granted (and subsequently extended by PTE 86-16),there has been only one instance of its utilization. According to the applicant,it is unclear in that case whether the purchaser was a party in interest.However, after close scrutiny by the Plan and in the opinion of the Plan'scounsel, it was determined that the homebuyer was not a party in interestto the Plan but merely a service provider to the Union. Despite the limiteduse of the exemption, the Trustees believe that prudence dictates thatan effort be made to extend PTE 82-184 for an additional duration so thatDesert Horizons will realize the broadest potential market. This view isalso shared by the Weitzman Group, an unrelated, nationally-recognizedreal estate asset management firm, which concluded, in its financial analysisof the Plan, that it would be most appropriate if Desert Horizons completedthe Desert Horizons complex and sold the individual properties on a unit-by-unitbasis rather than dispose of the entire complex in any other fashion. Therefore,the Trustees have determined to complete the build-out phase and aggressivelymarket individual Units since the economies of the project have improveddramatically as growth in the Palm Springs area has increased and projectsales are brisk. If current sales levels continue, it is anticipated thatthe project may be completely built in the next several years. Accordingly,the applicant again seeks herein additional exemptive relief to extendthe sales portion of PTE 82-184 for five years commencing on the date thenotice of proposed extension is granted.6. Consistent with the terms of a final consent order (the Consent Order)entered on March 23, 1988 by the U.S. District Court for the District ofAlaska in <T3>McLaughlin v. Carr, </T3>Civ. No. A-81-017, Advisors, an unrelatedinvestment advisory group and California general partnership, presentlymanages the Desert Horizon complex including the country club and the golfcourse. Advisors, which maintains offices in Huntington Beach and San Francisco,California, was formed in 1981 to offer investment advisory services topension plans established in the United States.7. Under the Consent Order, and for a period of ten years following itsentry, the Trustees are required to delegate the management of the assetsof the Plan to one or more persons or firms qualifying as investment managerswithin the meaning of section 3(38) of the Act. Thus, in accordance withthe Consent Order and by the terms of the Investment Management Agreement(the Agreement) dated May 21, 1987, the Trustees decided to turn over theoperation, management and investment decisions in connection with DesertHorizons to Advisors. The applicant hereby requests that Advisors, an approvedinvestment manager, be permitted to serve as the new independent fiduciarywith respect to the sale of the Units by Desert Horizons to non-fiduciaryparties in interest.8. Although no sales have been made to parties in interest, the price forall of the Units is being established by a team comprised of Mr. TerryNoyer of Advisors and three employees of Desert Horizons. Advisors, however,has the ultimate authority on the pricing of the Units. For each sectionor cluster of Units constructed, these individuals are responsible forconsidering such factors as cost, marketability and profits in determiningan acceptable price before Units are placed on the market. The prices mustalso reflect the fair market value of the subject property.9. Under procedures sought in the exemption extension request, a non-fiduciaryparty in interest will not be eligible to purchase a Unit until thirtydays after the terms and conditions of the prospective sale to that party(including the price and Unit/lot number and type) are advertised in the<T3>Desert Sun</T3> newspaper. The advertisement will also set forth theprice and the terms and conditions of comparable Units sold at Desert Horizonsprior to the prospective sale and state that the Unit is available forpurchase by all non-party in interest members of the public at a priceand on terms and conditions that are equal to the offer made by the partyin interest.During the interim between the publication of the advertisement and thirtydays thereafter, if any non-party in interest agrees to match or betterthe price or terms and conditions advertised, that person will have theright to purchase the Unit. This right will supersede the right of theparty in interest. If, after a reasonable period of time subsequent tothe thirty day period, the non-party in interest is unable to consummatethe purchase, the Unit may be sold to the party in interest at a priceand on terms and conditions that are equal to or greater than the advertisedprice.If, after thirty days from the publication of the advertisement, no non-partyin interest offers to purchase the Unit, the non-fiduciary party in interestwill be eligible to purchase the Unit but only at the advertised priceor at a price on terms and conditions that are more favorable to DesertHorizons. In addition, all prospective purchasers will be required to completea questionnaire indicating whether or not they are parties in interest.10. Advisors represents that it sees nothing inappropriate about the continuationof PTE 82-184 and it views such continuation as a distinct advantage forthe Plan. Since it is Advisors' duty to build out and sell the Units attheir fair market value and at the highest feasible level of profit toDesert Horizons and the Plan, Advisors sees no reason why a potential market,such as non-fiduciary parties in interest, should be lost. While acknowledgingthat there has been limited use of PTE 82-184 since it was granted andextended by PTE 86-16, Advisors states that it is possible that partiesin interest will seek to purchase the Units at their fair market value.In the absence of another extension of PTE 82-184, Advisors explains thatif such prospective purchasers are rejected, there will be a real hardshipto both the Plan and Desert Horizons. Advisors also believes that therewill be no risk to the Plan or its participants and beneficiaries if non-fiduciaryparties in interest are allowed to purchase the Units at their fair marketvalue. Advisors is of the opinion that the sales will benefit the Plan,Desert Horizons and the Plan's participants and beneficiaries because thesales will allow the Plan to maximize its investment rate of return, increasethe profitability of the project, allow Advisors to complete the sale ofthe Units at an earlier date and enable the Plan to sell the Units to thebroadest market spectrum. Advisors will monitor all sales transactions throughout the duration ofthe proposed extension period and provide written certification that theUnits are not sold for less than their fair market values and that establishedprocedures are followed. Because it is bound by the terms of the ConsentOrder and the Agreement, Advisors states that it presently monitors allsales transactions and that it must do so until the Agreement expires orit terminated or the Desert Horizons project is completed. As such, Advisorsrepresents that it ensures that the sales price of each Unit is based onthe fair market value of the property and it states that it will do sofor any sales that are made to non-fiduciary parties in interest. Advisorsalso agrees to take all actions that are necessary and proper to enforceand protect the interests of the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries.With regard to the sale of Units to parties in interest, Advisors representsthat it will make sure that no such sales are made to parties in interestwho are fiduciaries. Advisors further will ensure that non-fiduciary partiesin interest pay fair market value for any properties they acquire in theDesert Horizons complex and are treated in a manner comparable to all othermembers of the public.11. In summary, it is represented that the proposed transactions will satisfythe terms and conditions of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) DesertHorizons will have a larger group of potential buyers for the Units; (b)each transaction will be conducted on arm's length terms and will be certifiedand monitored by Advisors, the independent fiduciary for the Plan; and(c) the sale of the Units will be conducted at their fair market value.<T3>Notice to Interested Persons:</T3> Notice of the proposed extensionof PTE 82-184 will be provided to all interested persons by publicationin the Alaska Teamster newsletter within 40 days of the publication ofthe proposed extension notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice of proposed extension shall includea copy of the proposed extension notice as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment. Written comments are due within 70 days of the date ofpublication of the notice of proposed extension in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Ms. Jan D. Broady, of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Columbia Orthopaedic Group Integrated Profit Sharing Plan and Trust(the Plan) Located in Columbia, Missouri </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7798] </ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to 1) the acquisitionof first mortgage bonds (the bonds) issued by C.O.G. Leasing Company (COGLeasing) by the individual accounts (the Accounts) in the Plan, providedthe terms of the Bonds are the same for the Accounts as for unrelated parties;and 2) the guarantees by the partners of COG Leasing to the Accounts toassure the repayment of the Bonds.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>If granted, this proposed exemption will be effectiveNovember 1, 1988.Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan with approximately 59 participantsand assets of approximately $2,102,482. The Plan's sponsor, the ColumbiaOrthopaedic Group (the Group) is a partnership of professional corporations:C.O.G. Spine Associates, P.C.; Glenn L. McElroy, M.D., P.C.; Ronald D.Carter, M.D., P.C.; William G. Quinn, M.D., P.C.; Peter K. Buchert, M.D.,P.C.; Dennis L. Abernathie, M.D., P.C.; Patrick A. Smith, M.D., P.C.; andJames F. Eckenrode, M.D., P.C. The Group employs approximately 50 rankand file employees. Its offices are located at 400 Keene Street, Columbia,Missouri.2. The real property used by the Group is owned by COG Leasing, which isa separate but affiliated leasing partnership. The partners in COG Leasingare substantially the same physicians who own the professional corporationswhich compose the group.3. COG Leasing acquired one office building in 1981. In 1986, two adjacentoffice buildings were acquired, and during 1987 an extensive remodelingand refurbishment of these office buildings was accomplished. As a result,these three separate office buildings are now one large building (the Building)serving the needs of the Group and its patients.4. In order to permanently finance these improvements and the acquisitionof the personal property used in the Building, COG Leasing has issued theBonds, which are first mortgage bonds sold pursuant to a private placement.The Bonds have serial maturities from one to twenty years after issuance,and bear interest at a variable rate. The collateral to assure repaymentof the Bonds is a first mortgage lien against the Building, a perfectedfirst priority security interest in all furniture, fixtures, medical equipmentand other personal property owned by COG Leasing, an assignment of theleases in favor of COG Leasing by the Group, and personal guarantees ofthe individual physicians who are partners in COG Leasing. The effectivedate of the Bond issue was November 1, 1988.5. Each of the Bonds is issued in the face amount of $5,000. All Bondswill be sold initially at par, i.e. for their face value. Each Bond willinitially bear interest at the rate of 9.75% per annum during the periodcommencing with the date of issue and ending May 1, 1991. Those Bonds whichhave not matured by May 1, 1991 will thereafter bear interest at a fluctuatingrate which will be determined annually and on the anniversary date of theissue. The interest rate will be equal to the U.S. One Year Treasury BillIndex plus 3.5%. Interest payments on the Bond will be made semi-annually.All Bonds maturing after May 1, 1991 will bear the same rate of interest,regardless of maturity date.6. The Plan is an individually directed account plan which permits participant-directedinvestment by all participants. The Plan expressly permits the acquisitionby the Plan of employer securities. Numerous participants in the Plan expressedtheir desire to direct the Plan's trustee to purchase some of the Bondsfor their Accounts. An exemption has been requested to permit the Accountsto acquire directly from COG Leasing varying amounts of the Bonds. SomeAccounts began purchasing the Bonds as of November 1, 1988, the date ofissue. No Account will have more than 25% of its assets invested in theBonds.7. The applicants represent that after these Bonds have been acquired bythe Plan, the Plan will hold less than 25% of the aggregate amount of theBonds to be issued. Furthermore, the amount of the Bonds to be held byentities related to the Group and COG Leasing will constitute less than50% of the issue then outstanding. Immediately following the acquisitionof the Bonds, less than 25% of the Plan's assets will be invested in theBonds. As of February 6, 1989, the Plan had invested $480,000, or approximately23% of its assets, in the Bonds.8. Mr. W. Michael Stroupe, Executive Vice President, Lending, of BooneCounty National Bank (the Bank) in Columbia, Mo., has represented thatthe Bank, which is the Plan's trustee, purchased $1,690,000 of the COGLeasing Bonds on November 1, 1988 for its own portfolio. Mr. Stroupe representsthat the Bonds constitute an excellent asset based on the credit worthinessof the borrower, the quality of the security, and the rate of return. Mr.Stroupe represents that the Bonds purchased by the Plan have been purchasedon exactly the same terms as the Bonds purchased by the Bank, except forpossibly having different dates of maturity. The Bank represents that,as a major purchaser of the Bonds, it worked with COG Leasing in establishingthe terms of the Bond issue. As a result, the Bonds were issued on termsthat parallel those the Bank would have used in issuing a conventionalBank loan to COG Leasing. The Bank further represents that it would havepurchased even more of the Bonds for its own portfolio had they been available.9. Ms. Elizabeth M. Witte and Mr. Teddy J. Blaylock, independent appraisersin Columbia, Mo., have appraised the Building as having a fair market valueof $4,820,000 as of January 23, 1989. This value includes the personalproperty owned by COG Leasing. Since it is intended that $2,700,000 ofBonds will be issued, the applicants represent that the colleteral/loanratio will be approximately 180%. The applicants represent that shouldadditional Bonds be issued in the future, the colleteral/loan ratio willalways be at least 150%, and no Account in the Plan will ever hold in excessof 25% of its assets in the Bonds.10. In summary, the applicants represent that the transactions meet thecriteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: 1) Purchase of the Bondsby the Accounts have been and will be on the same terms as those purchasedby unrelated parties; 2) no Account has invested or will invest more than25% of its assets in the Bonds; 3) independent appraisers have appraisedthe collateral for the Bonds as having a fair market value 1.8 times thevalue of the Bonds to be issued; and 4) all purchases of the Bonds havebeen and will be at the direction of Plan participants who desire thatsuch transactions for their individual accounts be consummated.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Gary H. Lefkowitz of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Hanson, Toller, and Lockwood M.D.'s Profit Sharing Plan and Trust(the Plan) Located in Yuba City, California </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Application No. D-7828) </ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406 (a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the Plan's proposedsale (the Sale) of the Lakeridge Athletic Club (the Club) located in ElSobrante, California, to Dr. John W. Lockwood (Dr. Lockwood) and his wifeJulia (the Applicants), parties in interest with respect to the Plan, ofa total Sale price of $2,200,000 in cash; provided this amount is not lessthan the appraised fair market value of the Club at the time of Sale andprovided further that the terms and conditions of the Sale are at leastas favorable to those obtainable by the Plan in an arm's-length transactionwith an unrelated party. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan with approximately 15 participantsand $2,357,581 in total assets as of June 30, 1987. The trustee of thePlan (the Trustee) is Anthony M. Nichols, a certified public accountantwith Nichols Accountancy Corporation in Marysville, California. Dr. Lockwoodis a plan participant and a shareholder of Hanson, Toller, and LockwoodM.D.'s (the Employer). The Employer is a medical corporation operatingin Yuba City, California. 2. The Club is located on approximately six acres at 6350 San Pablo DamRoad, in El Sobrante, California. The Club consists of land, a 20,000 squarefoot two-story building thereon, improvements thereto, related equipmentand an on-going business. The Club includes, but is not limited to, suchrecreational and health facilities as five racquetball courts, exerciseand fitness rooms, basketball court, whirlpool, spa, sauna, weight andchanging rooms, restaurant, pro-shop boutique, four lighted tennis courtsand an outdoor Olympic-size swimming pool. The Plan became the co-owner of the Club on or about October 13, 1982 atthe conclusion of a foreclosure proceeding in California state court againstthe borrower of $165,000 from the Plan. The Plan had been a co-owner ofa first lien on the Club securing the loan. The Plan expended $95,130 tobuy out the co-holder of the first lien, as well as $1,182,140 to improveand operate the Club as an on-going business through June 30, 1987. 3. The Applicants have requested an exemption to permit the Plan to sellthe Club for a total Sale price of $2,200,000, payable in cash to the Planat closing. The Applicants represent that the Plan will pay no fees, commissionsor expenses in connection with the Sale. 4. The Club was appraised on April 30, 1988 by Edgar Holton, a certifiedpublic accountant with Edgar Holton Accountancy Corporation in San Francisco,California. In formulating his appraisal, Mr. Holton received information,financial statements and documents from the Club and various real estatebrokers and appraisers, analyzed industry data, including that from InternationalRacquet Sports Association, a trade organization, and physically inspectedthe Club premises. Mr. Holton has determined that no similar athletic clubsare within a twenty-five mile radius of the Club's location, which includesthe Oakland, Berkeley and San Francisco areas. He concluded that the totalfair market value of the Club, including all assets, is $1,875,000, basedon the capitalization of Club earnings. 5. An independent fiduciary for the Plan, First Independent Trust Company(FITC), has agreed to act on behalf of the Plan for the Sale. FITC, a statechartered bank in Sacramento, California received its charter from theCalifornia State Banking Department in 1975 in accordance with the CaliforniaFinancial Code. FITC provides trust services for governmental, multi-employer,401(k), and other types of retirement plans. A special services of FITCis the providing of comprehensive trustee, administrative, consulting,and management services for ERISA pension and profit sharing plans. Fromthe sponsorship of nationally-approved standardized and nonstandardizedprototypes to the discretionary management of retirement portfolios, FITCincorporates ongoing operation and management of over 2,500 retirementplan accounts, comprising trust assets in excess of $90 million, and involvingreal estate trust assets of $8.7 million. FITC maintains a Department of Real Estate to supervise the daily propertymanagement, mortgage origination and servicing, and real estate processingactivities of its employee benefit trust clients. FITC has representedthat it understands and acknowledges its duties, responsibilities and liabilitiesunder the Act in acting as a fiduciary with respect to the Plan. FITC'sstaff has had extensive experience under the Act and many of its employeesmaintain ongoing memberships in one or more of the following organizations:International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans; National Instituteof Pension Administrators; National Pension Real Estate Board; Trust andFinancial Services Committee, California Banking Association; CaliforniaTrustee Association; and Greater Sacramento Employee Benefit Roundtable.Prior to becoming the Plan's independent fiduciary on September 19, 1988,FITC had no relationship with the Employer, the Trustee, or any one ormore of Dr. Hanson, Toller, and Lockwood.6. Deno Evangelista, President of FITC, has analyzed the proposed Saleand concluded that it is in the best interests of the Plan and the Planparticipants for the following reasons:  (a) The Plan will maximize the value of the asset, the Club, upon the Sale; (b) The liquidity offered by the cash proceeds recovered will:  (i) Provide cash for required distribution of lump sum payments upon separationof service and payments to retiring participants and the beneficiariesof deceased participants;  (ii) Promote an opportunity for investment diversification of Plan assets; (iii) Minimize the inherent and concentrated risk associated with a realproperty-related asset, especially the active conduct of a business withsubstantial liability exposure to the Plan; and  (iv) Enable the Plan to invest in high quality debt obligations, including,<T3>Inter alia, </T3>U.S. Treasury bills, with a steadier stream of incomethan the Club's earnings.  7. FITC views that the terms of the proposed Sale compare very favorablywith the terms of similar transactions between unrelated parties because:(a) the total cash down payment will be 100% of the total purchase price,which the Plan will receive immediately at the Sale's closing with no waitingperiod whereas, in similar transactions between unrelated parties, thedown payment usually ranges between only 20% and 30% with the balance payablein twenty to twenty-five years; and (b) in a customary transaction betweenunrelated parties, there would normally be a substantial brokerage commission,whereas, in the proposed transaction with the Applicants, there is no brokeragecommission whatsoever, thus increasing the net proceeds to be receivedby the Plan.  8. FITC has also determined that, because the Plan's operation of the Clubis subject to considerable risk and management problems, the obtainingof an all-cash payment from the Applicants should be an objective of thefiduciary so as to insure liquidity for the Plan to pay necessary benefits.During the continued Plan operation of the Club business, the Plan onlyhas recourse to actual earnings of the Club. Such health clubs are generallyconsidered rather risky and subject to considerable fluctuations in incomeand expense with no assurance of a steady stream of income.  FITC believes that, because the Club constitutes 78% of Plan asset, a fiduciarywho retains the interest in the Club has substantially no diversity ofinvestments and is exposed to the risk of large losses. Since the Plan,under the terms of the proposed transaction with the Applicants, will obtaina substantial return on its reinvestment of the all-cash payment, FITCconcludes that, under the circumstances, it is prudent to sell the Cluband diversity Plan assets. For those reasons, FITC has determined thatthe terms of the proposed transaction are considerably more advantageousto the Plan than would be the normal terms of a similar transaction betweenunrelated parties.  9. In summary, the Applicants represent the criteria of section 408(a)of the Act have been met because: (a) The Sale will be a one-time transaction;(b) the proposed transaction will be consummated for all-cash payment tothe Plan at closing; (c) the Plan will pay no fees, commissions or expensesin connection with the Sale; (d) the proposed Sale will enable the Planto divest itself of liquid property which constitutes 78% of Plan assets;(e) a qualified appraiser has determined the fair market value of the Club;(f) the Plan will receive a Sale price in excess of the fair market valueas determined by a qualified appraiser; (g) an independent fiduciary hasanalyzed the terms of the proposed Sale and has opined that they are evenmore advantageous to the Plan than those obtainable in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated party; and (h) an independent fiduciary hasconcluded that the Plan's proposed Sale to the Applicants is in the bestinterest of the Plan.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact: </T2>Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)  <ITAG tagnum="84">General Information  </ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:  (1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;  (2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and  (3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.  (4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.  <ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 30th day of March, 1989.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7994 Filed 4-3-89; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M      </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>