<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89712-0020 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-12-89.f2.A1019</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">8 CFR Part 245A </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[INS Number: 1022-R-89] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN Number 1115-AA52 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Adjustment of Status for Certain Aliens </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Immigration and Naturalization Service, Justice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This rule addresses the adjustment of status of temporaryresident aliens to that of aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence,in accordance with section 201 of the Immigration Reform and Control Actof 1986 (IRCA). The Service, as the result of the publication of this rule,finalizes the provisions affecting the adjustment of temporary residentaliens to permanent residence.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>July 12, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Terrance M. O'Reilly, AssistantCommissioner, Legalization, (202) 786-3658.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On November 6, 1986, the Presidentsigned into law the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, Pub.L.99-603 (``IRCA''). This legislation, the most comprehensive reform of ourimmigration laws since the enactment of the Immigration and NationalityAct (``INA'') in 1952, reflected a resolve to strengthen law enforcementto control illegal immigration. It also reflected the Nation's concernsfor certain aliens who had resided illegally in the United States. Thetheme of this legislation was focused upon regaining control of our Nation'sborders and eliminating the illegal alien problem in this country throughthe firm yet fair enforcement of our Nation's laws. The Immigration and Naturalization Service took a number of steps to ensurethe new legislation would be implemented effectively, efficiently and fairly.Service officials engaged in continuing dialogue with members of the publicand representatives of interested organizations on how the legalizationprovisions of ``IRCA'' would be implemented. The temporary resident phase of the Legalization Program began on May 5,1987 and ended on May 4, 1988. The temporary resident phase of the LegalizationProgram was the first step for illegal aliens to become full and activemembers of the American society. The temporary resident phase of the programproved to be an overwhelming success with more than 1,700,000 applicantstaking advantage of the opportunity to come out of the shadows. In order to complete the process of becoming a lawful permanent residentof the United States, individuals who gained lawful temporary residentstatus during phase I of the Legalization Program are required to makeapplication for such permanent resident status.  An interim rule was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> at 53 FR 43986 on October 31, 1988. Forty-eightcomments, representing 71 individuals and organizations were received.These comments were reviewed and, as a result, several changes have beenincorporated into this final rule. The Service appreciates the time andsignificant effort put forth by all concerned parties. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of the Final Rule </ITAG>This rule makes final the provisions found in the interim rule publishedat 53 FR 43986 on October 31, 1988 pertaining to the requirements for certaintemporary resident aliens, who are otherwise eligible, to adjust theirstatus to that of aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence in theUnited States and the procedures to be used during this process. Some changesmade in this final rule to the interim regulations as a result of publiccomment caused the changing of similar regulations found in Part 245a.4dealing with the Extended Voluntary Departure (EVD) class of temporaryresident aliens. In addition, as a result of public comment, court proceedings,and the provisions of the Immigration Technical Corrections Act of 1988(ITCA), this rule makes changes to certain other regulations not foundin the interim rule. The following summarizes the processing method that is being used by theService for the processing of applications for permanent residence duringthis phase of the legalization program: The Service is utilizing a processingmethod that features direct mail of applications to four Regional ProcessingFacilities (RPFs) located at Williston, Vermont (Eastern); Lincoln, Nebraska(Northern); Dallas, Texas (Southern); and Laguna Niguel, California (Western).After preliminary processing of applications at the Regional ProcessingFacilities, applicants are interviewed at selected Service offices (includingdistrict offices, suboffices, and legalization offices) throughout thecountry. The adjustment of temporary resident aliens to permanent residenceconsists of five major segments: Pre-submission of applications; RegionalProcessing Facility processing (pre-interview); INS field and legalizationoffice processing; Regional Processing Facility processing (post-interview);and Immigration Card Facility (ICF) processing. In the pre-submission of applications segment the Service is distributinginformation and forms for the adjustment to permanent resident phase ofthe Legalization Program. Several commentors urged the Service to continueits public information and outreach efforts for Phase II of the LegalizationProgram. The Service has and will continue these efforts. The Service isconfident that awareness of the Legalization Program is high. In testimonybefore the Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugee Affairs, Committee onthe Judiciary, United States Senate, the Government Accounting Office reportedthat a market research study found that 92 percent of undocumented Hispanicswere aware that the Legalization Program exists (over 84% of the legalizationphase I applicants were Hispanic). In addition, the Service has receivedover 460,000 applications for permanent residence as of mid-June, 1989.The publicity and outreach campaign for Phase II is more selective sincethe Service knows who the temporary residents are and where they reside.This being the case, local level publicity and outreach methods are beingemployed along with national efforts. In the Regional Processing Facility (RPF) processing (pre-interview) segment,all pre-interview processing tasks (e.g., data entry, fee receipting, applicationreview, scheduling of interviews, etc.) are being performed. If duringthe review of the application at the Regional Processing Facility it isdetermined that the applicant has met all eligibility requirements (continuousresidence, English language/U.S. history and government, etc.) and therewas no indication of fraud in Phase I, the application may be approved.In this situation, the applicant would be notified by the RPF to appearfor processing at the INS field or legalization office for an Alien RegistrationReceipt Card (I-551). In the INS field and legalization office segment, applicants are interviewedas well as processed for Alien Registration Receipt Cards (I-551). Theinterview may include an English language/U.S. history and government examinationfor those applicants who wish to satisfy the standards for section 312(requirements as to understanding the English language, history, principlesand form of government of the United States) of the Immigration and NationalityAct. In the RPF processing (post-interview) segment, appeal processing and otherpost-interview administrative procedures occur.In the final segment, the Immigration Card Facility processing segment,Alien Registration Receipt Card (I-551) production is completed and thecard is mailed to the address specified by the alien as his or her placeof residence. Section 245a.1(i) is amended as a result of receipt of comments that theService should clarify in regulation what is now the policy concerningpublic cash assistance, by deleting the words, ``or his or her immediatefamily members''. The receipt of public cash assistance by immediate familymembers will not have a bearing on an applicant's eligibility for legalization.Section 245a.1(r) is amended to include a list of qualified designatedentities (QDEs) Phase II activities. Numerous comments were received concerningthis definition. Several commentors suggested that the Service should consideradding QDEs in good-standing as allowable representatives under 8 CFR 292.1for IRCA permanent resident applicants. The Immigration Reform and ControlAct of 1986 (IRCA) does not provide for Qualified Designated Entity involvementin the second phase of the Legalization Program. The Service feels thecertification procedures found in 8 CFR 292 should be followed by all organizationsand it is not proper to single out QDEs in good-standing for blanket certification.Section 245a.1(s) defines the term ``satisfactorily pursuing'' as usedin section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)(II) of the Act. Numerous comments were receivedon this section. Overwhelmingly, commentors supported the Service's variousoptions an applicant could pursue in order to ``satisfactorily pursue acourse of study''. The Service is genuinely concerned that temporary residentsenter the mainstream of American society in a fair and equitable mannerwithin the statutory framework provided by the Congress. Comments receivedon andSection; 245a.1(s)(1) generally endorsed the minimum 60 hour courselength. Several commentors cited that increasing the completed amount ofhours to 40 adversely affected State Legalization Impact Assistance Grant(SLIAG) allotments. The Service consulted with the Department of Healthand Human Services and was informed that in planning for educational requirements,State estimates for educational assistance under SLIAG should have beenbased on the 100 hour minimum standard that was contained in the proposedrule or the 60 hour minimum standard that was contained in the interimrule. The minimum number of attendance hours should not have been usedin preparing allotment requests. Commentors also urged the Service to ``grandfather''in those applicants who may have already completed 30 hours of a coursethereby not requiring these applicants to complete an additional 10 hours.The Service considered this recommendation but does not concur. The interimrule which was effective at the beginning of the permanent resident phaseof the Legalization Program, November 7, 1988, contained the 40 hour completionrequirement. No applications were adjudicated under the 30 hour requirementfound in the proposed rule. In addition, Congressional intent calls forlegalization applicants to attain basic citizenship skills. The Servicehas considered numerous input from the public before providing for theminimum 40 hour attendance requirement and the minimum 60 hour course length.The Service considers these hourly requirements both realistic and fair.Section 245a.1(s)(2), as a result of comments received, is amended to define``GED'' as General Educational Development. In addition, the Service wasadvised by one commentor that not all states use a standard ``GED EnglishProficiency Examination''. The Service therefore will include languagethat provides for states to use their usual GED English proficiency test.Language is also added to clarify that the high school/GED curriculum includeat least 40 hours of instruction in English and U.S. history and government.Comments received concerning andSection; 245a.1(s)(3) brought attention tothe fact that ``U.S. History'' was absent from the standard curriculumlanguage. The term has been added. Also, the interim rule contained the30 hour completion requirement in the curriculum language. This has beenchanged to correctly reflect the 40 hour requirement. Language is alsoadded to provide for use of a learning institution's standard of ``acadamicyear''. Section 245a.1(s)(4) is amended by adding the standard curriculum languagefor clarification purposes. Several comments were received concerning andSection; 245a.1(s)(5). Commentorsagreed with the deletion of the ``statement of intent'' language that appearedin the interim rule. Commentors urged the Service to replace the word ``home''with another term as it was deemed as too restrictive. The Service agreesand will replace the word ``home'' with the words ``individual study''to recognize that applicants may have studied at various locations. Languageis also added to reflect the fact that the Service may also administerproficiency tests along with other qualified administrators. QualifiedDesignated Entities in good-standing may also be designated as qualifiedadministrators and language stating this fact has also been added. Onecommentor asked how an applicant would know whether he or she passed theproficiency test. An applicant will receive a document that reflects thetest results. A Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit (I-699) will not beissued to such an applicant. The Service also adds the name of the proficiencytest (``IRCA Test for Permanent Residency''). Finally, a point of contactis provided for those who wish to participate in testing. Comments received on andSection; 245a.1(u) concerned clarification of thedefinition of curriculum. Commentors stated that it was unclear whetherthese definitional standards applied to the other alternatives found inandSection; 245a.1(s) concerning ``satisfactorily pursuing''. The definitionalstandard does apply to andSection; 245a.1(s) (1) through (4). The proficiencytest provided for in andSection; 245a.1(s)(5) was developed to conform tothese definitional standards. New andSection; 245a.1(v) is added to conform with the requirements of theImmigration Technical Corrections Act of 1988 (ITCA). As a result of theITCA, section 245A(b)(1)(D)(ii) of the Immigration and Nationality Actwas amended to expand the exception for certain individuals of the basiccitizenship skills requirement to include developmentally disabled individuals.Section 245a.1(v) defines the term ``developmentally disabled''. The term'smeaning is the same as found in section 102(5) of the Developmental DisabilitiesAssistance and Bill of Rights Act of 1987, Pub. L. 100-146, enacted onOctober 29, 1987. Section 245a.3(b)(4)(ii) is also amended as a resultof the ITCA.Section 245a.2(a)(2)(i) is removed as a result of the outcome of courtproceedings. This provision, published in the May 1, 1987 implementingregulations, required an alien who was subject to an Order to Show Causeissued on or after November 6, 1986 and prior to May 5, 1987 and who hadestablished prima facie eligibility for adjustment of status under section245A(a) of the Act to file an application for adjustment during the periodbeginning on May 5, 1987 and ending on June 3, 1987. All cases that weredenied because the applicant failed to satisfy the provision of 8 CFR 245a.2(a)(2)(i)will be reviewed to determine if the applicant is otherwise eligible forthe legalization benefits sought. If the applicant is found to be otherwiseeligible, the application will be reopened. The applicant will be so notifiedof the reopening and will be invited to report to the nearest legalizationoffice to obtain employment authorization. Section 245a.2(c)(5) is removed and reserved because of the deletion ofandSection; 245a.2(a)(2)(i). Section 245a.2(d)(4) is amended as a result of comments received that theService should bring the provisions of this section in line with the Service'soperational guidelines on determining financial responsibility. The Servicewill not deny an application for temporary residence as a result of findingan applicant subject to section 212(a)(15) of the Act without applyingthe Special Rule for determination of public charge. Section 245a.2(k)(4) is amended as a result of the comments received concerningthe Service's public cash assistance policy, by deleting the words, ``andhis or her family''. For the purposes of the Special Rule, as explainedin this section, an applicant need only demonstrate a consistent employmenthistory that shows the ability to support himself or herself. Section 245a.3(a) is redesignated andSection; 245a.3(a)(1) and amended foreditorial purposes and new andSection; 245a.3(a)(2) is added to address theapplication for adjustment from temporary to permanent resident status.Under the provisions of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986,a temporary resident alien who has resided in the United States for a periodof eighteen (18) months may make application for permanent resident statusduring the twelve-month period beginning on the day after the temporaryresidence period has been completed. The majority of the comments receivedcentered around the manner of determining when an applicant was eligibleto file an application for permanent residence and expressed concern thatapplicants would find it difficult to determine when they could apply.The Service addressed this issue in an interim rule published at 54 FR13360, April 3, 1989. The interim rule provided for the submission of applicationsanytime after the grant of temporary residence but prior to the end ofan applicant's twelve-month period of eligibility to apply for adjustmentto permanent residence. Temporary residents are encouraged to submit theirapplications as soon as possible. Applications must be submitted by theend of the 30-month period from the date the application for temporaryresidence was approved. Language is therefore included in andSection; 245a.3(a)(1)to reflect the fact that applicants will receive the entire 30-month periodof time in which to apply from the time of the granting of the applicationfor temporary residence. An applicant will still be considered a temporary resident from the dateof filing their temporary resident application. In this way, every applicantis provided with the statutorily guaranteed 30-month period and still receivesthe benefit of having the time count from the date of filing for permanentresidence and for naturalization purposes. In addition, this regulatoryconstruction is considered fair for the purposes of State LegalizationImpact Assistance Grant (SLIAG) funding. The Service began accepting applicationson November 7, 1988. Applications received anytime subsequent to the grantingof lawful temporary residence but prior to an applicant's eligibility toapply date are being held by the Service as a convenience to the public.These applications are considered ``filed'' on the applicant's eligibilitydate.To further provide assistance to temporary residents, the Service willmail a notice to all temporary resident aliens who have not yet filed anapplication for permanent residence. The notice will state that an applicationfor permanent residence can be submitted at anytime after the date temporaryresidence was granted and before the date the eligibility period to filefor permanent residence ends. In addition, another mailer will be sentto all temporary residents who have not submitted their application before60 days prior to the end of their eligibility period reminding them toapply. New andSection; 245a.3(a)(2) is added to provide that no application forpermanent residence will be denied, for failure to apply, before the endof 30 months from the date of actual approval of the temporary residentapplication. This provision conforms with the statute which guaranteesa 30-month period from the granting of temporary residence. Section 245a.3(b) is amended as a result of one commentor recommendingthat the Service should be able to accept applications mailed from outsideof the United States and to reflect the change in the acceptance of applicationsas reflected in andSection; 245a.3(a)(1). The Immigration Reform and ControlAct of 1986 does not specifically require that an applicant must be actuallyin the United States at the time of filing an application. Therefore, thephrase ``physically present in the United States'' will be deleted fromthis section. Section 245a.3(b)(1) is amended to add clarifying language relating tothe filing of an application, the continuous residence and the interviewrequirements. Comments received on andSection; 245a.3(b)(2) recommended clarification ofthe standard used to excuse an absence or absences outside the 30/90 dayrule and the officials who have the authority to excuse such absences.The Service will amend the language for clarification purposes and to includethe director of the Regional Processing Facility as an official who canexcuse absences. Concerning the determination of the abandonment of residence,the Service will consider the totality of an applicant's information inconcluding whether the absence or totality of absences represents a meaningfulinterruption of continuous residence. Section 245a.3(b)(4)(ii) is amended as a result of the comments received,as well as, the provisions of the Immigration Technical Corrections Actof 1988. Commentors urged the Service to clarify that a formal waiver application(I-690) was not required for an individual who is waived or exempted fromthe requirements of andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(i). The Service will add clarifyinglanguage. In addition, clarifying language is provided pertaining to theterm ``physically unable to comply''. Comments were also received requestingthe Service to include persons who are learning disabled. The Service willfollow the intent of Congress in using the definition of ``developmentallydisabled''. One commentor also recommended the Service qualify the exemptionfor an individual who was over 50 years of age and resided in the UnitedStates for 20 years to conform with Section 312 of the Immigration andNationality Act (INA). Section 312 of the INA relates to qualificationsfor naturalization and exempts a ``50/20'' applicant from the requirementto demonstrate an understanding of the English language including the abilityto read, write, and speak. Under section 312, a ``50/20'' applicant isnot exempt from demonstrating a knowledge and understanding of the fundamentalsof the history and of the principles and form of government of the UnitedStates. The Service will not implement the recommendation since this sectionprovides an exemption from the demonstration of the basic citizenship skillrequirements that equates to the ``satisfactorily pursuing'' criteria foundin andSection; 245a.1(s). The exemption afforded by this section to a ``50/20''applicant does not, therefore, exempt the applicant from the history andgovernment requirement of section 312 at the time of petitioning for naturalization.Section 245a.3(b)(4)(iii)(A) is amended to address clarification concernsexpressed by commentors. Language will be added to clarify that the passingof an INS authorized standardized ``section 312'' test will satisfy thebasic citizenship skills requirement as does the INS directly administeredtest. The Service will accept an applicant's passing of a standardizedtest as of November 7, 1988 since the Service authorized the EducationalTesting Service (ETS) version of the standardized test on November 4, 1988.This section is also changed to provide for the presentation of an EducationalTesting Service (ETS) notice of passing test results at the time of filingan I-698, application for permanent residence, subsequent to the filingof an I-698, or at the time of interview. The Service also provides forindependently verifying the test results. Concerning the manner in whichthe examination of an applicant's ability to read and write English isconducted, the Service will follow the guidance provided in section 312of the Immigration and Nationality Act. Finally, several commentors supportedthe use of the standardized list of 100 questions. The list is reproducedat the end of this regulation.Concerning andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(iii)(B) commentors requested that theService allow for not only the presentation of an I-699, Certificate ofSatisfactory Pursuit, but also for other evidence of ``satisfactory pursuit'',or evidence of having passed an INS authorized standardized exam afterthe failing of the English and/or U.S. History and Government portion ofthe examination conducted at the time of interview. The Service has providedfor the demonstration of the basic citizenship skills requirement in variousways and certainly would not prohibit an applicant from exercising anyoption during the pendency of his or her application. This section will,therefore, be amended to allow for the presentation of an I-699, or anyother evidence of satisfying the basic citizenship skills requirement.Several commentors expressed concern about the validity of an applicant'sI-688 during the six-month retest period. The issue of I-688 validity isaddressed in andSection; 245a.3(d)(5). An applicant would receive an extensionof validity of the I-688 if needed. Finally, language is added to clarifythat a second interview opportunity will be afforded an applicant beforehis or her application is denied, the denial being based solely on thefailure to pass the basic citizenship skills requirement.Section 245a.3(b)(4)(iv) is amended by replacing the term ``General EquivalencyDiploma'' with ``General Educational Development'' to conform with andSection;245a.1(s)(2). Commentors also suggested the Service accept ``other credibledocumentation'' in addition to a high school diploma. The Service feelsthat the documentation is readily available and will not include the recommendedlanguage. Language is also added which defines the Service's proficiencytest as the ``IRCA Test for Permanent Residency''. This section is alsochanged to provide for the presentation of a Certificate of SatisfactoryPursuit (I-699) at the time of filing an I-698, application for permanentresidence, subsequent to the filing of an I-698, or at the time of interview.Section 245a.3(b)(5) is amended to provide for the certification processby which district directors and the Director of Outreach will certify educationalprograms as recognized courses of study that provide instruction in Englishand U.S. History and Government. One commentor raised the possibility ofa program operating within more than one INS district jurisdiction beingcertified by one district director while not being certified by anotherdistrict director. The Service acknowledges that the possibility existsand therefore will provide for a review of a denied certification decisionby the appropriate Regional Commissioner where the petitions of a local,cross-district program are approved in one district and denied in anotherwithin the same State. Minor editorial changes have also been made.Numerous comments were received concerning andSection; 245a.3(b)(6). Commentorsurged the Service to modify the requirement of submitting notices of participationwithin 30 days after publication of the interim rule (October 31, 1988)or within thirty days after creation of the course of study. The Serviceagrees and adds language that allows for the submission of a notice ofparticipation as soon as possible since a Form I-699, Certificate of SatisfactoryPursuit, will not be accepted until a notice of participation is on filewith the Service. The Service will endeavor to review notices of participationas promptly as possible. Language is also added which clarifies that noticesof participation shall be submitted by blanket certified course providersto only the district director in whose jurisdiction the program is conductedand that course providers notify the district director in writing of anychange to the information contained in the notice of participation. Additionally,it was recommended that service providers receive an I-804, Certificateof Attorney General Recognition to Provide Course of Study for Legalization:Phase II, if a notice of participation is submitted that complies withINS regulations. The Service concurs and will so provide for the issuanceof an I-804 certificate. Commentors were concerned that the different regionaljurisdictions would encounter difficulty in verifying approved course providerslocated in other regions. Lists of course providers, therefore, will bedisseminated to all four INS Regional Processing Facilities to addressthis issue. Language is also added to provide for each district directorcompiling and maintaining lists of recognized courses within his or herdistrict.Section 245a.3(b)(7) explains the fee structure for courses. Comments werereceived requesting clarification of the reaching of a determination ofwhether a fee was proper. The Service wishes to be flexible and considerthe various factors that can have a bearing on the setting of course fees.To clarify the Service's position language is added which cites some factorsthat can be used in determining whether the fee charged is appropriate.The list is not exhaustive. The Service will also seek the assistance ofvarious Federal, State and local entities, as the need arises (e.g., StateDepartments of Education) to determine the appropriateness of course fees. Section 245a.3(b)(8) provides information on the Federal Textbooks onCitizenship. Two commentors inquired as to how textbooks would be distributed.Textbooks are distributed as provided for in section 332 of the Immigrationand Nationality Act (e.g., public schools conducting courses of instructionin preparation for citizenship). Section 245a.3(b)(9) addresses the maintenance of student records by courseproviders. One commentor urged to make the requirement for the maintenanceof student records prospective since it was stated that many providersdid not collect all of the required information. The Service feels thatcourse providers will, in most instances, have maintained information onindividuals to the extent necessary to meet the intent of this sectionand, therefore, will not change this section.Section 245a.3(b)(10) addresses the issuance of the Certificate of SatisfactoryPursuit (I-699). This section is amended by redesignating paragraph (b)(10)(vii)as paragraph (b)(10)(viii) and adding a new paragraph (b)(10)(vii) to providethat a Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit (I-699) can be accepted froma course provider who is decertified. Language is added to state that certificateswill not be accepted from a school or program that has been decertifiedunless the applicant had enrolled in and been issued a certificate priorto the decertification, provided that no fraud was involved. One commentorsuggested the Service attempt to verify course attendance via computerizeddata lists from State Departments of Education. The suggestion has meritand the Service will look into the requirements of establishing such aprocedure. The Service cannot, however, at this time amend this sectionto provide for such a procedure due to the technical, legal and time elementsinvolved.Section 245a.3(b)(12) is amended to correct a section reference.Section 245a.3(c) is amended for clarification purposes. Section 245a.3(c)(4)defines as an ineligible class for permanent residence those aliens whoare not granted temporary residence. The statute provides for the adjustmentof temporary residents to permanent residence. An alien would, therefore,have to be a temporary resident alien in order to be adjusted to permanentresidence. Aliens who have their temporary residence status terminatedwould, therefore, be ineligible for permanent residence and new section245a.3(c)(5) will so state.Section 245a.3(d)(2) is amended to clarify the role of Qualified DesignatedEntities (QDEs) in good-standing in the certification of documents processand for editorial purposes. In addition, language is added to provide forthe proper way to authenticate a certification. One commentor recommendedthe elaboration of what constitutes a complete application including allrequired documentation. Each case will dictate the extent of what documentationis required. It is not possible to address in the regulations the numerouspossibilities that exist regarding documentation to support an applicant'sclaim to eligibility for permanent residence. The Service will only requestdocumentation as needed to properly adjudicate cases or investigate fraud.Section 245a.3(d)(4) is amended by deleting the term ``(Pub. L. 99-603)''from the title description of the I-693 since the I-693 is now used asthe medical examination form for all applicants for adjustment of status.Several commentors agreed with the language provided in the interim rule.Additional clarification was requested as to how an applicant should supportthat he/she previously submitted a medical examination form reflectinga serologic test for HIV. A statement of the prior submission of the medicalexamination form will suffice as the Service will check an applicant'sfile to verify the statement. Language reflecting this clarification isadded. The Service is also amending this section to include the basic criteriaan applicant should address when filing for a waiver of the ground of excludabilityunder section 212(a)(6)_HIV infection.Section 245a.3(d)(6) provides for the adjudication of an application forpermanent residence based on the existing record. Numerous comments werereceived concerning this section. Commentors in general supported the provisionsset forth in the interim rule. Concern was expressed, however, that theService not return the I-698 application along with a request for additionalaction for reasons of increasing the chance of loss of the application.The Service will add language that clarifies when an application has tobe returned. An application will be returned when it is not acceptablefor filing (e.g., lacks the appropriate fee or is incomplete). The applicationwill not be returned once accepted and the need arises for additional informationor documentation. In this case a notice, requesting the additional informationor documentation, will be sent to the applicant. In addition, the Servicewill hold in abeyance the adjudication of a case on the basis of the existingrecord where no response has been received to the two requests for additionalinformation and/or documentation until the end of the 30-month period beginningfrom the time of the granting of the application for temporary residence.Section 245a.3(e) is amended to provide for holding in abeyance the adjudicationof a case on the basis of the existing record where an applicant has failedto appear for two scheduled interviews until the end of the 30-month periodbeginning from the time of the granting of the application for temporaryresidence. The Service has provided for similar action concerning adjudicationof a case on the basis of the existing record where no response has beenreceived to two requests for additional information and/or documentation(andSection; 245a.3(d)(6)). The Service will not automatically schedule anotherinterview until the applicant or the applicant's attorney or accreditedrepresentative contacts the Service and requests another interview. Commentorsexpressed concern over an apparent contradiction between this section andthe discussion contained in the summary of the interim rule concerningthe need for an interview. An application may be approved at the RegionalProcessing Facility. This action, however, does not relieve the need foran applicant to appear at a Service office for the purpose of being processedfor an I-551 permanent residence card. The Service, therefore, uses theterm ``interview'' to refer to both an adjudicative interview and an interviewfor the purposes of I-551 processing. Commentors also stated that thereappears to be no flexibility in the scheduling of interviews. This is notthe case. The automated scheduling system allows for the rescheduling ofinterviews. The Service would like to remind all interested parties, however,that scheduled interviews should be kept if possible as rescheduling introducesdelay in case processing, thus prolonging an applicant's wait for the completionof permanent residence processing.Section 245a.3(f), concerning the inapplicability of numerical limitations,is added due to the inadvertent omission of this section from the October31, 1988 interim rule. The remaining sections of this part are redesignatedaccordingly.Section 245a.3(g)(2) is amended to correct an improper reference concerningthe section that contains grounds of exclusion that cannot be waived. Thissection is also amended to require a waiver of certain grounds of exclusionbefore the granting of permanent residency, where the alien was excludableat the time of temporary residency and failed to apply for a waiver inconnection with his or her application for temporary residence, or becomesexcludable subsequent to the date temporary residence was granted.Concerning andSection; 245a.3(g)(3)(ii) changes are made to conform to theprovisions of the Immigration Technical Correction Act of 1988. Specifically,the public charge ground of exclusion can be waived for an applicant whois or was an aged, blind or disabled individual as defined in section 1614(a)(1)of the Social Security Act. A formal waiver application (I-690) is notrequired if an applicant received a waiver for the public charge groundas a result of filing a waiver application during Phase I (temporary residence).Section 245a.3(g)(4) is amended to correct editorial errors and does notchange in substance. Commentors generally agreed with the provisions ofthe section.Section 245a.3(g)(4)(iii) is amended as a result of the comments receivedconcerning the Service's public cash assistance policy, and to correctan improper reference concerning the section that contains applicationof the Special Rule and is further amended by deleting the words, ``andhis or her family''. For the purposes of the Special Rule, as explainedin this section, an applicant need only demonstrate a consistent employmenthistory that shows the ability to support himself or herself.Concerning andSection; 245a.3(i) commentors cited an improvement in the interimrule provisions over those contained in the proposed rule. The Servicewishes to reiterate its position that denials will be based on the totalityof the information at the Service's disposal. In addition, the appeal mechanismprovided in andSection; 245a.3(j) affords an opportunity for administrativereview of all denials.Section 245a.3(j) provides for appeals to adverse decisions. One commentorrecommended that the period for submission for appeal be lengthened toninety days and that the denial notifications be sent registered mail.The Service has provided for more time for the submission of legalizationappeals than normally provided for in andSection; 103.3(a) for appeals ofother Service denials. It is also felt that the use of certified mail issufficient service of notification.Section 245a.3(m) is amended to clarify that the required period for continuousresidence for naturalization will begin from the date of adjustment topermanent residence.Section 245a.3(n)(3) is amended, for clarification purposes, to reflectthe intended prosecution of both the applicant and/or the individual supplyinga false writing or document for use in the permanent resident applicationprocess.Section 245a.3(n)(4) is amended to conform with the provisions of the ImmigrationTechnical Corrections Act of 1988 concerning reports to Congress and forfurnishing information at the discretion of the Attorney General in thesame manner and circumstances as census information may be disclosed bythe Secretary of Commerce. Two commentors urged the Service to delete thissection entirely stating that the section is neither necessary nor consistentwith the statute (IRCA). Section 245A(a)(1)(c) allows the Attorney Generaland subsequently the Service to collect information on relatives of temporaryresident applicants for the eventual use in support of visa petitions filedon their behalf. The Service also added language in the interim rule toprovide for the use of legalization information for naturalization applicationsto assist in the verification of an applicant's claim that he or she isrelieved from section 312 requirements (English and U.S. History and Government)and to verify legal resident status if needed. It is thus to the applicant'sbenefit for the Service to make use of information contained in grantedlegalization files for naturalization purposes. The Service, therefore,will not delete this section.Section 245a.4(a)(10) is amended as a result of the comments received concerningthe Service's public cash assistance policy, by deleting the words, ``orhis or her immediate family members''. The receipt of public cash assistanceby immediate family members will not have a bearing on an applicant's eligibilityfor legalization.Section 245a.4(b)(4)(v) is amended as a result of the comments receivedconcerning the Service's public cash assistance policy, to bring the provisionsof this section in line with the Service's operational guidelines on determiningfinancial responsibility. The Service will not deny an application fortemporary residence as a result of finding an applicant subject to section212(a)(15) without applying the provisions of andSection; 245a.4(b)(11)(iv)_theapplication of the Special Rule for determination of public charge.Section 245a.4(b)(11)(iv)(C) is amended as a result of the comments receivedconcerning the Service's public cash assistance policy, by deleting thewords, ``and his or her family''. For the purposes of the Special Rule,as explained in this section, an applicant need only demonstrate a consistentemployment history that shows the ability to support himself or herself.Section 245a.4(c)(1) is removed to conform to the changes made in andSection;245a.3(a) (1) and (2) concerning the adjustment of status of temporaryresidents to permanent residence. This section provided for the applicationfor adjustment from temporary to permanent resident status for the ``ExtendedVoluntary Departure'' (EVD) class of temporary resident aliens. The removalof this section allows for the regulations affecting the application processfor all other classes of temporary resident aliens to also apply to theEVD class of temporary resident aliens. An EVD temporary resident aliencan now also submit an application for adjustment to permanent residentstatus at anytime after the granting of temporary residence but on or beforethe end of 30 months from the date the temporary resident application wasapproved by the Service.Section 245a.4(c)(2) is redesignated due to the removal of andSection; 245a.4(c)(1).In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Commissioner of Immigration andNaturalization certifies that this rule does not have a significant adverseeconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. This rule isnot a major rule within the meaning of section 1(b) of E.O. 12291, nordoes this rule have federalism implications warranting the preparationof a Federal Assessment in accordance with E.O. 12612.The Information collection requirements contained in this regulation havebeen cleared by the Office of Management and Budget under the provisionsof the Paperwork Reduction Act. OMB control numbers for these collectionsare contained in 8 CFR 299.5.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 8 CFR Part 245a</ITAG>Aliens, Temporary resident status, Permanent resident status.The interim rule published at 53 FR 43986-43997 on October 31, 1988, isadopted as final with the following changes:Accordingly, Part 245a of Chapter I of Title 8 of the Code of Federal Regulationsis amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 245A_ADJUSTMENT OF STATUS TO THAT OF PERSONS ADMITTED FOR LAWFULTEMPORARY OR PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS UNDER SECTION 245A OF THE IMMIGRATIONAND NATIONALITY ACT, AS AMENDED BY PUB. L. 99-603, THE IMMIGRATION REFORMAND CONTROL ACT OF 1986, AND PUB. L. 100-204, SECTION 902</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 245a continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 8 U.S.C. 1103, 1255a, 1255a note, and 8 CFR 2.1.</ITAG>2. In andSection; 245a.1, paragraphs (i), (r) and (s) (2), (3), (4), and(5) are revised, ((s) introductory text is republished), and paragraph(v) is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(i) ``Public cash assistance'' means income or needs-based monetary assistanceto include, but not limited to, supplemental security income received bythe alien through federal, state, or local programs designed to meet subsistencelevels. It does not include assistance in kind, such as food stamps, publichousing, or other non-cash benefits, nor does it include work-related compensationor certain types of medical assistance (Medicare, Medicaid, emergency treatment,services to pregnant women or children under 18 years of age, or treatmentin the interest of public health).<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(r) A qualified designated entity in good-standing with the Service meansthose designated entities whose cooperative agreements were not suspendedor terminated by the Service or those whose agreements were not allowedto lapse by the Service prior to January 30, 1989 (the expiration dateof the INS cooperative agreements for all designated entities), or thosewhose agreements were not terminated for cause by the Service subsequentto January 30, 1989.Subsequent to January 30, 1989, and throughout the period ending on November6, 1990, a QDE in good-standing may: (1) Serve as an authorized courseprovider under andSection; 245a.3(b)(5)(i)(C) of this chapter; (2) Administerthe IRCA Test for Permanent Residency (proficiency test), provided an agreementhas been entered into with and authorization has been given by INS underandSection; 245a.1(s)(5) of this chapter; and, (3) Certify as true and completecopies of original documents submitted in support of Form I-698 in theformat prescribed in andSection; 245a.3(d)(2) of this chapter.(s) ``Satisfactorily pursuing,'' as used in section 245A(b)(1)(D)(i)(II)of the Act, means: * * *<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(2) An applicant presents a high school diploma or general educationaldevelopment diploma (GED) from a school in the United States. A GED gainedin a language other than English is acceptable only if a GED English proficiencytest has been passed. (The curriculum for both the high school diplomaand the GED must have included at least 40 hours of instruction in Englishand U.S. history and government); or(3) An applicant has attended for a period of one academic year (or theequivalent thereof according to the standards of the learning institution),a state recognized, accredited learning institution in the United Statesand that institution certifies such attendance (as long as the curriculumincluded at least 40 hours of instruction in English and U.S. history andgovernment); or(4) An applicant has attended courses conducted by employers, social, community,or private groups certified (retroactively, if necessary, as long as enrollmentoccurred on or after May 1, 1987, and the curriculum included at least40 hours of instruction in English and U.S. history and government) bythe district director or the Director of the Outreach Program under andSection;245a.3(b)(5)(i)(D) of this chapter; or(5) An applicant attests to having completed at least 40 hours of individualstudy in English and U.S. history and government and passes the proficiencytest for legalization, called the IRCA Test for Permanent Residency, indicatingthat the applicant is able to read and understand minimal functional Englishwithin the context of the history and government of the United States.Such test may be given by INS, as well as, State Departments of Education(SDEs) (and their accredited educational agencies) and Qualified DesignatedEntities in good-standing (QDEs) upon agreement with and authorizationby INS. Those SDEs and QDEs wishing to participate in this effort shouldwrite to the Director of the INS Outreach Program at 425 ``I'' Street,NW., Washington, DC 20536, for further information.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(v) The term ``developmentally disabled'' means the same as the term ``developmentaldisability'' defined in section 102(5) of the Developmental DisabilitiesAssistance and Bill of Rights Act of 1987, Pub. L. 100-146. As a convenienceto the public, that definition is printed here in its entirety:<ITAG tagnum="21">The term ``developmental disability'' means a severe, chronic disabilityof a person which:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(1) Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combinationof mental and physical impairments;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) Is manifested before the person attains age twenty-two;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(3) Is likely to continue indefinitely;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(4) Results in substantial functional limitations in three or moreof the following areas of major life activity: (i) Self-care, (ii) receptiveand expressive language, (iii) learning, (iv) mobility, (v) self direction,(vi) capacity for independent living, and (vii) economic self-sufficiency;and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(5) Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special,interdisciplinary, or generic care, treatment, or other services whichare of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated.</ITAG>3. Section 245a.2 is amended by removing and reserving paragraphs (a)(2)(i)and (c)(5), and; by revising paragraphs (d)(4) introductory text, and (k)(4)to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for temporary residence.</ITAG>(a) * * *(2) * * *(i) [Reserved]<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) * * *(5) [Reserved]<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) * * *(4) <T3>Proof of financial responsibility.</T3> An applicant for adjustmentof status under this part is subject to the provisions of section 212(a)(15)of the Act relating to excludability of aliens likely to become publiccharges. Generally, the evidence of employment submitted under paragraph(d)(3)(i) of this section will serve to demonstrate the alien's financialresponsibility during the documented period(s) of employment. If the alien'speriod(s) of residence in the United States include significant gaps inemployment or if there is reason to believe that the alien may have receivedpublic assistance while employed, the alien may be required to provideproof that he or she has not received public cash assistance. An applicantfor residence who is determined likely to become a public charge and isunable to overcome this determination after application of the specialrule will be denied adjustment. The burden of proof to demonstrate theinapplicability of this provision of law lies with the applicant who mayprovide:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(k) * * *(4) <T3>Special rule for determination of public charge. </T3>An alien whohas a consistent employment history which shows the ability to supporthimself or herself even though his or her income may be below the povertylevel, may be admissible under paragraph (k)(2) of this section. The alien'semployment history need not be continuous in that it is uninterrupted.It should be continuous in the sense that the alien shall be regularlyattached to the workforce, has an income over a substantial period of theapplicable time, and has demonstrated the capacity to exist on his or herincome without recourse to public cash assistance. This regulation is prospectivein that the Service shall determine, based on the alien's history, whetherhe or she is likely to become a public charge. Past acceptance of publiccash assistance within a history of consistent employment will enter intothis decision. The weight given in considering applicability of the publiccharge provisions will depend on many factors, but the length of time anapplicant has received public cash assistance will constitute a significantfactor.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>4. Section 245a.3 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for adjustment from temporary to permanent resident status.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Application period for permanent residence. </T3>(1) An alien may submitan application for lawful permanent resident status, with fee, immediatelysubsequent to the granting of lawful temporary resident status. Any applicationreceived prior to the alien's becoming eligible for adjustment to permanentresident status will be administratively processed and held by the INS,but will not be considered filed until the beginning of the nineteenthmonth after the date the alien was granted temporary resident status asdefined in andSection; 245a.2(s) of this chapter. (2) No application shallbe denied for failure to timely apply before the end of 30 months fromthe date of actual approval of the temporary resident application.(b) <T3>Eligibility. </T3>Any alien who has been lawfully admitted for temporaryresident status under section 245A(a) of the Act, such status not havingbeen terminated, may apply for adjustment of status of that of an alienlawfully admitted for permanent residence if the alien:(1) Applies for such adjustment anytime subsequent to the granting of temporaryresident status but on or before the end of 30 months from the date ofactual approval of the termporary resident application. The alien neednot be physically present in the United States at the time of application;however, the alien must establish continuous residence in the United Statesin accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b)(2) of this section andmust be physically present in the United States at the time of interviewand/or processing for permanent resident status (ADIT processing);(2) Establishes continuous residence in the United States since the datethe alien was granted such temporary residence status. An alien shall beregarded as having resided continuously in the United States for the purposeof this part if, at the time of applying for adjustment from temporaryto permanent resident status, or as of the date of eligibility for permanentresidence, whichever is later, no single absence from the United Stateshas exceeded thirty (30) days, and the aggregate of all absences has notexceeded ninety (90) days between the date of approval of the temporaryresident application, Form I-687 (not the ``roll-back'' date) and the datethe alien applied or became eligible for permanent resident status, whicheveris later, unless the alien can establish that due to emergent reasons orcircumstances beyond his or her control, the return to the United Statescould not be accomplished within the time period(s) allowed. A single absencefrom the United States of more than 30 days, and aggregate absences ofmore than 90 days during the period for which continuous residence is requiredfor adjustment to permanent residence, shall break the continuity of suchresidence, unless the temporary resident can establish to the satisfactionof the district director or the Director of the Regional Processing Facilitythat he or she did not, in fact, abandon his or her residence in the UnitedStates during such period;(3) Is admissible to the United States as an immigrant, except as otherwiseprovided in paragraph (g) of this section; and has not been convicted ofany felony, or three or more misdemeanors; and (4)(i)A) Can demonstrate that the alien meets the requirements of section312 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended (relating to minimalunderstanding of ordinary English and a knowledge and understanding ofthe history and government of the United States); or(B) Is satisfactorily pursuing a course of study recognized by the AttorneyGeneral to achieve such an understanding of English and such a knowledgeand understanding of the history and government of the United States.(ii) The requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section must be metby each applicant. However, these requirements shall be waived withoutformal application for persons who, as of the date of application or thedate of eligibility for permanent residence under this part, whicheverdate is later, are:(A) Under 16 years of age; or(B) 65 years of age or older; or(C) Over 50 years of age who have resided in the United States for at least20 years and submit evidence establishing the 20-year qualification requirement.Such evidence must be submitted pursuant to the requirements containedin Section 245a.2(d)(3) of this chapter; or(D) Developmentally disabled as defined at andSection; 245a.1(v) of thischapter. Such persons must submit medical evidence concerning their developmentaldisability; or(E) Physically unable to comply. The physical disability must be of a naturewhich renders the applicant unable to acquire the four language skillsof speaking, understanding, reading, and writing English in accordancewith the criteria and precedence established in OI 312.1(a)(2)(iii) (Interpretations).Such persons must submit medical evidence concerning their physical disability.(iii) (A) Literacy and basic citizenship skills may be demonstrated forpurposes of complying with paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section by:(<T3>1</T3>) Speaking and understanding English during the course of theinterview for permanent resident status. An applicant's ability to readand write English shall be tested by excerpts from one or more parts ofthe Federal Textbooks on Citizenship at the elementary literacy level.The test of an applicant's knowledge and understanding of the history andform of government of the United States shall be given in the English language.The scope of the testing shall be limited to subject matter covered inthe revised (1987) Federal Textbooks on Citizenship or other approved trainingmaterial. The test questions shall be selected from a list of 100 standardizedquestions developed by the Service. In choosing the subject matter andin phrasing questions, due consideration shall be given to the extent ofthe applicant's education, background, age, length of residence in theUnited States, opportunities available and efforts made to acquire therequisite knowledge, and any other elements or factors relevant to an appraisalof the adequacy of his or her knowledge and understanding; or(<T3>2</T3>) By passing a standardized section 312 test (effective retroactivelyas of November 7, 1988) such test being given in the English language bythe Legalization Assistance Board with the Educational Testing Service(ETS) or the California State Department of Education with the ComprehensiveAdult Student Assessment System (CASAS). The scope of the test is basedon the 1987 edition of the Federal Textbooks on Citizenship series writtenat the elementary literacy level. An applicant may evidence passing ofthe standardized section 312 test by submitting the approved testing organization'sstandard notice of passing test results at the time of filing Form I-698,subsequent to filing the application but prior to the interview, or atthe time of the interview. The test results may be independently verifiedby INS, if necessary.(B) An applicant who fails to pass the English literacy and/or the U.S.history and government tests at the time of the interview, shall be affordeda second opportunity after six (6) months (or earlier, at the request ofthe applicant) to pass the tests, submit evidence of passing an INS approvedsection 312 standardized examination or submit evidence of fulfillmentof any one of the ``satisfactorily pursuing'' alternatives listed at andSection;245a.1(s) of this chapter. The second interview shall be conducted priorto the denial of the application for permanent residence and may be basedsolely on the failure to pass the basic citizenship skills requirements.An applicant whose period of eligibility expires prior to the end of thesix-month re-test period, shall still be accorded the entire six monthswithin which to be re-tested.(iv) To satisfy the English language and basic citizenship skills requirementsunder the ``satisfactorily pursuing'' standard as defined at andSection;245a.1(s) of this chapter the applicant must submit evidence of such satisfactorypursuit in the form of a ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' (FormI-699) issued by the designated school or program official attesting tothe applicant's satisfactory pursuit of the course of study as definedat andSection; 245a.1(s) (1) and (4) of this chapter; or a high school diplomaor general educational development diploma (GED) under andSection; 245a.1(s)(2)of this chapter; or certification on letterhead stationery from a staterecognized, accredited learning institution under andSection; 245a.1(s)(3)of this chapter; or evidence of having passed the IRCA Test for PermanentResidency under andSection; 245a.1(s)(5) of this chapter. Such applicantsshall not then be required to demonstrate that they meet the requirementsof andSection; 245a.3(b)(4)(i)(A) of this chapter in order to be grantedlawful permanent residence provided they are otherwise eligible. Evidenceof ``Satisfactory Pursuit'' may be submitted at the time of filing FormI-698, subsequent to filing the application but prior to the interview,or at the time of the interview (the applicant's name and A90M number mustappear on any such evidence submitted). An applicant need not necessarilybe enrolled in a recognized course of study at the time of applicationfor permanent residency.(v) Enrollment in a recognized course of study as defined in andSection;245a.3(b)(5) and issuance of a ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit''must occur subsequent to May 1, 1987.(5) A course of study in the English language and in the history and governmentof the United States shall satisfy the requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(i)of this section if the course materials for such instruction include textbookspublished under the authority of section 346 of the Act, and it is(i) Sponsored or conducted by: (A) An established public or private institutionof learning recognized as such by a qualified state certifying agency;(B) An institution of learning approved to issue Forms I-20 in accordancewith andSection; 214.3 of this chapter; (C) A qualified designated entitywithin the meaning of section 245A(c)(2) of the Act, in good-standing withthe Service; or (D) Is certified by the district director in whose jurisdictionthe program is conducted, or is certified by the Director of the OutreachProgram nationally.(ii) A program seeking certification as a course of study recognized bythe Attorney General under paragraph (b)(5)(i)(D) of this section shallfile Form I-803, Petition for Attorney General Recognition to Provide Courseof Study for Legalization: Phase II, with the Director of Outreach fornational level programs or with the district director having jurisdictionover the area in which the school or program is located. In the case oflocal programs, a separate petition must be filed with each district directorwhen a parent organization has schools or programs in more than one INSdistrict. A petition must identify by name and address those schools orprograms included in the petition. No fee shall be required to file FormI-803;(A) The Director of Outreach and the district directors may approve a petitionwhere they have determined that (<T3>1</T3>) a need exists for a course of study in addition to those alreadycertified under andSection; 245a.3(b)(5)(i) (A), (B), or (C); and/or (<T3>2</T3>) of this chapter the petitioner has historically provided educationalservices in English and U.S. history and government but is not alreadycertified under andSection; 245a.3(b)(5)(i) (A), (B), or (C); and (<T3>3</T3>) of this chapter the petitioner is otherwise qualified to providesuch course of study;(B) Upon approval of the petition the Director of Outreach and districtdirectors shall issue a Certificate of Attorney General Recognition onForm I-804 to the petitioner. If the petition is denied, the petitionershall be notified in writing of the decision therefor. No appeal shalllie from a denial of Form I-803, except that in such case where the petitionsof a local, cross-district program are approved in one district and deniedin another within the same State, the petitioner may request review ofthe denied petition by the appropriate Regional Commissioner. The RegionalCommissioner shall then make a determination in this case;(C) Each district director shall compile and maintain lists of programsapproved under paragraph (b)(5)(i)(D) of this section within his or herjurisdiction. The Director of Outreach shall compile and maintain listsof approved national level programs.(6) <T3>Notice of participation.</T3> All courses of study recognized underandSection; 245a.3(b)(5)(i)(A) through (C) of this chapter which are alreadyconducting or will conduct English and U.S. history and government coursesfor temporary residents must submit a Notice of Participation to the districtdirector in whose jurisdiction the program is conducted. Acceptance of``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' (Form I-699) shall be delayeduntil such time as the course provider submits the Notice of Participation,which notice shall be in the form of a letter typed on the letterhead ofthe cou2se provider (if available) and include the following:(i) The name(s) of the school(s)/program(s).(ii) The complete addresses and telephone numbers of sites where courseswill be offered, and class schedules.(iii) The complete names of persons who are in charge of conducting Englishand U.S. history and government courses of study.(iv) A statement that the course of study will issue ``Certificates ofSatisfactory Pursuit'' to temporary resident enrollees according to INSregulations.(v) A list of designated officials of the recognized course of study authorizedto sign ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'', and samples of theiroriginal signatures.(vi) A statement that if a course provider charges a fee to temporary residentenrollees, the fee will not be excessive.(vii) Evidence of recognition under 8 CFR 245a.3(b)(5)(i)(A), (B), or (C)(e.g., certification from a qualified state certifying agency; evidenceof INS approval for attendance by nonimmigrant students, such as the schoolcode number, or the INS identification number from the QDE cooperativeagreement).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The course provider shall notify the district director, in writing,of any changes to the information contained in the Notice of Participationsubsequent to its submission within ten (10) days of such change.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">A Certificate of Attorney General Recognition to Provide Course ofStudy for Legalization (Phase II), Form I-804, shall be issued to courseproviders who have submitted a Notice of Participation in accordance withthe provisions of this section by the distict director. A Notice of Participationdeficient in any way shall be returned to the course provider to correctthe deficiency. Upon the satisfaction of the district director that thedeficiency has been corrected, the course provider shall be issued FormI-804. Each district director shall compile and maintain lists of recognizedcourses within his or her district.(7) <T3>Fee structure.</T3> No maximum fee standard will be imposed by theAttorney General. However, if it is believed that a fee charged is excessive,this factor alone will justify non-certification of the course providerby INS as provided in andSection; 245a.3(b)(10) and/or (12) of this section.Once fees are established, any change in fee without prior approval ofthe district director or the Director of Outreach may justify de-certification.In determining whether or not a fee is excessive, district directors andthe Director of Outreach shall consider such factors as the means of instruction,class size, prevailing wages of instructors in the area of the program,and additional costs such as rent, materials, utilities, insurance, andtaxes. District directors and the Director of Outreach may also seek theassistance of various Federal, State and local entities as the need arises(e.g., State Departments of Education) to determine the appropriatenessof course fees.(8) The Citizenship textbooks to be used by applicants for lawful permanentresidence under section 245A of the Act shall be distributed by the Serviceto appropriate representatives of public schools. These textbooks may otherwisebe purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, Government PrintingOffice, Washington, DC 20402, and are also available at certain publicinstitutions.(9) <T3>Maintenance of Student Records.</T3> Course providers conducting coursesof study recognized under andSection; 245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter shallmaintain for each student, for a period of three years from the student'senrollment, the following information and documents:(i) Name (as copied exactly from the I-688A or I-688);(ii) A-number (90 million series);(iii) Date of enrollment;(iv) Attendance records;(v) Assessment records;(vi) Photocopy of signed ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' issuedto the student.(10) <T3>Issuance of ``Certificate of Satisfactory Pursuit'' (I-699).</T3> (i)Each recognized course of study shall prepare a standardized certificatethat is signed by the designated official. The Certificate shall be issuedto an applicant who has attended a recognized course of study for at least40 hours of a minimum of 60-hour course as appropriate for his or her abilitylevel, and is demonstrating progress according to the performance standardsof the English and U.S. history and government course prescribed. Suchstandards shall conform with the provisions of andSection; 245a.1(s) of thischapter.(ii) The district director shall reject a certificate if it is determinedthat the certificate is fraudulent or was fraudulently issued.(iii) The district director shall reject a Certificate if it is determinedthat the course provider is not complying with INS regulations. In thecase of non-compliance, the district director will advise the course providerin writing of the specific deficiencies and give the provider thirty (30)days within which to correct such deficiencies.(iv) District directors will accept Certificates from course providersonce it is determined that the deficiencies have been satisfactorily corrected.(v) Course providers which engage in fraudulent activities or fail to conformwith INS regulations will be removed from the list of INS approved programs.INS will not accept Certificates from these providers.(vi) Certificates may be accepted if a program is cited for deficienciesor decertified at a later date and no fraud was involved.(vii) Certificates shall not be accepted from a course provider that hasbeen decertified unless the alien enrolled in and had been issued a certificateprior to the decertification, provided that no fraud was involved.(viii) The appropriate State agency responsbile for SLIAG funding shallbe notified of all decertifications by the district director.(11) <T3>Designated official. </T3>(i) The designated official is the authorizedperson from each recognized course of study whose signature appears onall ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' issued by that course;(ii) The designated official must be a regularly employed member of theschool administration whose office is located at the school and whose compensationdoes not come from commissions for recruitment of foreign students;(iii) (A) The head of the school system or school, the director of theQualified Designated Entity, the head of a program approved by the AttorneyGeneral, or the president or owner of other institutions recognized bythe Attorney General must specify a ``designated official''. Such designatedofficial may not delegate this designation to any other person. Each schoolor institution may have up to three (3) designated officials at any onetime. In a multi-campus institution, each campus may have up to three (3)designated officials at any one time;(B) Each designated official shall have read and otherwise be familiarwith the ``Requirements and Guidelines for Courses of Study Recognizedby the Attorney General''. The signature of a designated official shallaffirm the official's compliance with INS regulations;(C) The name, title, and sample signature of each designated official foreach recognized course of study shall be on file with the district directorin whose jurisdiction the program is conducted.(12) <T3>Monitoring by INS. </T3>(i) INS Outreach personnel in conjunction withthe district director shall monitor the course providers in each districtin order to:(A) Assure that the program is a course of study recognized by the AttorneyGeneral under the provisions of andSection; 245a.3(b)(5).(B) Verify the existence of curriculm as defined in andSection; 245a.1(u)on file for each level of instruction provided in English language andU.S. history and government classes.(C) Assure that ``Certificates of Satisfactory Pursuit'' are being issuedin accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(10).(D) Assure that records are maintained on each temporary resident enrolleein accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(9).(E) Assure that fees (if any) assessed by the course provider are in compliancein accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(7).(ii) If INS has reason to believe that the service is not being providedto the applicant, INS will issue a 24-hour minimum notice to the serviceprovider before any site visit is conducted.(iii) If it is determined that a course provider is not performing accordanceto the standards established in either andSection; 245a.3(b)(10) or (12)of this chapter, the district director shall institute decertificationproceedings. Notice of Intent to Decertify shall be provided to the courseprovider. The course provider has 30 days within which to correct performanceaccording to standards established. If after the 30 days, the districtdirector is not satisfied that the basis for decertification has been overcome,the course provider will be decertified. The appropriate State agency shallbe notified in accordance with andSection; 245a.3(b)(10)(viii) of this chapter.A copy of the notice of decertification shall be sent to the State agency.(13) Courses of study recognized by the Attorney General as defined atandSection; 245a.3(b)(5) of this chapter shall provide certain standardsfor the selection of teachers. Since some programs may be in locationswhere selection of qualified staff is limited, or where budget constraintsrestrict options, the following list of qualities for teacher selectionis provided as guidance. Teacher selections should include as many of thefollowing qualities as possible:(i) Specific training in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages(TESOL);(ii) Experience as a classroom teacher with adults;(iii) Cultural sensitivity and openness;(iv) Familiarity with compentency-based education;(v) Knowledge of curriculum and materials adaptation;(vi) Knowledge of a second language.(c) <T3>Ineligible aliens.</T3> (1) An alien who has been convicted of a felony,or three or more misdemeanors in the United States.(2) An alien who is inadmissible to the United States as an immigrant,except as provided in andSection; 245a.3(g)(1).(3) An alien who was previously granted temporary resident status pursuantto section 245A(a) of the Act has not filed an application for permanentresident status under section 245A(b)(1) of the Act by the end of 30 monthsfrom the date of actual approval of the temporary resident application.(4) An alien who was not previously granted temporary resident status undersection 245A(a) of the Act.(5) An alien whose temporary resident status has been terminated underandSection; 245a.2(u) of this chapter(d) <T3>Filing the application.</T3> The provisions of Part 211 of this chapterrelating to the documentary requirements for immigrants shall not applyto an applicant under this part.(1) The application must be filed on Form I-698. The application will bemailed to the designated Regional Processing Facility having jurisdictionover the applicant's residence. Form I-698 must be accompanied by the correctfee and documents specified in the instructions.(2) <T3>Certification of documents. </T3>The submission of original documentsis not required at the time of filing Form I-698. A copy of a documentsubmitted in support of Form I-698 filed pursuant to section 245A(b) ofthe Act and this part may be accepted, though unaccompanied by the original,if the copy is certified as true and complete by(i) An attorney in the format prescribed in andSection; 204.2(j)(1) of thischapter; or(ii) An alien's representative in the format prescribed in andSection; 204.2(j)(2)of this chapter; or(iii) A qualified designated entity (QDE) in good standing as defined inandSection; 245a.1(r) of this chapter, if the copy bears a certificationby the QDE in good-standing, typed or rubber-stamped in the following language:<ITAG tagnum="21">I certify that I have compared this copy with its original and itis a true and complete copy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Signed: _</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Date: _</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Name: _</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">QDE in good-standing representative </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Name of QDE in good-standing: _</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Address of QDE in good-standing: _</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">INS-QDE Cooperative Agreement Number: _</ITAG>(iv) <T3>Authentication.</T3> Certification of documents must be authenticatedby an original signature. A facsimile signature on a rubber stamp willnot be acceptable.(v) <T3>Original documents.</T3> Original documents must be presented whenrequested by the Service. Official government records, employment or employment-relatedrecords maintained by employers, unions, or collective bargaining organizations,medical records, school records maintained by a school or school boardor other records maintained by a party other than the applicant which aresubmitted in evidence must be certified as true and complete by such partiesand must bear their seal or signature or the signature and title of personsauthorized to act in their behalf. At the discretion of the district directorand/or the Regional Processing Facility director, original documents maybe kept for forensic examination.(3) A separate application (I-698) must be filed by each eligible applicant.All fees required by andSection; 103.7(b)(1) of this chapter must be submittedin the exact amount in the form of a money order, cashier's check or certifiedbank check. No personal checks or currency will be accepted. Fees willnot be waived or refunded under any circumstances.(4) Applicants who filed for temporary resident status prior to December1, 1987, are required to submit the results of a serologic test for HIVvirus on Form I-693, ``Medical Examination of Aliens Seeking Adjustmentof Status'', completed by a designated civil surgeon, unless the serologictest for HIV was performed and the results were submitted on Form I-693when the applicant filed for temporary resident status. Applicants whodid submit an I-693 reflecting a serologic test for HIV was performed priorto December 1, 1987, must submit evidence of this fact when filing theI-698 application in order to be relieved from the requirement of submittinganother I-693. If such evidence is not available, applicants may note ontheir I-698 application their prior submission of the results of the serologictest for HIV. This information shall then be verified at the Regional ProcessingFacility. Applicants having to submit an I-693 pursuant to this sectionare not required to have a complete medical examination. All HIV-positiveapplicants shall be advised that a waiver of the ground of excludabilityunder section 212(a)(6) of the Act is available and shall be provided theopportunity to apply for the waiver. To be eligible for the waiver, theapplicant must establish that: (i) The danger to the public health of the United States created by thealien's admission to the United States is minimal,(ii) The possibility of the spread of the infection created by the alien'sadmission to the United States is minimal, and(iii) There will be no cost incurred by any government agency without priorconsent of that agency. Provided these criteria are met, the waiver maybe granted only for humanitarian purposes, to assure family unity, or whenthe granting of such a waiver is in the public interest in accordance withandSection; 245a.3(g)(2) of this chapter.(5) If necessary, the validity of an alien's temporary resident card (I-688)will be extended in increments of one (1) year until such time as the decisionon an alien's properly filed application for permanent residence becomesfinal.(6) An application lacking the proper fee or incomplete in any way shallbe returned to the applicant with request for the proper fee, correction,additional information, and/or documentation. Once an application has beenaccepted by the Service and additional information and/or documentationis required, the applicant shall be sent a notice to submit such informationand/or documentation. In such case the application Form I-698 shall beretained at the RPF. If a response to this request is not received within60 days, a second request for correction, additional information, and/ordocumentation shall be made. If the second request is not complied withby the end of 30 months from the date the application for temporary residence,Form I-687, was approved the application for permanent residence will beadjudicated on the basis of the existing record.(e) <T3>Interview.</T3> Each applicant regardless of age, must appear at theappropriate Service office and must be fingerprinted for the purpose ofissuance of Form I-551. Each applicant shall be interviewed by an immigrationofficer, except that the adjudicative interview may be waived for a childunder 14, or when it is impractical because of the health or advanced ageof the applicant. An applicant failing to appear for the scheduled interviewmay, for good cause, be afforded another interview. Where an applicantfails to appear for two scheduled interviews, his or her application shallbe held in abeyance until the end of 30 months from the date the applicationfor temporary residence was approved and adjudicated on the basis of theexisting record.(f) <T3>Numerical limitations.</T3> The numerical limitations of sections 201and 202 of the Act do not apply to the adjustment of aliens to lawful permanentresident status under section 245A(b) of the Act.(g) <T3>Applicability of exclusion grounds._</T3>(1) <T3>Grounds of exclusion not to be applied. </T3>The following paragraphsof section 212(a) of the Act shall not apply to applicants for adjustmentof status from temporary resident to permanent resident status: (14) workersentering without labor certification; (20) immigrants not in possessionof valid entry documents; (21) visas issued without compliance of section203; (25) illiterates; and (32) graduates of non-accredited medical schools.(2) <T3>Waiver of grounds of excludability.</T3> Except as provided in paragraph(g)(3) of this section, the Service may waive any provision of section212(a) of the Act only in the case of individual aliens for humanitarianpurposes, to assure family unity, or when the granting of such a waiveris otherwise in the public interest. In any case where a provision of section212(a) of the Act has been waived in connection with an alien's applicationfor lawful temporary resident status under section 245A(a) of the Act,no additional waiver of the same ground of excludability will be requiredwhen the alien applies for permanent resident status under section 245A(b)(1)of the Act. In the event that the alien was excludable under any provisionof section 212(a) of the Act at the time of temporary residency and failedto apply for a waiver in connection with the application for temporaryresident status, or becomes excludable subsequent to the date temporaryresidence was granted, a waiver of the ground of excludability, if available,will be required before permanent resident status may be granted.(3) <T3>Grounds of exclusion that may not be waived.</T3> Notwithstanding anyother provisions of the Act the following provisions of section 212(a)of the Act may not be waived by the Attorney General under paragraph (g)(2)of this section:(i) Paragraphs (9) and (10) (criminals);(ii) Paragraph (15) (public charge) except for an alien who is or was anaged, blind, or disabled individual (as defined in section 1614(a)(1) ofthe Social Security Act);(iii) Paragraph (23) (narcotics), except for a single offense of simplepossession of thirty grams or less of marijuana;(iv) Paragraphs (27) (prejudicial to the public interest), (28) (communists),and (29) (subversives);(v) Paragraph (33) (participated in Nazi persecution).(4) <T3>Determination of ``Likely to become a public charge'' and Special Rule.</T3>Prior to use of the special rule for determination of public charge,paragraph (g)(4)(iii) of this section, an alien must first be determinedto be excludable under section 212(a)(15) of the Act. If the applicantis determined to be ``likely to become a public charge,'' he or she maystill be admissible under the terms of the Special Rule.(i) In determining whether an alien is ``likely to become a public charge''financial responsibility of the alien is to be established by examiningthe totality of the alien's circumstances at the time of his or her applicationfor legalization. The existence or absence of a particular factor shouldnever be the sole criteria for determining if an alien is likely to becomea public charge. The determination of financial responsibility should bea prospective evaluation based on the alien's age, health, income, andvocation.(ii) The Special Rule for determination of public charge, paragraph (g)(4)(iii)of this section, is to be applied only after an initial determination thatthe alien is inadmissible under the provisions of section 212(a)(15) ofthe act.(iii) <T3>Special Rule.</T3> An alien who has a consistent employment historywhich shows the ability to support himself or herself even though his orher income may be below the poverty level is not excludable under paragraph(g)(3)(ii) of this section. The alien's employment history need not becontinuous in that it is uninterrupted. It should be continuous in thesense that the alien shall be regularly attached to the workforce, hasan income over a substantial period of the applicable time, and has demonstratedthe capacity to exist on his or her income without recourse to public cashassistance. The Special Rule is prospective in that the Service shall determine,based on the alien's history, whether he or she is likely to become a publiccharge. Past acceptance of public cash assistance within a history of consistentemployment will enter into this decision. The weight given in consideringapplicability of the public charge provisions will depend on many factors,but the length of time an applicant has received public cash assistancewill constitute a significant factor. It is not necessary to file a waiverin order to apply the Special Rule for Determination of Public Charge.(5) <T3>Public cash assistance and criminal history verification. </T3>Declarationsby an applicant that he or she has not been the recipient of public cashassistance and/or has not had a criminal record are subject to a verificationof facts by the Service. The applicant must agree to fully cooperate inthe verification process. Failure to assist the Service in verifying informationnecessary for proper adjudication may result in denial of the application.(h) <T3>Departure</T3>. An applicant for adjustment to lawful permanent residentstatus under section 245A(b)(1) of the Act who was granted lawful temporaryresident status under section 245A(a) of the Act, shall be permitted toreturn to the United States after such brief and casual trips abroad, aslong as the alien reflects a continuing intention to adjust to lawful permanentresident status. However, such absences from the United States must notexceed the periods of time specified in andSection; 245a.3(b)(2) of thischapter in order for the alien to maintain continuous residence as specifiedin the Act.(i) <T3>Decision</T3>. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision,and, if the application is denied, of the reason therefor. Applicationsfor permanent residence under this chapter will not be denied at localINS offices (districts, suboffices, and legalization offices) until theentire record of proceeding has been reviewed. An application will notbe denied if the denial is based on adverse information not previouslyfurnished to the Service by the alien without providing the alien an opportunityto rebut the adverse information and to present evidence in his or herbehalf. If inconsistencies are found between information submitted withthe adjustment application and information previously furnished to theService, the applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to explain discrepanciesor rebut any adverse information. A party affected under this part by anadverse decision is entitled to file an appeal on Form I-694. If an applicationis denied, work authorization will be granted until a final decision hasbeen rendered on an appeal or until the end of the appeal period if noappeal is filed. An applicant whose appeal period has ended is no longerconsidered to be an Eligible Legalized Alien for the purposes of the administrationof State Legalization Impact Assistance Grants (SLIAG) funding. An alienwhose application is denied will not be required to surrender his or hertemporary resident card (I-688) until such time as the appeal period hastolled, or until expiration date of the I-688, whichever date is later.After exhaustion of an appeal, an applicant who believes that the groundsfor denial have been overcome may submit another application with fee,provided that the application is submitted within his or her eligibilityperiod.(j) <T3>Appeal process</T3>. An adverse decision under this part may be appealedto the Associate Commissioner, Examinations (Administrative Appeals Unit)the appellate authority designated in andSection; 103.1(f)(2). Any appealshall be submitted to the Regional Processing Facility with the requiredfee within thirty (30) days after service of the Notice of Denial in accordancewith the procedures of andSection; 103.3(a) of this chapter. An appeal receivedafter the thirty (30) day period has tolled will not be accepted. The thirty(30) day period for submitting an appeal begins three days after the noticeof denial is mailed. If a review of the Record of Proceeding (ROP) is requestedby the alien or his or her legal representative and an appeal has beenproperly filed, an additional thirty (30) days will be allowed for thisreview from the time the Record of Proceeding is photocopied and mailed.A brief may be submitted with the appeal form or submitted up to thirty(30) calendar days from the date of receipt of the appeal form at the RegionalProcessing Facility. Briefs filed after submission of the appeal shouldbe mailed directly to the Regional Processing Facility. For good causeshown, the time within which a brief supporting an appeal may be submittedmay be extended by the Director of the Regional Processing Facility.(k) <T3>Motions</T3>. The Regional Processing Facility director may reopenand reconsider any adverse decision <T3>sua sponte</T3>. When an appeal to the Associate Commissioner, Examinations(Administrative Appeals Unit) has been filed, the INS director of the RegionalProcessing Facility may issue a new decision that will grant the benefitwhich has been requested. The director's new decision must be served onthe appealing party within forty-five (45) days of receipt of any briefsand/or new evidence, or upon expiration of the time allowed for the submissionof any briefs.(1) <T3>Certifications</T3>. The Regional Processing Facility director or districtdirector may, in accordance with andSection; 103.4 of this chapter, certifya decision to the Associate Commissioner, Examinations (AdministrativeAppeals Unit) when the case involves an unusually complex or novel questionof law or fact. The decision on an appealed case subsequently remandedback to either the Regional Processing Facility director or the districtdirector will be certified to the Administrative Appeals Unit.(m) <T3>Date of adjustment to permanent residence. </T3>The status of an alienwhose application for permanent resident status is approved shall be adjustedto that of a lawful permanent resident as of the date of filing of theapplication for permanent residence or the eligibility date, whicheveris later. For purposes of making application to petition for naturalization,the continuous residence requirements for naturalization shall begin asof the date the alien's status is adjusted to that of a person lawfullyadmitted for permanent residence under this part. (n) <T3>Limitation on access to information and confidentiality. </T3>(1) Noperson other than a sworn officer or employee of the Department of Justiceor bureau of agency thereof, will be permitted to examine individual applications.For purposes of this part, any individual employed under contract by theService to work in connection with the Legalization Program shall be consideredan ``employee of the Department of Justice or bureau or agency thereof''.(2) No information furnished pursuant to an application for permanent residentstatus under this section shall be used for any purpose except: (i) Tomake a determination on the application; or (ii) for the enforcement ofthe provisions encompassed in section 245A(c)(6) of the Act, except asprovided in paragraph (n)(3) of this section.(3) If a determination is made by the Service that the alien has, in connectionwith his or her application, engaged in fraud or willful misrepresentationor concealment of a material fact, knowingly provided a false writing ordocument in making his or her application, knowingly made a false statementor representation, or engaged in any other activity prohibited by section245A(c)(6) of the Act, the Service shall refer the matter to the UnitedStates Attorney for prosecution of the alien and/or of any person who createdor supplied a false writing or document for use in an application for adjustmentof status under this part.(4) Information contained in granted legalization files may be used bythe Service at a later date to make a decision (i) On an immigrant visapetition or other status filed by the applicant under section 204(a) ofthe Act; (ii) On a naturalization application submitted by the applicant;(iii) For the preparation of reports to Congress under section 404 of IRCA,or; (iv) For the furnishing of information, at the discretion of the AttorneyGeneral, in the same manner and circumstances as census information maybe disclosed by the Secretary of Commerce under section 8 of Title 13,Unites States Code.(o) <T3>Rescission.</T3> Rescission of adjustment of status under 245a shalloccur under the guidelines established in section 246 of the Act.5. Section 245a.4 is amended by revising paragraphs (a)(10), (b)(4)(v)introductory text, (b)(11)(iv)(C), and, (c) introductory text to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 245a.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Adjustment to lawful resident status of certain nationals of countriesfor which extended voluntary departure has been made available.</ITAG>(a) * * * (10) ``Public cash assistance'' means income or need-based monetary assistanceto include, but not limited to, supplemental security income received bythe alien through federal, state, or local programs designed to meet subsistencelevels. It does not include assistance in kind, such as food stamps, publichousing, or other non-cash benefits, nor does it include work related compensationor certain types of medical assistance (Medicare, Medicaid, emergency treatment,services to pregnant women or children under 18 years of age, or treatmentin the interest of public health).<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) * * *(4) * * *(v) <T3>Proof of financial responsibility. </T3>An applicant for adjustmentof status under this part is subject to the provisions of section 212(a)(15)of the Act relating to excludability of aliens likely to become publiccharges. Generally, the evidence of employment submitted under paragraph(b)(4)(iv)(A) of this section will serve to demonstrate the alien's financialresponsibility during the documented period(s) of employment. If the alien'speriod(s) of residence in the United States include significant gaps inemployment or if there is reason to believe that the alien may have receivedpublic assistance while employed, the alien may be required to provideproof that he or she has not received public cash assistance. An applicantfor residence who is determined likely to become a public charge and isunable to overcome this determination after application of the SpecialRule under paragraph (b)(11)(iv)(C) of this section will be denied adjustment.The burden of proof to demonstrate the inapplicability of this provisionof law lies with the applicant who may provide:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(11) * * *(iv) * * *(C) An alien who has a consistent employment history which shows the abilityto support himself or herself even though his or her income may be belowthe poverty level may be admissible under this section. The alien's employmenthistory need not be continuous in that it is uninterrupted. It should becontinuous in the sense that the alien shall be regularly attached to theworkforce, has an income over a substantial period of the applicable time,and has demonstrated the capacity to exist on his or her income withoutrecourse to public cash assistance. The Special Rule is prospective inthat the Service shall determine, based on the alien's history, whetherhe or she is likely to become a public charge. Past acceptance of publiccash assistance within a history of consistent employment will enter intothis decision. The weight given in considering applicability of the publiccharge provisions will depend on many factors, but the length of time anapplicant has received public cash assistance will constitute a significantfactor. It is not necessary to file a waiver in order to apply the SpecialRule for Determination of Public Charge.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) <T3>Adjustment from temporary to permanent resident status.</T3> The provisionsof andSection; 245a.3 of this part shall be applied to aliens adjusting topermanent residence under this part.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: June 23, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Richard E. Norton,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Commissioner, Examinations, Immigration and NaturalizationService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-15790 Filed 7-11-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-10-M            </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>