<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89623-0023 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-23-89.f2.A1022</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 120 / Friday, June 23, 1989 /Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Aviation Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Parts 21, 25, and 121</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 25491; Amdts. Nos. 21-65, 25-67, 121-205] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2120-AC29</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Location of Passenger Emergency Exits in Transport Category Airplanes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">June 13, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This final rule establishes a new standard that limitsthe distance between emergency exits on transport category airplanes. Thisrule prohibits airplane manufacturers and air carriers from increasingthe distance between emergency exits to more than 60 feet. Existing regulationsdo not limit the distance. This rule is intended to ensure an opportunityfor safe passenger evacuation during an emergency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>July 24, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Arthur J. Hayes, Aircraft EngineeringDivision (AIR-120), Aircraft Certification Service, Federal Aviation Administration,800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591; Telephone (202) 267-9937.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>Since 1967, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has regulated thelocation of emergency exits on airplanes by requiring that an exit be providedfor every specified number of passengers, that an exit be located whereit would allow the most effective means of passenger evacuation, and thatexits be distributed as uniformly as practicable taking into account passengerdistribution. (14 CFR 25.807) An underlying assumption has been that auniform distribution of exits accounting for passenger distribution resultsin reasonable seat-to-exit and exit-to-exit distances. However, some recent exit configurations have exit distances that are greaterthan those envisaged when the exit rule was adopted. Of the new wide-bodytransports that were being designed when the rule was adopted, the BoeingModel 747 had a maximum distance between exits of 44 feet; the McDonnellDouglas Model DC-10, 47 feet; and the Lockheed Model L-1011, 50 feet. (Allfigures are rounded off.) Basic narrow-body transport models typicallyhad shorter distances. Derivative configurations of these models show anincrease in typical distances. Exit-to-exit distance, originally 50 feetin the L-1011-385-1, increased to nearly 70 feet in a later model, theL-1011-385-3. The Boeing 747 showed an increase from 44 feet in the 747-100,-200, and -300 models to nearly 70 feet in the 747-200 and 747-300 modelswith the No. 3 exits deactivated. A recent certification request proposeda derivative configuration with a distance substantially greater than 80feet. The FAA denied this request. These recent cases of exit configurationdesign indicate that the exit distribution requirement of andSection; 25.807(c)alone is ineffective in preventing increases in escape path distances.While the agency recognizes that exit distance considered alone is notdispositive of the conditions which provide for a safe evacuation, underour current state of safety knowledge, this factor is clearly an importantvariable. As discussed below, however, the agency considers it preferablethat a performance standard for evacuation be employed in the future, soas not to artificially constrain design options. With the specific intentof developing the information necessary to propose such a performance standardto replace (among other factors affecting safe evacuation) this artificialexit distance limitation, the agency will gather the best available safetyexpertise in a formally chartered advisory committee to consider and reporton the best means for achieving that end. The agency's concern over the significance of escape path distance recentlyincreased in connection with type certification activities for a derivativeof the Boeing Model 747 (B-747), necessitating this action in the interim,until better knowledge permitting development of a performance standardbecomes available. In September 1984, at the request of the Boeing Company(Boeing), the Seattle Aircraft Certification Office (ACO) approved a modificationof the B-747 which would deactivate a pair of over-wing exits and reducethe maximum passenger capacity of the main deck by 110, from 550 to 440.The Seattle ACO approved the modification on the basis that such a modificationwas within the requirements of the regulations at that time. The FAA receivedmany letters from the public objecting to the deactivation of emergencyexits. In response to the public objections, the FAA Administrator askedthe Office of Airworthiness (presently the Aircraft Certification Service)for a review of the ACO action. The review, dated March 1, 1985, foundthat the B-747, as modified, fully met all applicable rules and that noexemptions, waivers, or special conditions were granted or considered.Notwithstanding this conclusion, on June 12, 1985, the FAA Administratorwrote a letter to a number of U.S. air carriers strongly encouraging themto maintain the original number of emergency exits on their passenger-carryingBoeing 747 airplanes, because of safety concerns not addressed by the rule.On June 24, 25, and 26, 1985, the House Subcommittee on Investigationsand Oversight heard testimony from witnesses opposed to exit deactivationsand from the FAA Administrator. The Administrator promised the committeea review of all issues raised in the letters received by the FAA and intestimony given before the committee. The review was summarized in a reportto the Administrator, dated August 5, 1985. It found that the approvalfor design modifications to B-747 airplanes was technically valid in accordancewith the regulations but that issues raised by the public added new emphasisand perspective to the issue of escape path distances. The report concludedthat all of the issues raised by the public questioned the efficacy ofthe rules rather than the validity of the approval. The report stated thatthe FAA would hold a Public Technical Conference on emergency evacuation.As a result, an Emergency Evacuation Task Force was formed in Seattle,Washington, in September of 1985. The task force consisted of members ofthe interested public and was chaired by the FAA. The task force reviewedrecent design, maintenance, and operational experience of the new generationof narrow- and wide-body transports. It examined the full range of emergencyevacuation topics, including passenger emergency exits, cabin configuration,emergency evacuation demonstrations, evacuation slides, crewmember dutiesand training, and passenger safety information. Although no consensus wasreached by the task force, the task force efforts were helpful to the FAAin its own ongoing efforts to improve emergency evacuations. Unfortunately,the task force did not provide any basis for a performance standard toaddress the concerns raised by increasing exit distances. The FAA reviewed the issues surrounding the Boeing approval as well asinformation grained on modifications of other wide-body transport airplanes,information received from flight attendants who are knowledgeable aboutemergency evacuation procedures, and information from the public and otherinterested persons. As a result, the FAA decided that the rule on numberand location of passenger emergency exists were not adequate to maintainthe original intent of those rules that exists be located to provide anopportunity for passenger evacuation in an emergency, because aircraftdesigns had significantly changed in the over 20 years since the rule waswritten. The agency's reassessment of the rules in light of recent aircraft designsand events has confirmed the importance of the distance betewen existsand the potential impact of excessive distance on the chances of passengersurvival in an emergency. Accordingly, in the absence of a performancestandard which provides acceptable safety, the FAA is amending Parts 21,25, and 121 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) to prohibit any passengeremergency exist from being located more than 60 feet from any adjacentpassenger emergency exist. The FAA has determined that the specificationof the distance between exists along with the existing uniform distributionrule is sufficient to provide the appropriate distance between a passengerseat and an emergency exit, though the preferable alternative would bea performance standard. For the purposes of this rule, the distance betweenexists is measured along a line parallel to the airplane's longitudinalaxis for exits on the same deck and on the same side of the fuselage. This rulemaking action covers only one of many factors affecting cabinevacuation. The FAA considers evacuation within a systems or ``holistic''framework, i.e., a number of interrelated factors affect the success ofan evacuation. These factors include: cabin attendant training, fuselageattitude, door design, door reliability, chute design and reliability,chute inflation times, aisle design, seat materials, exist low lighting,aisle lighting, crew check lists passenger safety information, cabin configuration,and other factors. The FAA is addressing these and other related issues by establishing anemergency evacuation advisory committee to develop recommendations foran evacuation performance standard and appropriate further modificationsand additions to the agency's existing evacuation regulations. The committeewill include representatives of crewmembers, airlines, manufacturers, andother interested organizations. The committee will provide the FAA withrecommendations on areas which concern improved specification of emergencyevacuation regulations and other new techniques which should enhance cabinevacuation. Specifically, the committee will be tasked to design a performancestandard against which safe evacuation capability of existing and new aircraftdesigns can be measured in order to replace artificial exist distance limitationsand other nonperformance oriented design criteria mandated by this andother regulations. This group will be asked to submit recommendations onairplane evacuation standards by July 1, 1991, and to review all relevantcabin evacuation issues that the FAA asks it to consider, as well as issuesraised by passengers, the National Transportation Safety Board, and theCongress. The FAA will use the committee's recommendations as a basis forreformulating the agency's evacuation regulations, if warranted by analysisin accordance with Executive Order 12291. While such a reformulation intoan evacuation performance standard is hoped to obviate the need for distancelimitations established by this final rule, the FAA finds that, in theinterim until such performance standards are available, distance limitsbetween emergency exist doors are necessary in the interest of airlinepassenger safety. On October 20, 1987, the FAA published Notice of Proposed Rulemaking No.87-10 (Notice No. 87-10) (52 FR 39190) which proposed to establish newstandard limits on transport category airplanes for the distance betweenany passenger seat and the nearest emergency exit and the distance betweenexits. On March 2, 1988, the Administrator testified before the House Committeeon Public Works and Transportation, Subcommittee on Investigations andOversight. In that testimony the Administrator stated that, having reviewedthe public comments, the FAA planned to issue a final rule to prescribea new standard to limit the distance between exists. Comments receivedon the proposals are described and responded to below. <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Comments </ITAG>The FAA received 31 comments on the proposals. Approximately two-thirdsof the comments are generally supportive of the FAA proposals. These supportivecomments are from associations of airline employees, from individual flightattendants and private citizens, and from an association of airline passengers.In addition to these groups, there are favorable comments from the NationalTransportation Safety Board (NTSB), The Airworthiness Authorities SteeringCommittee, Transport Canada, and The Civil Aviation Administration of China.Although about one-third of the commenters oppose the proposals, none ofthese comments contains either a supportable alternative performance standardor any additional proof that would convince the FAA that the proposalsshould be withdrawn. These opposing comments come from foreign air carriers,from airline associations, and from airplane manufacturers. The discussion of comments is divided into the following categories ofissues: (1) Common sense support of the agency's approach; (2) retroactivenature of the agency's action; (3) claimed discriminatory and inconsistentnature of the agency's action; (4) offsetting factors; (5) accident andservice experience; (6) actual emergency evacuation conditions versus evacuationdemonstrations; (7) sixty-foot determination; (8) economic costs; and (9)comments beyond the scope of the proposals. <ITAG tagnum="84">Common Sense Support of the Agency's Approach</ITAG>Most of the supporting commenters agree that, given our present state ofknowledge regarding safety matters, exit-to-exit distances affect the outcomeof emergency evacuations. Throughout the favorable comments, the commonsense assumption is presented that a passenger who is close to an emergencyexit has a better chance to escape than a person farther away. A Britishaeronautical engineer states:<ITAG tagnum="21">With the considerable test and operational data available to the FAAit is reassuring to read that they now also support my long held opinion,and that of my colleagues, that the escape path distance can have a majoreffect on the outcome of the evacuation.</ITAG>The commenters who support the proposals think that the FAA should addressthe issues of exit-to-exit distance and seat-to-exit distance as well asother cabin improvements (e.g., smoke hoods and location of cabin attendantstations).The FAA agrees that distance from a passenger to an exit and distance betweenexits are relevant factors (though not the only important ones) in emergencyevacuations and, therefore, is amending its airworthiness requirementsto establish a standard limit on distances between exits, in the absenceof a preferable performance standard. For reasons discussed under the headingRule Clarifications, the FAA is not adopting a specific limit on the distancebetween a passenger seat and the nearest emergency exit. In recent years,the FAA has completed several rulemaking actions that addressed other safetyfeatures that could increase the likelihood of passenger survival in anemergency evacuation. On July 10, 1986, the FAA issued Amendments 25-61and 121-189 (51 FR 26206) to upgrade fire safety standards for cabin interiormaterials in transport category airplanes. On May 29, 1987, the FAA issuedAmendment 121-194 (52 FR 21472) to establish new carry-on baggage requirements.The Task Force Report on Emergency Evacuation of Transport Airplanes (discussedin the background section of the preamble of Notice No. 87-10) identifiedadditional areas that are under study within the FAA and that could bethe subject of future rulemaking. The agency expects that the emergencyevacuation advisory committee to be formed will consider all of these datain its development of a recommended performance standard for emergencyevacuations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Retroactive Nature of the Agency's Action</ITAG>Several commenters state that the FAA is attempting by general rulemakingto disapprove, retroactively, a particular emergency exit design that theFAA admits is legal under existing regulations. Specifically, The BoeingCompany describes three ways that this rule would be applied retroactively.(1) It would apply to applications for supplemental type certificates (STC)or for amendments to type certificates that were submitted to the FAA beforeOctober 16, 1987 (andSection; 25.2).(2) It would apply to airplanes that already have STC's or amended typecertificates but have not yet received standard airworthiness certificates(andSection; 21.183(f)).(3) It would prevent airplanes that are already in service from being modifiedin a way that was legal under the certification rules that applied to thoseairplanes when they were manufactured (andSection; 121.310(m)).Only one commenter specifically criticizes the agency's intention to makeandSection;andSection; 21.183(f) and 121.310(m) applicable as of the date ofissuance of the proposals.Boeing states that the FAA does not have discretion to change the rulesin the ways described above. Boeing also states that once the FAA has approveda type design and issued a production certificate the manufacturer is entitledunder andSection; 21.183(a) to a standard airworthiness certificate withoutfurther showing. Boeing states that the FAA cannot change the automaticnature of andSection; 21.183(a) because it maintains that andSection; 21.183(a)is taken directly from the agency's statutory mandate. Section 603(c) ofthe Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (Act), 49 U.S.C. 1423(c), provides:<ITAG tagnum="21">If the Administrator finds that the aircraft conforms to the typecertificate therefor, and, after inspection, that the aircraft is in conditionfor safe operation, he shall issue an airworthiness certificate.</ITAG>Boeing further states that Congress passed legislation giving the FAA specificauthority to issue retroactive regulations relating to aircraft noise andsonic boom which shows that the FAA does not otherwise have the authorityto issue retroactive regulations under the Act.Boeing's description of how the new rule is applied retroactively is correct;however, Boeing and other commenters are incorrect in claiming that theFAA does not have any authority to apply airworthiness certification rulesretroactively.The basic scheme of the type certification regulations is set out in andSection;21.17. Paragraph (a) of andSection; 21.17 reads as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21">(a) Except as provided in andSection; 23.2, andSection; 25.2 and in Part36 of this chapter, an applicant for a type certificate must show thatthe aircraft, aircraft engine, or propeller concerned meets_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(1) The applicable requirements of this subchapter that are effectiveon the date of application for that certificate unless_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(i) Otherwise specified by the Administrator, or</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(ii) Compliance with later effective amendments is elected or requiredunder this section, and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) Any special conditions prescribed by the Administrator.</ITAG>Section 21.17(a) has described for many years four methods by which anapplicant for a type certificate could be required to comply with regulationsthat are not the applicable requirements that are effective on the dateof application for the type certificate. First, retroactive regulationscould be applicable under andSection; 25.2. Second, under andSection; 21.17(a)(1)(i),the applicable regulations could be otherwise specified by the Administrator.Third, under andSection; 21.17(a)(1)(ii), compliance with later effectiveregulations could be required. Fourth, under andSection; 21.17(a)(2), specialconditions could be prescribed by the Administrator.In addition, airplane manufacturers have always been affected by eitherspecial airworthiness requirements of instrument and equipment requirementsthat have been included in the applicable operating rules (e.g., SubpartsJ and K of Part 121). Even though an airplane fully met the type certificationrequirements, an airline could not operate the airplane unless it alsomet the special airworthiness or instrument and equipment requirementsthat apply to that airline. Thus, for many years, the FAA has had the authority to upgrade applicabletype certification and airworthiness requirements as needed to ensure thatthe appropriate level of safety is maintained. This authority to applyrules in a manner that has certain retroactive effects has been exercisedby the FAA on many occasions and applies to supplemental type certificatesand to amendments to type certificates. The language in section 603(c)of the Act in no way limits the above-described authority since the issuanceof an airworthiness certificate becomes automatic only after the Administratorhas found full compliance with the type certificate or production certificate,as applicable. (See andSection; 21.183) Therefore, the fact that the FAA was given specific authority in section611 of the Act to issue retroactive rules relating to aircraft noise andsonic boom does not lead to Boeing's conclusion. As described above, theauthority to promulgate retroactive requirements to address safety issuesis consistent with the proper exercise of the agency's safety rulemakingauthority, and exists independently from the authority to promulgate standardsto address the control and abatement of noise and sonic boom. Therefore,the enactment of section 611 in no way diminishes the authority of theFAA under the Act to adopt the standard described herein.<ITAG tagnum="84">Claimed Discriminatory and Inconsistent Nature of the Agency's Action</ITAG>Boeing states that the proposed Part 121 amendment is arbitrary and capriciousand discriminates against Boeing because it is specifically targeted atthe B-747. Boeing's basic argument is that if safety is the justificationfor the operating rule, then all airplanes that do not meet the 30-foot/60-footrequirements would have to be barred from future Part 121 operations. Accordingto Boeing, however, andSection; 121.310(m), as proposed, would permit LockheedModel L-1011-500 (L-1011-500) airplanes that are presently operating underPart 121 to continue to operate under that part even though they do notmeet the 30 foot/60-foot requirements while prohibiting operation of comparablymodified or newly-manufactured B-747 airplanes. Boeing and other commentersstate that the FAA position is inconsistent in the following ways:(1) A 10-door B-747 would be considered safe for 550 passengers on themain deck while an 8-door B-747 would not be considered safe for 400 passengersor even for substantially lower maximum seating configurations. (2) L-1010-500 airplanes with emergency exits that are 65.6 feet apartwould continue to be legal under Part 121. (3) Foreign air carriers could continue to operate their previously-modified8-door B-747's into and out of the United States but could not sell a modifiedB-747 to a Part 121 certificate holder unless the over-the-wing exits werereactivated.The Lockheed Corporation (Lockheed) states that the regulatory evaluationprepared for the proposals is inconsistent with the proposed rule languagebecause, while the regulatory evaluation states that the L-1011-500 airplaneswould not be impacted by the proposed rule, the language of proposed andSection;121.310(m) would prevent such airplanes now owned by foreign operatorsfrom being sold to U.S. airlines.KLM Royal Dutch Airlines (KLM) suggests that because the agency's distinctionsmay not be understandable to the public, airlines like KLM might be forcedto reactivate exits so that they would not have internal inconsistenciesin their operations. That airplanes will be flying side by side in air carrier operations eventhough they neither meet the same requirements nor possess the same characteristicsis in no way a new concept. At times the FAA has adopted retrofit rulesthat apply to all airplanes operating under a particular operating rule,and at other times it has allowed certain airplanes to continue operatinguntil they are retired. Under this rule there would continue to be inconsistencies in the seat-to-exitratios of various airplane types. Under the current rules, airlines havechosen to configure their cabin space in various ways and many airplanesdo not have as many seats as would be allowed for that airplane under andSection;25.807; however, this rulemaking addresses exit-to-exit distance as a separateissue from seat-to-exit ratios. The current seat-to-exit ratios in andSection;25.807 are not changed by this rulemaking. Perhaps the emergency evacuationadvisory committee will develop recommendations for a performance standardwhich accommodates the change implied by this comment. The statement from the regulatory evaluation referenced in the Lockheedcomment did not mean that L-1011-500 airplanes would be excluded from theeffect of proposed andSection; 121.310(m). The statement referred to thefact that, since Lockheed is no longer manufacturing the L-1011-500, therewould be no direct economic impact on Lockheed. Under new andSection; 121.310(m),no existing foreign-owned airplane (whether a L-1011-500 or a modifiedB-747 or any other transport category airplane) that exceeds the exit-to-exitlimit can be obtained by a U.S. airline to be operated under Part 121.This rule is intended to ``hold the line'' on growth of exit distance untilan adequate performance standard can be developed. The overall effect ofthis final rule is threefold:  (1) No operator of U.S.-registered airplanes can modify one of its existingairplanes to exceed the exit-to-exit limit established by this rulemakingunder Part 121.  (2) No operator can purchase from a foreign air carrier and operate underPart 121 any existing airplane that exceeds the exit-to-exit limit establishedby this rulemaking.  (3) No airplane manufactured after October 16, 1987, that exceeds the exit-to-exitlimit will receive a U.S. standard airworthiness certificate.  Thus, while this rule contains the above-mentioned effects, this rule doesnot require any operator of a U.S.-registered airplane to expend any resourcesto retrofit any airplane that was in its fleet as of October 16, 1987.These effects clearly are associated with no direct costs.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Offsetting Factors  </ITAG>Several commenters state that improvements to emergency exit slide designand maintenance and to emergency exit door maintenance and actual seatingconfigurations are offsetting factors which would allow faster and saferevacuations with fewer exits. This, is fact, might be true and could bea factor to be considered by the emergency evacuation advisory committeein its attempts to develop a suitable performance standard.  Boeing cites specific emergency exit and slide design improvements forthe B-747 in the following areas: (1) Reduced inflation time of up to 50percent; (2) use of higher strength, tear, and puncture-resistant slidingsurface materials; (3) improve 25-knot wind performance; (4) an escapeslide design with improved load-bearing capacity; and (5) lengthening theNo. 2 door escape slide so that it can be usable for a wider range of conditions. Virtually all of the foreign air carriers state that the FAA failed toconsider that the standard seating configuration for the main deck of theirB-747's ranged from 322 passengers to 384 passengers, all well below the440 that would be the maximum under the present rules for an 8-door configuration.British Airways suggests as an alternative to the FAA proposals a 10-percentreduction in the present limit of 440 passengers to 396 for the 8-doorconfiguration.  While the FAA recognizes that there have been improvements in emergencyevacuation equipment and maintenance in recent years, in the absence ofan accepted and validated performance standard against which to measurethese factors and their contribution to evacuation success, these improvementsdo not offset the need to place a limit on the distance between exits untilthe performance standard is developed. Furthermore, as one commenter notes,a large proportion of the world fleet is not yet fitted with the inflatableslides which incorporate the latest safety advances. Also, this commenternotes that, despite improvements in emergency evacuation procedures forwide-bodied transports, the time necessary to evacuate these types of airplanesin full-scale demonstrations remains close to the time necessary to evacuatenarrow-bodied airplanes.  The FAA is not addressing seat-to-exit ratios in this rulemaking. As discussedpreviously, this rulemaking is needed to hold the line on maximum exit-to-exitdistance to provide the appropriate level of safety until a performancestandard can be developed. This requirement will work together with presentseat-to-exit ratio requirements, uniform distribution requirements, andimprovements in evacuation equipment to increase the likelihood that passengerswill survive in emergencies involving fire where evacuation is necessary. <ITAG tagnum="84">Accident and Service Experience  </ITAG>Boeing and others point to actual evacuations in emergency situations inwhich 8-door B-747's were evacuated safely. British Airways describes itsown experience in two emergency evacuations (Azores, 1985, and Los Angeles,1987) where 334 and 370 passengers, respectively, plus crewmembers evacuatedwith only a few minor injuries to passengers.  The examples cited by commenters do not contradict the proposed rule changes.The main objective of the 60-foot exit-to-exit distance requirement isto prevent any further increase in exit-to-exit distances until an adequateperformance standard can be developed.  While the evacuation situations described by British Airways are both examplesof successful actual emergency evacuations, neither involved crash conditions.The evacuations involved neither fire nor smoke, and all emergency exitswere operable. In accidents studied where some passengers survived andsome did not, evidence indicates that proximity to an exit increased thelikelihood of survival. (See the following discussion.)  <ITAG tagnum="84">Actual Emergency Evacuation Conditions Versus Evacuation Demonstrations </ITAG>Positions vary on the question of whether distance to exits is as importantas other factors in evacuation. The Association of Flight Attendants (AFA)states that distance to exits is as important as other factors. In supportof its position, the AFA provides quotes from two earlier FAA reports.A 1964 report entitled ``Human Factors of Emergency Evacuation'' statethat no passenger should be more than 22 feet from an exit. (AM 65-7, p.8, Mohler, Swearingen, McFadden, and Garner). A 1970 FAA report entitled``Survival In Emergency Escape From Passenger Aircraft,'' stated:<ITAG tagnum="21">In all three accidents, the distance between initial seat locationand the nearest usable exit tended to be greater among fatalities thansurvivors. This leads to the not unsurprising conclusion that it is betterto sit closer to an exit than farther away.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(AM-70-16, p. 55, Snow, Carroll, and Allgood)</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The AFA also states that testimony of flight attendants who had beenin crashes confirms that distance to exit doors is important in escaping.Many commenters who think that the FAA is overemphasizing distance to exitsappear to agree with one commenter who states that the time needed to evacuateairplanes in emergencies is a function of both distance to the nearestemergency exit and the time to evacuate. This commenter suggests that withshorter distances, lines may form and that the piling up or queuing ofpassengers in emergency evacuations may actually impede the ability toevacuate airplanes because passengers could be more prone to panic if theyare lined up and waiting. Most of the opposing commenters also appear to believe that the FAA isnot giving adequate recognition to the numerous emergency evacuation demonstrationsthat have proven that airplanes, such as models of the B-747 with 8 doorson the main deck, could be evacuated within less than 90 seconds with 50percent of the exits blocked along with the other simulated emergency conditionsrequired by the rules. As noted in Notice No. 87-10, the evacuation demonstration required byandSection;25.803 neither establishes a maximum escape path distance nordemonstrates that escape path distance is not a major factor in actualemergencies. That demonstration is conducted to provide a benchmark againstwhich the FAA can consistently evaluate emergency exit performance withvarious internal seating and emergency exit configurations. It does notsimulate actual post-crash emergency evacuation conditions, nor could itreasonably do so. It is not an acceptable evacuation performance standard.As explained in Notice No. 87-10, with present designs, excessive escapepath distance can be a major impediment to evacuation in a number of situationswhich service experience has shown might occur during an actual emergency.The typical passenger cabin with a single aisle feeds evacuees to pairsof exits, one exit on each side of the cabin (or dual aisles to dual laneexits in typical wide-body cabins). In an actual emergency evacuation,exits at one end of the cabin might be made unusable by fire, smoke, structuraldamage, water submersion, landing gear collapse, or other causes, leavingone or more pairs of usable exits in the remainder of the cabin. This isconmmonly the case in a pool fire accident, where escape time differencesof only a few seconds can be critical. In this situation, the aisle cannotfeed evacuees to a pair of typical floor level exits fast enough to usethe full evacuation capability of the exit pair. The flow rate of the aisleis less than that of the exit pair, making the aisle itself the criticalimpediment which determines the time required for passengers to escapethe airplane. Similarly, dual aisles inadequately feed pairs of exits equippedwith dual-lane evacuation slides. In the situation where one exit in a pair of exits is unusable, as in anevacuation demonstration, the aisle is not the critical impediment to evacuation.In this case the aisle can feed more evacuees to the remaining single exitthan that exit can handle. This results in passenger queues at exits. Thelimited flow rate of the single exit is the impediment which determinesevacuation time. This is the situation which some commenters contend demonstratesthat aisle length has no effect on evacuation time. The FAA acknowledgesthat in evacuation demonstrations, aisle distance may not be as criticala factor in evacuation time as it is in real accident emergencies wherethe aisle may be barely passable. The agency expects that these variableswill be more appropriately accounted for in a performance standard developedby the emergency evacuation advisory committee. <ITAG tagnum="84">Sixty-Foot Determination </ITAG>A number of commenters address the proposed maximum distance between emergencyexits. Several commenters who support the proposed maximum distance betweenexits cite the historical increase in distance between exits as describedin Notice No. 87-10. These commenters agree with the FAA position thatearlier improvements in crashworthiness safety regulations had not focusedon the distance between exits because as a practical matter those distanceswere all within a range generally agreed to be acceptable. Some of thesecommenters suggest that while they think a distance of less than 60 feetcould be justified, they will accept the agency's proposal of 60 feet.Virtually all of the commenters who oppose the proposal state that thereis no basis for the 60-foot maximum distance requirement. Typical of thesecommenters is KLM Royal Dutch Airlines' statement that the 60-foot limitbetween emergency exits was and is an arbitrary figure, not supported byobjective evidence or analysis. KLM states that the 60-foot limit was asubjective opinion expressed by airline cabin crew delegations at the 1985Evacuation Technical Conference in Seattle. KLM and other commenters urgethe FAA to consider other factors besides exit distance: factors such asdual aisles versus single aisles and the number of people who have beenevacuated within the 90-second limit in demonstrations of emergency evacuationprocedures under Part 121. Several commenters assume that the primary justification for the proposed60-foot maximum distance is the tests discussed in Notice No. 87-10 thatwere conducted in the emergency evacuation simulator at the FAA Civil AeromedicalInstitute (CAMI). These commenters specifically dispute the statement madein Notice No. 87-10 that the CAMI tests indicate that a reduction in aisleflow by about one-third could be reasonably expected when the floor isinclined because of, for example, gear collapse. Boeing contends that the FAA selectively used the CAMI data. British Airwaysstates that it disagrees with the conclusions drawn by the FAA on flowrates and has not been able to support it in its reading of the appropriateCAMI report. As the discussion in Notice No. 87-10 clearly indicated, the justificationfor the maximum 60-foot distance between exits is not based on specificempirical research (CAMI's or other), success or failure of evacuationdemonstrations, or anecdotal evidence from actual crash evacuations. However,testing, historical data, analysis, and informed engineering judgment leadthe FAA to conclude that, in the absence of a preferable but presentlyunavailable evacuation performance standard, it would not be prudent toallow distances between emergency exits to increase without providing alimit. As Notice No. 87-10 stated, the issue of maximum distance betweenexits was not addressed in the major crashworthiness regulations in the1960's because even the new wide-bodied transports then being designedhad a maximum exit-to-exit distance ranging from 44 feet to 50 feet. BeforeNotice No. 87-10 was issued, one designer of a derivative version of anexisting airplane proposed exit-to-exit distances substantially exceeding80 feet. This is not acceptable, for reason of safety, in present designs.  For the FAA to determine that 60 feet is the maximum allowable distancebetween exits, the FAA does not have to conclude, as Boeing and many othercommenters seem to assume, that 65 feet or 75 feet or even 85 feet wouldnever under any circumstance be safe. A survivable crash situation in whichupwards of 400 people safely evacuate an airplane with exits more than60 feet apart is certainly possible. But, as other commenters note, therealso have been survivable crashes in which many people died or were injuredbecause some or nearly all of the available exits were unusable. As theFAA has stated on numerous occasions, Part 25 of the FAR contains manyrequirements for built-in redundance because it would be imprudent to allowotherwise. For instance, three-engine transport category airplanes mustbe capable of maintaining safe flight with two engines inoperable, notbecause such flight is desirable but because such capability may be necessary,although rarely, to avoid a catastrophe. Therefore, the decision to establish a maximum distance of 60 feet betweenexits is not a decision based on specific provable data. Rather, in theabsence of a technically acceptable evacuation performance standard, itis a decision based on a balancing of door distance in the total equationof cabin evacuation, that is, how door distance interrelates with aisledesign, exit row lighting, door design, chute inflation time, and otherfactors that go into the cabin evacuation scenario, given our present understandingof the interrelationship of these variables. The FAA finds that the selectionof a maximum 60/foot distance between exits is a prudent and necessarysafety decision consistent with its mandate under the Act and in the absenceof an acceptable performance standard. The agency has placed in the public docket (No. 25191) an explanation ofits analysis and use of the CAMI tests in arriving at the one-third reductionin flow rate mentioned in Notice No. 87-10. These tests were just one factorin the agency's decision. The primary technical basis for the differencebetween the one-third reduction and lesser figures mentioned by commentersis the emphasis given to different parameters in the tests. <ITAG tagnum="84">Economic Costs </ITAG>Many foreign air carriers and Boeing comment that the agency's regulatoryevaluation did not consider potential revenue loss to air carriers becausethey could not increase their passenger capacity. These commenters statethat with 8 emergency exits on the main deck, it would be possible to increasethe seating capacity by 6 to 12 seats while maintaining an interior layoutconsistent with the current layout (a mix of first class, business class,and coach seating; seat pitch and width; and interior service areas suchas closets, galleys, and lavatories). Commenters provide a range of estimatesof the annual value of these seats to air carriers in additonal passengerrevenues. The loss of potential revenue because an air carrier cannot increase itspassenger capacity should not be considered as an impact of this rulemaking.Airlines are currently operating B-747's well below the type certificatedmaximum seating capacities: 440 with 8 exits and 550 with 10 exits on themain deck. This rulemaking does not prohibit an airline from increasingpassenger seating capacity to the maximum allowed. Although allowing deactivationof two of the exit doors could potentially provide air carriers with anopportunity to increase passenger seating capacity without changing thepresent interior layout, it is not a cost directly related to this rulemaking.It is a cost resulting from air carrier management decisions regardingcabin configuration and passenger service. Only foreign air carriers and Boeing raised the issue of increasing passengerseating capacity. The Air Transport Association of America (ATA), whichrepresents U.S. air carriers, states in its comments, ``Few ATA memberairlines are directly affected by the proposed limitations on seat/exitlocations; those which are directly affected have, for reasons of theirown, elected to restrict their future airplane seat/exit configurationsto those which comply with the proposed limits.'' Consequently, this rulemakingdoes not have a substantial impact on U.S. air carriers. The cost figures submitted regarding lost opportunity are inaccurate. Forexample, both Boeing and Korean Airlines assume that the present passengerload factor would apply to the additonal seats gained by deactivation ofthe exit doors; however, if the current passenger load factor is about70 percent on an airplane with 350 seats, the additonal 6-12 seats wouldbe used only when flights were full or nearly full. The additional seatswould more accurately have a load factor of about 10 percent. Such an adjustmentwould significantly reduce the lost opportunity costs of the air carriers.  KLM Royal Dutch Airlines expresses concern that it would be forced to reactivateexit doors in its 8-door B-747's because the public may think the airplaneswith 8 doors on the main deck are unsafe. KLM states that reactivatingthe doors would cost $450,000 per airplane. The FAA is not requiring exitdoors to be reactivated as a condition for continued airworthiness. Asstated previously, the FAA is prohibiting air carriers and manufacturersfrom increasing exit-to-exit distances beyond the limitations in this rulebecause the preferable alternative of a performance standard cannot nowbe exercised. As a result of this rulemaking, airlines may voluntarilyreactivate exit doors in the interest of safety. These costs would be voluntaryand, therefore, are not being considered. The Orient Airlines Association and Korean Airlines state that orders for8-door B-747's have been placed with Boeing. In anticipation of deliveryof these airplanes, the airlines have made plans; to change these plans,as the final rule would require, would involve incurring added costs. TheFAA recognizes that inconvenience may be involved for foreign air carriersthat had placed orders. However, any such lost opportunity costs are notconsidered except as they relate to U.S. trade (discussed in the InternationalTrade Impact Assessment).Boeing submitted cost estimates on fuel costs associated with additionalweight and maintenance cost of the equipment for the two exits. These avoidedcosts were considered in the regulatory evaluation for the proposed rule.The estimated cost impact is $8,300 per B-747 per year operated. This consistsof $6,800 in avoided fuel costs and $1,500 in avoided maintenance expenses.Boeing estimates an annual cost increase of $4,780 per B-747. This consistsof fuel costs of $1,080 and maintenance costs of $3,700. In light of thesefigures, an appropriate range of the potential per airplane annual costincrease of this final rule is from $5,000 to $8,000. In summary, no additional cost/benefit information, which significantlyalters the agency's original assessment of the proposed rule, was submittedin response to Notice No. 87-10. <ITAG tagnum="84">Comments Beyond the Scope of the Proposals </ITAG>The following are a number of comments that while relating to the overallissue of emergency evacuation are beyond the scope of this rulemaking:andbullet; One commenter recommends a separate proposal to resolve the shortcomingsand controversial aspects of simulated emergency evacuation demonstrations.andbullet; British Airways recommends further evacuation testing to establishsupportable, repeatable criteria rather than the subjective opinions expressedin Notice No. 87-10. andbullet; McDonnel Douglas states that the issue is more complex than justdistance alone and that the FAA should consider seat pitch, aisle width,door size, and seat density. andbullet; ALPA states that the FAA should correlate distance to size ofexit. For example, for less than a Type A exit, the maximum distance betweenexits should be 50 feet. andbullet; Several commenters suggest that a flight attendant be requiredat each Type A emergency exit. As stated earlier, this rulemaking focuses on exit-to-exit distances becausean acceptable performance standard has not yet been developed. The FAAmay address related issues, such as emergency evacuation demonstrations,cabin configuration, and location of flight attendants in other actionsand in the deliberations of the emergency evacuation advisory committee.The recommendation by British Airways to conduct further evacuation testingbefore establishing criteria would only allow for a continuing increasein exit-to-exit distances. The FAA will continue to conduct research inemergency evacuations and will use such research results to increase thelikelihood of passenger survival in emergencies. The FAA will also fullysupport and aggressively address the recommendations of the emergency evacuationadvisory committee regarding proposal and adoption of a regulation implementingan evacuation performance standard. <ITAG tagnum="84">Rule Clarifications </ITAG>In addition to minor editorial corrections, the following specific changeshave been made to the proposed rule language that appears in Notice No.87-10. <ITAG tagnum="84">Section 25.2 </ITAG>The phrase, ``involving an increase in distance between any adjacent passengeremergency exits,'' in proposed andSection; 25.2(b) has been replaced withthe words ``for an airplane manufactured after October 16, 1987,''. Thischange makes the language of andSection; 25.2 consistent with andSection; 21.183(f)and clarifies the intent that andSection; 25.2(b) applies only to newly-manufacturedairplanes. <ITAG tagnum="84">Sections 25.807(c)(7) and 121.310(m) </ITAG>One commenter notes that the distance from the furthest upper deck seat(down the staircase) to a main deck exit in the B-747 is greater than 30feet. This commenter recommends that the distance to the exit on the upperdeck should be allowed to meet the rule. Two other commenters emphasizethat both distances (seat-to-exit and exit-to-exit) should be measuredparallel to an airplane's longitudinal centerline axis. The intent is for each distance to be measured along a line parallel toan airplane's longitudinal axis for exits on the same deck and on the sameside of the fuselage. The wording in the rule has been changed to accommodatethese concerns, to clarify that adjacent exits are on the same side ofthe same deck, and to set a limit on exit-to-exit distance only on thesame side of the same deck. In addition, proposed andSection;andSection; 25.807(c)(7) and 121.310(m)(1)have been withdrawn because they are redundant with respect to existingrequirements. (Proposed andSection; 25.807(c)(8) has been renumbered andSection;25.807(c)(7) in this final rule.) Section 25.807(c) currently requiresthat at least one floor level exit per side be located near each end ofthe cabin. Therefore, for a passenger seat located aft of the aft-mostexit or forward of the forward-most exit, the escape path distance willnot be excessive. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Evaluation Summary </ITAG>The regulatory evaluation prepared for this rule considers costs and benefitsassociated with amendments to Parts 21, 25, and 121 to limit passengeremergency escape path distance by establishing a standard that limits thedistance any exit may be from an adjacent exit (no more than 60 feet).The potential impact of this rule falls primarily on U.S. airline operatorsof B-746 airplanes. Although no B-747 airplane currently in use by U.S.air carriers has an exit-to-exit distance greater than 60 feet, a lossof potential revenues could occur if any U.S. air carrier intended to deactivatetwo exit doors from B-747 airplanes thereby increasing exit-to-exit distancesbeyond the standard limit established in this rulemaking. This rule could have a potential impact on operators of Lockheed ModelL-1011-385-3 (L-1011-500) airplanes. These airplanes are no longer in productionand those currently in existence in U.S. air carrier service have beenexcluded from the requirements of this rulemaking. Noncomplying L-1011-500'smay not enter Part 121 operations after October 16, 1987. The L-1011-500'sowned by foreign operators before October 16, 1987, cannot be used by aPart 121 operator unless they are modified to comply with the exit distancerequirements. To modify such an airplane is prohibitively expensive. After reviewing the comments received on Notice No. 87-10, the FAA hasrevised its regulatory evaluation of this final rule. No U.S. air carrierindicated any interest in deactivating emergency exits on its existingB-747 airplanes or ordering new airplanes with exits deactivated even ifregulations allowed such deactivation. The ATA, which represents U.S. aircarriers, stated in its comments, ``Few ATA members are directly affectedby the proposed limitations on seat/exit locations; those which are directlyaffected have, for reasons of their own, elected to restrict their futureairplane seat/exit locations to those which comply with the proposed limits.''Therefore, the FAA concludes that the final rule will not have an effecton the revenues of U.S. air carriers because it incorporates current industrypractice into regulation. There may be some unquantifiable safety or cost effects on firms whichproduce executive configurations of airline transport category airplanes.Some of these newly-manufactured airplanes may be affected by the finalrule. However, since most executive conversions are destined for overseascustomers, any such airplanes which did not meet the final rule could beaccommodated under the deviation authority of Part 21. A benefit of the final rule is that it will ensure that the current levelof safety of B-747 airplanes used in Part 121 operations is maintainedby precluding the deactivation of emergency exits. The rule also will preventany decrease in safety related to emergency exit distances in future airplanedesigns when compared to current airplanes by establishing an exit-to-exitdistance standard. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Determination </ITAG>The Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) of 1980 was enacted by Congress toensure that small entities are not unnecessarily and disproportionatelyburdened by Government regulations. The RFA requires agencies to reviewrules which may have a significant impact on a substantial number of smallentities. This final rule will not have a significant economic impact, positive ornegative, on a substantial number of small entities. This regulation willpotentially impact primarily two types of entities: the manufacturer ofB-747 airplanes and airline operators whose fleets contain B-747 airplanes.The FAA size threshold for determination of a small entity for aircraftmanufacturers is 75 employees; that is, any aircraft manufacturer withmore than 75 employees is considered not to be a small entity. The BoeingCompany, manufacturer of the B-747 airplane, is not a small entity.The FAA size threshold for a determination of a small entity for aircraftoperators is 9 owned aircraft; that is, any operator with more than 9 ownedaircraft is considered not to be a small entity. The FAA threshold fora substantial number of small entities is one third and at least elevenof the small entities must be impacted. There are less than eleven smallentities that own B-747 airplanes.<ITAG tagnum="84">International Trade Impact Assessment</ITAG>This rule is not expected to have any measurable impact on internationaltrade. Although some foreign operators could modify their airplanes bydeactivating exit doors, such an action would not result in any seriouscompetitive disadvantages for U.S. operators doing business abroad. Thisassessment is based on the fact that some foreign operators have alreadydeactivated exit doors and this practice is not expected to continue toany great extent because virtually all of the world fleet operators, onaverage, are flying below their maximum seating capacity. Thus, this ruleis expected to have no measurable impact on the trade opportunities forU.S. operators doing business abroad or for foreign operators doing businessin the United States.<ITAG tagnum="84">Federalism Implications</ITAG>These regulations are issued under the authority of the Federal AviationAct (Act) of 1958, as amended (49 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.).The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effectson the states, on the relationship between the national government andthe states, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities amongthe various levels of government. Thus, in accordance with Executive Order12612, it is determined that this final rule will not have sufficient federalismimplications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion</ITAG>For the reasons discussed in this preamble and based on the findings inthe Regulatory Flexibility Determination and the International Trade ImpactAssessment, the FAA has determined that this regulation is not major underExecutive Order 12291. In addition, it is certified that this rule willnot have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, or a substantialnumber of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory FlexibilityAct. This rule is considered significant under DOT Regulatory Policiesand Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979). A regulatory evaluationof the rule, including a Regulatory Flexibility Determination and TradeImpact Assessment, has been placed in the docket. A copy may be obtainedby contacting the person identified under <T2>``FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT.''</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>14 CFR Part 21Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation Safety, Safety.14 CFR Part 25Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Safety.14 CFR Part 121Air carriers, Air transportation, Aircraft, Airplanes, Airworthiness directivesand standards, Aviation safety, Common carriers, Crashworthiness, Emergencyevacuation, Safety, Transportation.<ITAG tagnum="84">The Rule</ITAG>Accordingly, the Federal Aviation Administration amends Parts 21, 25, and121 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR Parts 21, 25, and 121)as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 21_CERTIFICATION PROCEDURES FOR PRODUCTS AND PARTS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 21 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>49 U.S.C. 1344, 1348(c), 1352, 1354(a), 1355, 1421through 1431, 1502, 1651(b)(2); 42 U.S.C. 1857f-10, 4321 et seq., E.O.11514; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983).</ITAG>2. By amending andSection; 21.183 by adding a new paragraph (f) to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;21.183</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Issue of standard airworthiness certificates for normal, utility,acrobatic, commuter, and transport category aircraft; manned free balloons;and special classes of aircraft.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) <T3>Passenger emergency exit requirements.</T3> Notwithstanding all otherprovisions of this section, each applicant for issuance of a standard airworthinesscertificate for a transport category airplane manufactured after October16, 1987, must show that the airplane meets the requirements of andSection;25.807(c)(7)in effect on July 24, 1989. For the purposes of this paragraph, the dateof manufacture of an airplane is the date the inspection acceptance recordsreflect that the airplane is complete and meets the FAA-approved type designdata.<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 25_AIRWORTHINESS STANDARDS: TRANSPORT CATEGORY AIRPLANES</ITAG>3. The authority citation for Part 25 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1344, 1354(a), 1355, 1421, 1423, 1424, 1425,1428, 1429, 1430; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12,1983); and 49 CFR 1.47(a).</ITAG>4. By amending andSection;25.2 by redesignating the introductory text asparagraph (a), redesignating paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) as paragraphs(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3) and (a)(4), respectively, and adding a new paragraph(b) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;25.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Special retroactive requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) Irrespective of the date of application, each applicant for a supplementaltype certificate (or an amendment to a type certificate) for an airplanemanufactured after October 16, 1987, must show that the airplane meetsthe requirements of andSection;25.807(c)(7) in effect on July 24, 1989.5. By amending andSection;25.807 by adding a new paragraph (c)(7) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;25.807</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Passenger emergency exists.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) * * *(7) For an airplane that is required to have more than one passenger emergencyexit for each side of the fuselage, no passenger emergency exit shall bemore than 60 feet from any adjacent passenger emergency exit on the sameside of the same deck of the fuselage, as measured parallel to the airplane'slongitudinal axis between the nearest exit edges.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 121_CERTIFICATION AND OPERATIONS: DOMESTIC, FLAG, AND SUPPLEMENTALAIR CARRIERS AND COMMERCIAL OPERATORS OF LARGE AIRCRAFT</ITAG>6. The authority citation for Part 121 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1355, 1356, 1357, 1401, 1421 through1430, 1472, 1485, and 1502; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January12, 1983); and 49 CFR 1.47(a).</ITAG>7. By amending andSection;121.310 by adding a new paragraph (m) to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;121.310</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Additional emergency equipment.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(m) Except as provided by andSection;121.627(c) and except for an airplaneused in operations under this part on October 16, 1987, and having an emergencyexit configuration installed and authorized for operation prior to October16, 1987, for an airplane that is required to have more than one passengeremergency exit for each side of the fuselage, no passenger emergency exitshall be more than 60 feet from any adjacent passenger emergency exit onthe same side of the same deck of the fuselage, as measured parallel tothe airplane's longitudinal axis between the nearest exit edges.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on June 16, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert E. Whittington,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14797 Filed 6-22-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>