<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89703-0052 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-03-89.f2.A1051</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7901 et al.] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Exemptions; Drs. Hodgin and Chongsiriwatana, P.A. ProfitSharing Plan, et al.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of Proposed Exemptions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code). <ITAG tagnum="81">Written Comments and Hearing Requests </ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (atleast three copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671,U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC20210. Attention: Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. Theapplications for exemption and the comments received will be availablefor public inspection in the Public Documents Room of Pension and WelfareBenefit Programs, U.S. Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 ConstitutionAvenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. <ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons </ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and shall inform interested persons of their right to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department. The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Drs. Hodgin and Chongsiriwatana, P.A., Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan),Located in Albuquerque, New Mexico</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Application No. D-7901) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a) and (b)(1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedpurchase (the Purchase) from Ulton G. Hodgin, M.D. (Dr. H) and his wife,Jean (collectively, the Applicants), by the individually directed acccunts(the Accounts) in the Plan of Dr. H and Krisna Chongsiriwatana, M.D. (Dr.C), trustees of the Plan and, as such, parties in interest with respectto the Plan, of one limited partnership unit (the Unit) for the greaterof $71,550 or the appraised fair market value on the date of the transactionpayable by $20,576 in cash and by the assumption of the Applicants' requiredcapital contribution of $50,974; provided that the terms and conditionsof the Purchase are at least as favorable to the Accounts as those obtainablein an arm's-length transaction with an unrelated party; and further providedthat, at the time of acquisition, both Accounts' proportionate ownershipshare of the Unit shall not exceed 25% of each Account's assets.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan with four participants and netassets of $319,804 as of November 30, 1988. As of that date, the Accountsheld $195,510.48 on behalf of Dr. H and $105,302.86 on behalf of Dr. C.2. The Applicants currently own the Unit of Oakland 20 (the Partnership),a New Mexico general partnership formed on March 26, 1985. The Partnershipholds one sole asset, a 17.4 acre parcel of vacant land described as Lots1-26, Block 27, Track A, Unit B of North Albuquerque Acres, BernalilloCounty, New Mexico. 3. The Applicants believe that the Unit will appreciate in value and desirethat the Accounts benefit from such appreciation. Accordingly, they nowpropose to sell the Unit to the Accounts at a price which will be eitherthe lower of its acquisition and holding cost or its appraised fair marketvalue. As of March 13, 1989, the Applicants have expended $53,657.50 ascapital contributions to the Partnership and are required to make additionalcontributions of $50,974 over the next four years, totalling an aggregatecost of $104,631.50. 4. The Unit has been appraised by John Blatnik, A.S.A., of John Blatnikandamp; Associates, Inc., a qualified appraiser in Albuquerque, New Mexico,who has represented that less than one percent of his gross annual revenueis derived from parties in interest with respect to the Plan. Mr. Blatnikdetermined that the Unit had a fair market value of $71,550 as of August31, 1988. The Accounts will pay the Applicants $71,550 on the date of thePurchase, of which $20,576 will be in cash and $50,974 will be the assumptionof the Applicants' capital contribution obligation to the Partnership,proportionately 65% by Dr. H's Account and 35% by Dr. C's Account in thePlan. The Accounts will pay no fees or commissions in connection with thePurchase. After consummation of the transaction, the proportionate shareof each Account's ownership of the Unit will not exceed 25% of either Account'sassets. 5. In summary, the Applicants represent that the transaction meets thestatutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) The transactioninvolves less that 25% of each of the Accounts' assets; (b) The Purchaseprice will be the lower of the acquisition and holding costs to the Applicantsof the Unit or the fair market value as established by a qualified independentappraisal; (c) Drs. C and H are the only Plan participants to be affectedby the proposed transaction and they desire that the transaction be consummated;and (d) The Accounts will pay no fees or commissions in connection withthe proposed transaction. Notice to Interested Persons: Because Drs. C and H are the sole participantsin the Plan to be affected by the proposed transaction, the Departmenthas determined that there is no need to distribute the notice of pendencyof the proposed exemption to interested persons. Comments and requestsfor hearing must be received within 30 days of the date of publicationin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>of this notice of proposed exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact: </T2>Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number).<ITAG tagnum="85">Hunter Associates Laboratory, Inc. Profit Based Retirement Plan andTrust (the Plan), located in Reston, Virginia </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7906] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedsale by the Plan to Hunter Associates Laboratory, Inc. (the Employer),the sponsor of the Plan, of (1) the Plan's rights with respect to an unsatisfiedjudgment (the Judgment) against the National Exchange Leasing Company (NELCO),and (2) the Plan's rights as creditor in a loan to Government FinancialServices, Inc. (the GFS Loan), including any preferential payment refundsdue from the Plan with respect thereto (collectively, the Claims); providedthat all terms of such transactions are at least as favorable to the Planas those which the Plan could obtain in an arm's-length transaction withan unrelated party. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Plan is a defined contribution individual-account pension plan with150 participants and net assets of $2,250,707 as of June 30, 1988. TheEmployer is a closely-held Virginia corporation engaged in the operationof a commercial chemical research facility in Reston, Virginia. The trusteesof the Plan (the Trustees) are Philip S. Hunter, Elizabeth Hunter, DavidCraun and Jane Hersey, each of whom is an employee, officer, director,or greater than ten percent shareholder of the Employer. 2. The Plan was adopted by the Employer effective July 1, 1982 and fromthat date until March of 1986 the Trustees engaged by contractual arrangementthe services of Chesapeake Pension Consultants (Chesapeake) and Glen E.Dawson (Dawson) to act as the Plan's administrator and investment advisor.Chesapeake is a Maryland corporation of which Dawson is the president andsole shareholder. The Claims constitute two unsuccessful investments ofPlan assets entered into upon Dawson's advice which the Employer proposesto remedy by purchasing from the Plan and thereby restoring to the Planthe funds invested therein. The Employer is requesting an exemption topermit such purchases as described herein. 3. On January 29, 1985, upon Dawson's advice the Trustees made a loan of$150,000 of Plan funds to NELCO, a Maryland corporation managed and controlledby George Kennedy (Kennedy), whom the Trustees represent to be a businessassociate of Dawson. In exchange for such loan, NELCO executed a promissorynote (the Note) in favor of the Plan providing for monthly interest-onlypayments over two years at an interest rate of sixteen percent per annumand payable in full on January 25, 1987. With respect to the making ofthe loan to NELCO, the Trustees represent as follows: (a) That Dawson knew or should have known that NELCO had little or no networth, was highly illiquid and likely would be unable to repay the loanpursuant to the Note; (b) That Dawson represented to the Trustees that the Note was secured fullyby certain equipment leases as collateral (the Collateral); (c) That Dawson failed to secure the Collateral or perfect a security agreementpertaining to the Note and concealed such failure from the Trustees; and(d) That Dawson and Chesapeake received a fee from an affiliate of NELCOfor the placement of the loan from the Plan to NELCO and concealed suchfee from the Trustees. In accordance with the Note NELCO commenced making monthly interest paymentsto the Plan on February 25, 1985 but made no further payments after August1985. On February 13, 1987, the Trustees filed a lawsuit against NELCOand Kennedy on behalf of the Plan in the U. S. District Court for the Districtof Maryland seeking recovery of the full balance due under the Note. ThatCourt entered the Judgment against NELCO and Kennedy on April 3, 1987,awarding the Plan $158,750 plus interest at the rate of fourteen percentper annum from January 25, 1987 until paid, as well as reasonable costsand attorneys' fees. Thereafter, Kennedy filed a petition for bankruptcyin the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Maryland. The Judgmentremains totally unsatisfied. The Trustees represent that although the Plan has a lien on certain realproperty belonging to Kennedy, it is not likely that it will be sufficientto satisfy the Judgment. The Employer proposes to acquire the Judgmentfrom the Plan by paying the Plan cash in the amount due under the Judgment.The amount proposed by the Employer to be paid to the Plan for the Judgmentis $168,750, representing the Judgment's principal amount of $158,750 plus$10,000 of the interest which the Judgment awards on the principal amountfrom January 25, 1987 until paid. The Employer represents that if any amountsare recovered pursuant to the Judgment in excess of $168,750, such additionalamounts will be applied to litigation expenses and the balance paid tothe Plan. 4. In June of 1984, upon Dawson's advice the Trustees invested Plan fundsin the GFS Loan, a loan in the principal amount of $100,000 to GovernmentFinancial Services, Inc. (GFS), a Maryland corporation in which Dawsonwas an initial investor. The GFS Loan was to be repaid over five yearswith interest at sixteen percent per annum. GFS commenced payment to thePlan in accordance with the GFS Loan on August 18, 1984. However, GFS madeno further payments after September 1987, leaving an outstanding GFS Loanbalance of $44,164.09.Thereafter, in December of 1987, GFS filed a petition for bankruptcy inthe U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Maryland. The Trustees havecaused to be filed with the bankruptcy court on behalf of the Plan a proofof claim against the bankrupt estate of GFS for the outstandlng GFS Loanbalance of $44,164.09. Subsequently, the Trustees represent that they wereadvised by counsel to the trustee of the bankrupt estate that the finaltwo payments made by GFS to the Plan, in the total amount of $14,716.36,may constitute preferential transfers under section 547 of the U.S. BankruptcyCode and, therefore, are possibly voidable by the bankruptcy trustee andsubject to refund by the Plan.\1\<NOTE/> The Employer proposes to acquire the Plan's claim againstGFS arising from the GFS Loan by paying the Plan cash in the amount ofits proof of claim filed in the bankruptcy court, $44,164.09, plus anyamounts returned by the Plan to the bankruptcy trustee as preferentialtransfers.  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The Employer represents that as of February 27, 1989 therehad been no attempt by the bankruptcy trustee to have such monies returnedto the bankrupt's estate as a preferential transfer and that the Employerdid not expect such an attempt to be made.The Employer represents that in the event, which the Employer representsto be unlikely, that any monies are recovered from Dawson or Chesapeakepursuant to the Claims in excess of the amounts paid by the Employer tothe Plan for the Claims, such additional amounts will be applied to litigationexpenses and the balance paid to the Plan. 5. Violations of various provisions of Title I of the Act and breachesof fiduciary duties thereunder by Dawson and Chesapeake were alleged bythe Department in a lawsuit filed by the Department (the Lawsuit) againstDawson and Chesapeake (the Defendants) in the U.S. District court for theDistrict of Maryland (Civil Action No. JFM-86-2536). The Lawsuit was filedon behalf of 46 pension plans (the Plaintiff Plans), including the Plans,for which the Defendants had acted as fiduciaries. By the terms of a ConsentOrder and Final Judgment (the Order) entered November 7, 1988, as resolutionof the Lawsuit, the Defendants were ordered to pay a total of $70,000 tothe Plaintiff Plans. Of that amount, the Plan received $2,089.04 as itspro rata share. The Department agreed to the terms of the Order on thebasis of affidavits submitted by Dawson and Chesapeake disclosing theirfinancial conditions and the Order includes the Defendants' agreement topay to the Plaintiff Plans on a pro rata basis an amount equal to the valueof any assets or income not disclosed in such affidavits upon a showingthat such affidavits contained material misrepresentations. The Employerrepresents that the amount awarded to and received by the Plan under theOrder does not reduce the amounts which the Employer will pay the Planfor the Claims. 6. The Trustees represent that it is in the best interests of the participantsand beneficiaries of the Plan for the Employer to make the Plan whole forthe losses resulting from Dawson's investment advice. After payment ofthe Claims by the Employer, if the requested exemption is granted, theTrustees will directly reimburse each participant account in the Plan inthe amount of loss charged to each account as a result of the unsatisfiedClaims. The Trustees represent that the Employer's proposal ensures thatthe Claims will be transferred at no less than their fair market value,due to the fixed nature of the Claims and the financial condition of theobligors under the Claims. 7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction satisfiesthe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act for the following reasons: (1)The Plan will recover losses which do not appear likely to be recoveredin the absence of the proposed transaction; (2) The proposed transactionwill prevent the Plan from sustaining additional losses from further nonpaymentof the monies due under the Claims; and (3) The proposed transaction willtransfer the Claims at no less than their market value. For Further Information Contact: Ronald Willett of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. Located in San Francisco, California </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7933] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedsale for cash by the Crocker Real Estate Loan Fund (CRELF), a collectiveinvestment fund of qualified employee benefit plan assets, of certain firstmortgage notes (the Notes) to Wells Fargo andamp; Company (Wells Fargo),the fiduciary and therefore a party in interest with respect to CRELF,or to a subsidiary of Wells Fargo, provided that the price paid be no lessthan the fair market value of the Notes as of the date of sale as determinedby an independent and qualified appraiser. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., is the principal subsidiary of Wells Fargo.On May 30, 1986, Wells Fargo acquired Crocker National Corporation andits subsidiary corporations, including its principal subsidiary, CrockerNational Bank. Wells Fargo Bank was merged into Crocker National Bank onthat date. As a result of the acquisition and merger, Wells Fargo Bankbecame the trustee of the Crocker Investment Funds for Employee BenefitTrusts, a Crocker National Bank-sponsored collective investment fund thatoffers several investment funds, including CRELF, which consists primarilyof mortgage investments in income-producing properties. 2. Prior to the merger of Crocker National Bank and Wells Fargo Bank onMay 30, 1986, Crocker National Bank decided to liquidate CRELF. The investmentswere frozen and an orderly disposition of assets was begun. After the merger,Wells Fargo Bank continued the ongoing management and liquidation of CRELF.3. The Notes, consisting of a note secured by a first mortgage on a restaurantbuilding in San Marcos, Texas, and a note secured by a first mortgage ona shopping center in Springfield, Illinois, are the only remaining assetsin CRELF. A package of CRELF loans was sold to Drexel Burnham Lambert,Inc. (DBL) on May 15, 1986, on the condition that the buyer could rejectindividual mortgage subsequently found to be below standard. A second packageof CRELF loans was sold to DBL on January 1, 1987 on the same terms. BothNotes were subsequently rejected by DBL and returned to Wells Fargo Bank.4. The inability to complete the liquidation of CRELF has created hardshipsfor some of the participating plans. During the process of liquidationsome participating plans have terminated, and portions of the assets ofthe terminated plans have continued to be held in CRELF. Other participatingplans have requested liquidation of assets invested in CRELF for variousreasons, such as changes in investment strategies, and CRELF has not beenable to comply with such requests. 5. Wells Fargo Bank desires to complete the liquidation of CRELF as soonas practicable. Consistent with its fiduciary obligations under ERISA,Wells Fargo Bank desires to sell the Notes for a price which will maximizethe return to CRELF. However, there is no assurance that the Notes canbe disposed of for fair market value by sale to a third party purchaseror prepayment by the borrower. It is therefore proposed that Wells Fargopurchase the Notes for the current fair market value in cash as determinedby an independent appraiser. 6. The Notes continue to be marketed, and Wells Fargo Bank has offeredto discount the notes to the borrowers. The borrower for the Springfield,Illinois property did not respond to the offer. If a third party purchasermakes a firm offer to purchase that note at or above the purchase priceproposed by Wells Fargo, Wells Fargo Bank will so dispose of the assetrather than by sale to Wells Fargo. The borrower for the San Marcos, Texas property accepted the offer to repurchasethe note. If the borrower is able to tender payment, Wells Fargo Bank willsell the note to him rather than to Wells Fargo. If the borrower is unableto repurchase the note and no other purchaser comes forward, it is proposedthat the note be sold to Wells Fargo. 7. The applicant appointed The Karsten Companies (Karsten) to serve asthe independent fiduciary with regard to the proposed sale. Founded in1969, Karsten concentrates on providing real estate sales and developmentadvisory assistance to major corporations, financial institutions, andpublic institutions, and has regularly asssumed major responsibilitieswith respect to the management and investment of retirement plan assets.Karsten is not affiliated with Wells Fargo in any way. On November 15, 1988, Karsten determined the fair market value of the loanon the Illinois property to be $1,310,482, and the fair market value ofthe loan on the Texas property to be $183,340, for a total of $1,493,822for the two Notes. 8. Karsten identified four alternative strategies for dealing with thenotes: (a) Discount the Notes to the borrower in order to induce prepaymentin an amount equal to or more than Karsten's estimate of net realizablevalue; (b) sell the Notes to Wells Fargo for an all cash price equal toor greater than Karsten's estimate of net realizable value; (c) sell theNotes to an unrelated third party for an all cash price equal to or greaterthan Karsten's estimate of net realizable value; or (d) hold the Notesfor long term investment yield. Karsten recommended alternative (a) asthe optimal strategy since it would produce the highest recovery if itcould be successfully negotiated. If alternative (a) could not be negotiated,Karsten recommended alternative (b) as the most advantageous strategy andtherefore in the best interests of CRELF participants. In accordance withKarsten's recommendation, Wells Fargo has requested an exemption to purchasethe Notes. 9. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willmeet the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) theNotes will be sold for their fair market value as of the date of sale asdetermined by an independent and qualified appraiser; (b) the participatingplans will not be liable for any fees, commissions, or taxes in connectionwith the proposed transaction; (c) the proposed transaction is a one-timesale for cash, which can be easily verified; (d) the proposed transactionwill permit Wells Fargo Bank to complete the liquidation of CRELF, thuspermitting participating employee benefit plans which are terminating towind up their affairs; and (e) Karsten, acting as independent fiduciarywith respect to the sale, has determined that the transaction is protectiveof the rights and in the best interest of the participating plans and theirparticipants. For Further Information Contact: Joseph L. Roberts III of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Drs. Elliott, Halseth and Walker, P.C. Money Purchase Pension Plan(the Pension Plan) and Drs. Elliott, Halseth and Walker, P.C. Profit SharingPlan for William L. Halseth, M.D. (the PS Plan; collectively, the Plans),located in Denver, Colorado  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application Nos. D-7961 and D-7962] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedpurchase from the Plans of two promissory notes by William L. Halseth,M.D. (Dr. Halseth), a party in interest with respect to the Plans, providedthat all terms of such transaction are at least as favorable to the Plansas those which the Plans could obtain in an arm's-length transaction withan unrelated party. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Plans are defined contribution plans sponsored by Drs. Elliott,Halseth and Walker, P.C. (the Employer), a closely-held Colorado professionalcorporation engaged in the practice of medicine in Denver, Colorado. ThePension Plan is an individual account plan with six participants and totalassets of $4,253,408 as of October 31, 1988. The Pension Plan providesfor individual participant direction of the investments of the participantaccounts. As of October 31, 1988 Dr. Halseth's account (the Account) inthe Pension Plan had total assets of $1,149,823.59. The trustees of thePension Plan are Dr. Halseth, Donald P. Elliott, M.D. and E. Lance Walker,M.D. each of whom is an employee, officer and director of the Employer,an owner of one third of the outstanding stock of the Employer and a participantin the Pension Plan. Dr. Halseth is the only participant and trustee ofthe PS Plan, which had total assets of $105,917.63 as of October 31, 1988.At Dr. Halseth's direction in 1987, the Account and the PS Plan each investedin promissory notes (the Notes) with the Imperial Mortgage Company (Imperial)of Englewood, Colorado. Dr. Halseth represents that the Notes have provento be unfavorable investments and is requesting an exemption to permithim to purchase them from the Plans under the circumstances described herein.2. Dr. Halseth represents that he made the investments in the Notes onbehalf of the Account and the PS Plan in good faith pursuant to an offeringcircular (the Offering) issued by Imperial, a Colorado corporation engagedin the provision of short-term loan and other credit services in connectionwith the real estate brokerage services of Crown Realty Company (Crown),the parent corporation of Imperial. Dr. Halseth represents that he andthe Plans are independent of and unrelated to Imperial, except as investorsin the Notes. The Offering provided that the promissory notes issued thereunderby Imperial were to be unsecured obligations of Imperial which were notto be obligations of or guaranteed by Crown. The Notes constitute the Plans' investments of a total of $284,000 in promissorynotes issued pursuant to the Offering as follows: Dr. Halseth directedthe investment by the Account in a promissory note executed by Imperialin the principal amount of $200,000 on January 21, 1987. On March 10, 1987,Dr. Halseth directed the investment by the PS Plan in a promissory noteexecuted by Imperial in the principal amount of $84,000. The Plans paidcash to Imperial in exchange for the Notes. Each of the Notes providedfor interest at the rate of ten percent per annum payable in full withprincipal six months from date of execution. 3. Dr. Halseth represents that Imperial defaulted on the Notes upon theirmaturities and that Imperial remains in default of its obligations underboth Notes. To collect the amounts due the Account and the PS Plan underthe Notes, the Trustees filed a civil lawsuit on behalf of the PS Planand the Account in the state district court for the County of Arapahoein Colorado (Civil Action No. 87CV1953, Division No. 3). That court entereda judgment order (the Judgment) against Imperial on April 12, 1988 in favorof the Plans for the amounts due under the Notes. The Employer representsthat court costs, attorneys' fees and other expenses of obtaining the Judgmentwere borne by the Employer. Dr. Halseth represents that Imperial has paidthe Plans no amount pursuant to the Judgment, that the Judgment remainsunsatisfied and that the obligations under the Notes remain outstanding.On May 16, 1988 Imperial filed in Federal district court in Denver, Coloradoa petition in bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the U.S. Code. Dr. Halsethrepresents that the sole asset of Imperial at the time of the bankruptcypetition was a promissory note executed in favor of Imperial by Van Schaakand Company (Van Shaak), a Colorado corporation. However, on January 6,1989, prior to any payment of the Judgment by the bankruptcy trust, VanShaak filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Code. Accordingly,Dr. Halseth maintains that there are no assets of Imperial with which topay the claims of Imperial's creditors, including the Plans. In order toenable the Account and the PS Plan to recoup their investments in the Notes,Dr. Halseth proposes to purchase the Notes for cash in the amount of theNotes' face values, consisting of the principal amount paid for each Noteand the interest on such principal at the rate of ten percent per annumfor six months as provided by each Note. 4. Dr. Halseth represents that because of the bankruptcies of Imperialand Van Shaak and the apparent lack of any assets from which the bankruptcytrustees might provide for payment of the Notes, the market values of theNotes are less than the Notes' original purchase prices. Dr. Halseth representsthat the Trustees have determined that under prevailing circumstances theNotes cannot be negotiated or otherwise disposed of and that Dr. Halsethconstitutes the only willing buyer of the Notes. Dr. Halseth maintainsthat his proposed purchase of the Notes at their face values constitutesthe only means available to the Plans to recover the investments in theNotes and the interest provided for in the Notes. Dr. Halseth emphasizesthat the Notes were purchased at his direction exclusively for his segregatedaccount in the Pension Plan and for his sole benefit as the sole participantin the PS Plan and that, accordingly, Dr. Halseth is the sole participantin the Plans to be affected by the Notes and their proposed purchase byDr. Halseth. Dr. Halseth represents that the Plans will pay no fees orcommissions in connection with the proposed transaction and that the termsof the sale which he proposes are more favorable to the Plans than thePlans could obtain in an arm's-length transaction with an unrelated party.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the criteria of section 408(a)of the Act are satisfied in the proposed transaction for the followingreasons: (1) The Plans will receive cash for the Notes in the amount oftheir face values, which is no less than their fair market values; (2)The proposed transaction will enable the Plans to recoup their investmentsin the Notes, which have produced no income for the Plans and which havemarket values below the amount of the Plans' initial investments in theNotes; (3) The Plans will pay no fees, commissions or other expenses inconnection with the proposed sale of the Notes; and (4) Dr. Halseth, whodesires that the proposed transaction be consummated, is the only participantin the Plans to be affected by the proposed transaction. Notice To Interested Persons: Because Dr. Halseth is the sole participantin the PS Plan and the only participant in the Pension Plan to be affectedby the proposed transaction, it has been determined that there is no needto distribute the notice of pendency to interested persons. Comments andrequests for a hearing must be received by the Department within 30 daysof publication of this notice of proposed exemption. For Further Information Contact: Ronald Willett of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Hawaii Carpenters Annuity Fund (the Annuity Fund) and Hawaii CarpentersFinancial Security Fund (the FS Fund) Located in Honolulu, Hawaii</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application Nos. D-8048 and D-8049]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption</ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and in accordance with the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemptionis granted the restrictions of section 406(b)(2) of the Act shall not applyto the proposed transfer of assets from the Annuity Fund to the FS Fund,provided each of the assets will be valued at its fair market value atthe time of the transfer.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The applicants have represented that the two funds arenot parties in interest with respect to one another within the meaningof section 3(14) of the Act. Accordingly, no relief is being provided hereinfrom the restrictions of section 406(a) of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. The Annuity Fund and the FS Fund are substantially identical definedcontribution plans formed pursuant to collective bargaining agreementsentered into between the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners ofAmerica, Local 745, AFL-CIO, the General Contractors Labor Association,and the Building Industry Labor Association (collectively, the BargainingParties). The Annuity Fund, which was formed in 1978, has approximately4,435 participants. The FS Fund has approximately 3,390 participants. Theparticipants and beneficiaries of the Annuity Fund and the FS Fund aresubstantially the same persons, but are not identical due to normal turnover.2. The Annuity Fund and the FS Fund are each governed by a board of trusteesconsisting of five trustees appointed by contributing employers and fivetrustees appointed by the union. Six of the ten individuals appointed astrustees of each fund have also been appointed as trustees of the otherfund.3. As a part of collective bargaining negotiations, the Bargaining Partiesentered into a letter agreement dated November 30, 1987. Among other things,the letter agreement called for: 1) The formation of the FS Fund (whichwas accomplished March 1, 1988); and 2) the termination of the AnnuityFund by no later than March 1, 1990. These transactions are being undertakenin order to implement a supplemental benefit to be provided by the HawaiiCarpenters Pension Fund (a defined benefit plan formed pursuant to collectivebargaining agreements entered into between the Bargaining Parties). Theamount of the supplemental benefit will depend in part on the participant'saccount balance in the FS Fund (other than any portions thereof derivedfrom rollover contributions, including rollover contributions from theAnnuity Fund).4. Upon the termination of the Annuity Fund, it is anticipated that a largenumber of the Annuity Fund participants will elect to rollover their AnnuityFund account balances into the FS Fund. In general, these rollovers willbe accomplished through direct plan-to-plan transfers of assets from theAnnuity Fund to the FS Fund. The assets to be transferred will consistof cash, publicly traded securities, and/or other assets held by the AnnuityFund as of the date of its termination. For each participant who electsto rollover his account, the value of the assets transferred to the FSFund will be equal to the value of his account in the Annuity Fund.5. It is anticipated that the transfer of assets from the Annuity Fundto the FS Fund will be made upon or shortly after the termination of theAnnuity Fund. For purposes of the transfer, each of the assets will bedeemed to have a value equal to the fair market value thereof determinedupon the termination of the Annuity Fund (i.e., cash will be valued atits face value, publicly traded securities will be valued based on tradingprices on applicable security exchanges, and other assets will be appraised).6. The trustees of the two funds have requested the proposed exemptionto accommodate the participants of both funds. The applicants representthat the proposed exemption to permit the direct transfer of assets fromthe Annuity Fund to the FS Fund will facilitate the goal of participantsin the Annuity Fund who desire to rollover their account balances to theFS Fund.7. In summary, the applicants represent that the proposed transaction meetsthe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: 1) The transaction involvesa one-time transfer of assets; 2) the assets to be transferred will bevalued at their fair market value at the time of the transfer; and 3) thetransaction will facilitate the desired rollover of assets by the participantsin the Annuity Fund upon its termination to their accounts in the FS Fund.For further information contact: Gary Lefkowitz of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Electrical Workers Local Union No. 103, I.B.E.W., Health and Welfare[the Welfare Fund), Deferred Income Fund (the Deferred Income Fund), PensionFund (the Pension Fund), and Holiday, Vacation and Supplementary UnemploymentBenefits Fund (the Vacation and SUB Fund; collectively, the Funds), Locatedin Boston, Massachusetts </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application Nos. D-7893 thru D-7896] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and in accordance with the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemptionis granted the restrictions of section 406(b)(2) of the Act shall not applyto the proposed leasing of certain office space, and the provision of incidentalservices and goods relating to such office space, to the Funds by the Local103, I.B.E.W., Building Corporation (the Building Corporation), a corporationwhich is wholly-owned by the Local Union No. 103 of the International Brotherhoodof Electrical Workers, AFL-CIO (the Union), a party in interest with respectto the Funds, provided that the terms of the transactions are at leastas favorable to the Funds as the terms which the Funds could obtain inarm's-length transactions with an unrelated party. Effective Date: If the proposed exemption is granted, the exemption willbe effective July 14, 1988. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Funds are multiemployer trusts created pursuant to section 302(c)of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, as amended, which providehealth, pension, vacation, holiday, unemployment and related benefits.As of November 21, 1988, the Welfare Fund had 2775 participants, the DeferredIncome Fund had 3342 participants, the Pension Fund had 3385 participants,and the Vacation and SUB Fund had 2775 participants. The Funds were createdby various collective bargaining agreements with the Union which requirecontributions to the Funds by participating employers. 2. Each of the Funds is administered by six trustees (the Trustees), threeof whom are appointed by the Union (the Union Trustees) and three of whomare appointed by an employers' association known as the Electrical ContractorsAssociation of Greater Boston, Inc., Boston Chapter, National ElectricalContractors Association (the Association). The Union Trustees are WilliamWalker, president of the Union, Russell Sheehan, business manager of theUnion, and John O'Donnell, treasurer of the Union. The Union Trustees arealso the directors of the Building Corporation. The Trustees appointedby the Association are David MacKay, John Penney and Alfred Rotman (theEmployer Trustees). The Employer Trustees are not affiliated with eitherthe Union or the Building Corporation. 3. The Welfare Fund currently leases office space at 10 High Street, Boston,Massachusetts, from KNH Realty Trust, an unrelated party, and charges theother Funds their proportionate shares of the expenses for their use ofsuch space. The Union has its business offices and other facilities in a building (theBuilding) located at 256 Freeport Street, Dorchester, Massachusetts. TheBuilding is owned by the Building Corporation. The first floor of the Buildingis occupied by the Union and includes Union offices and a Union membermeeting hall. Union members are also participants in the Funds. 4. The Trustees have been negotiating a proposal by the Union to leasethe second floor of the Building to the Funds. The Trustees intend to enterinto a lease agreement (the Lease) with the Building Corporation for suchspace. The applicant states that the Lease would constitute the paymentby a plan for office space to a party in interest, within the meaning ofsection 408(b)(2) of the Act. The applicant states further that the Leasewould otherwise meet the requirements of 29 CFR 2550.408b-2, relating tosection 408(b)(2), and be statutorily exempt from the prohibitions of section406(a) of the Act, but for the participation by the Union Trustees in thedecision to have the Funds engage in the proposed transaction.\3\<NOTE/> The Lease and the Declaration of Trust for the Funds statethat the Trustees cannot enter into the Lease without the discussion, considerationand vote of the Union Trustees, all of whom are officers of the Union.However, if the Union Trustees exercise their fiduciary authority to effectuatethe Lease, the transaction may constitute a violation of section 406(b)(2)of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The Department expresses no opinion as to whether theLease constitutes the payment by a plan for office space to a party ininterest within the meaning of section 408(b)(2) of the Act or whetherthe Lease is statutorily exempt from the prohibitions of section 406(a)of the Act by virtue of section 408(b)(2) of the Act. The Trustees are requesting an exemption, effective July 14, 1988 (forreasons discussed below), to permit the Funds to lease office space inthe Building, in accordance with the terms of the Lease, and to allow theprovision of incidental services and goods relating to the Lease by theBuilding Corporation or the Union. 5. The Lease has an initial term of five years with three extension terms,each one for an additional five year period. During the initial term, theannual rent will be fixed at $15 per square foot. During the first extensionterm, the annual rent will be fixed at $18 per square foot, which representsa compound growth rate of 3.7 percent. During the third and fourth extensionterms, the annual rent will be set at 95% of the   prevailing fair marketrent for such office space, as established by an independent appraiser,for the first month of that extended term. All rents for each of the termswill be paid by the Funds in equal monthly installments. In addition, the Lease requires the Funds to pay a proportional part ofany increase in the real estate tax liability in excess of the tax imposedon the Building as reassessed after completion of the improvements madeto the space which the Funds will lease. The Building Corporation willpay all utilities under the Lease. However, the Funds will be responsiblefor telephone expenses.The Funds may individually or jointly terminate the Lease upon sixty daysnotice to the Building Corporation, or a shorter time which would be consideredreasonable under the circumstances, without penalty. The Lease states thatno rent, fees, assessments or penalties may be charged to the Funds onaccount of such early termination. Finally, the Lease has a strict tenantsecurity clause which insures the confidentiality of the Funds' records.6. The Trustees have employed the services of the Boston Valuation Group,Inc. (the Group), an independent, qualified real estate appraisal and consultingfirm in Weymouth, Massachusetts, to represent the Funds with respect tothe Lease. On July 14, 1988, the Trustees signed an agreement with theGroup (the Agreement) under which the Group agreed to serve as a fiduciaryof the Funds within the meaning of section 3(21) of the Act. The Grouprepresents that it is an experienced and knowledgeable fiduciary underthe Act, which is wholly independent of and unrelated to the Building Corporation,the Union, and the Trustees. Under the Agreement, the Group agreed to perform the following services:(i) To aid in the negotiation by the Funds with the Union regarding theterms of the Lease, (ii) to render an independent evaluation and opinionof such terms and determine whether the Lease would be in the best interestsof the Funds, (iii) to appraise the fair market rental value of the Funds'proposed office space in the Building, and (iv) to monitor the terms andconditions of the Lease over the duration of the Lease and provide theTrustees with annual reports as to whether any changes in market conditionsor other circumstances has occurred which would render the Lease no longerin the best interests of the Funds. 7. The applicant states that the Group actively participated in the negotiationof the terms of the Lease on behalf of the Funds by attending various conferenceswith the Union, along with the Funds' Administrator, James L. McCoy, duringJuly and August 1988. During such conferences, the parties discussed variousmatters concerning the Funds' office needs in connection with the proposedspace in the Building. The Group was supplied with information on thesematters, including copies of the Funds' current leases and the architect'splans for the second floor of the Building. The Union and the Group reached an agreement concerning the terms of theLease in November 1988, and such terms were agreed to by the Trustees.8. The proposed office space in the Building was appraised on November21, 1988 by Edward Wadsworth, M.A.I. (Mr. Wadsworth), an independent, qualifiedreal estate appraiser in Weymouth, Massachusetts. Mr. Wadsworth is alsopresident of the Group. Mr. Wadsworth states that the fair market rentalvalue of the Funds' proposed space, taking into consideration the proposedimprovements to such space, would be at least $15.00 per square foot. Mr.Wadsworth's appraisal is based on an analysis of similar properties inthe greater Boston area. In addition, Mr. Wadsworth updated his appraisal of the proposed spaceon April 12, 1989. Mr. Wadsworth states that based on current lease ratesfor similar space, the fair market rental value of the Funds' proposedspace would be approximately $16.00 per square foot, as of April 1, 1989.9. By letter dated November 28, 1988, Mr. Wadsworth analyzed the termsof the Lease as a representative of the Group under the Agreement. Mr.Wadsworth represents that the proposed transactions would be in the bestinterests of the participants and beneficiaries of the Funds. Mr. Wadsworthstates that the proposed rental rate is a more advantageous rate than theFunds' current rental and at least as favorable a rate to the Funds asother comparable rentals in the greater Boston area. In addition, Mr. Wadsworthstates that the other terms of the Lease are standard in the industry,as favorable as the Funds' current rental, and at least as favorable asleases for comparable rentals in the area. Mr. Wadsworth states further that the Lease provides some specific provisionsdesigned to be beneficial to the Funds, such as an early termination clausewithout penalty and a strict tenant security clause to ensure the confidentialityof the Funds' records. Mr. Wadsworth notes that the location of the proposedoffice space will be advantageous for the Funds since the Building is locatedclose to major highways. The Funds' participants, most of whom are Unionmembers, are familiar with the location and can be expected to be transactingbusiness at the Building on a regular basis. The proposed office spacewill centralize into one area most of the services provided to the participantsand beneficiaries of the Funds. Mr. Wadsworth also notes that the proposedoffice space will have sufficient free parking adjacent to the Buildingfor participants and beneficiaries transacting business with the Funds,which is a distinct advantage over the Funds' current rental and over comparablerentals in the Boston area.10. The Group represents that it will monitor the Lease on behalf of theFunds throughout its duration and will decide whether the Funds shouldrenew the Lease for each of the five-year extension periods. The Groupwill also monitor the provision of incidental services and goods to theFunds by the Union and the Building Corporation to ensure that such transactionsare necessary for the Fund's operations and are at least as favorable tothe Funds as arm's length transactions between unrelated parties.11. In summary, the applicant represents that the statutory criteria ofsection 408(a) of the Act are satisfied with respect to the Lease because:(a) The Group, acting as independent fiduciary on behalf of the Funds,has participated in the negotiations of the terms of Lease and has determinedthat the proposed transactions will be in the best interests of the participantsand beneficiaries of the Funds; (b) the proposed office space for the Fundshas been appraised by an independent, qualified appraiser, who has determinedthat the proposed rental rate for such space will be at least as favorablea rate as comparable facilities in the area; and (c) the interests of theFunds under the Lease will be represented by the Group, an experiencedindependent fiduciary, who will monitor the terms and conditions of theLease throughout its duration and will provide periodic reports to theTrustees, at least annually, regarding any changes in market conditionsor other circumstances which may effect the best interests of the Funds.For further information contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information</ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 28th day of June 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Ivan Strasfeld,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Exemption Determinations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-15606 Filed 6-30-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>