<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89106-0002 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-06-89.f2.A1001</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 563</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 88-1524]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Purchase and Sale of Freddie Mac Preferred Stock by Certain InsuredInstitutions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: December 29, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (``Board''), as operatinghead of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (``FSLIC''),is adopting a final regulation addressing certain aspects of the purchaseand sale of preferred stock of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation(``Freddie Mac'') held by institutions insured by the FSLIC (``insuredinstitutions''). On July 20, 1988 the Board issued a temporary regulationthat placed certain restrictions on actions that insured institutions thatdid not currently meet their minimum or fully phased-in regulatory capitalrequirements may take regarding such stock. This temporary regulation expireson December 31, 1988.Today, the Board is adopting a final rule concerning the purchase and saleof Freddie Mac stock by insured institutions that fail to meet either theirminimum or fully phased-in regulatory capital requirements. The final regulationprovides that any insured institution failing to meet its minimum regulatorycapital requirement may not buy or sell Freddie Mac preferred stock withoutobtaining prior approval from its Principal Supervisory Agent (``PSA'')or his designee, subject to the concurrence of the Office Regulatory Activities(``ORA''). It also sets general factors to be contained in an institution'swritten application for approval that the PSA will consider in determiningwhether to grant such approval. Additionally, the final regulation restrictsany insured institution not meeting its fully phased-in capital requirementsfrom taking certain actions as a result of any purchase or sale of FreddieMac stock that might adversely affect its ability to meet its fully phased-incapital requirement, without first receiving prior approval from its PSA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>January 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Deborah Dakin, Regulatory Counsel,(202) 377-6445; or Richard A. Katz, Staff Attorney, (202) 377-7037, Regulationsand Legislation Division, Office of General Counsel, Federal Home LoanBank Board, 1700 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20552; Michael P. Scott,Policy Analyst (202) 331-4590, Office of Regulatory Activities, 801 17thStreet, NW., Washington, DC 20552.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On July 13, 1988, the Board of Directorsof Freddie Mac voted in principle to permit holders of the preferred stockof Freddie Mac to sell such stock to the general public as of January 1,1989. Before this time, pursuant to a previous resolution creating theclass of preferred stock covered by the July 13 action, such stock couldonly be held by stockholders of a Federal Home Loan Bank in connectionwith the collateral for advances, the FSLIC in connection with the receivershipor insolvency of a holder of the preferred stock, a pre-approved marketmaker or nominee thereof, or a specialist on any national securities exchange.Additionally, single holders of such preferred stock were limited in themaximum amount of shares each could hold to 150,000, subject to certaingrandfathering provisions. Freddie Mac's Board of Directors also actedon July 13, 1988, to increase the maximum number of shares that any singleholder could own from 150,000 to 600,000 by January 1, 1989. The FreddieMac Board of Directors issued a resolution on August 30, 1988, ratifyingits decision of July 13, 1988.Currently, Freddie Mac preferred stock is primarily held by the approximately3,000 insured institutions that own stock in the Federal Home Loan Banks.In general, the Board believes that any decision to purchase or sell FreddieMac stock both before and after January 1, 1989, is best left to the soundbusiness judgment of insured institutions themselves. However, on July22, 1988 the Board adopted a temporary regulation affecting the purchaseand sale of, and use of proceeds from the sale of, Freddie Mac stock bycertain insured institutions based upon two specific concerns.First, the Board believes that institutions not currently meeting theirminimum regulatory capital requirements as set forth in 12 CFR 563.13 and12 CFR 563.14 require closer supervision as a result of their impairedcapital position. The volatility accompanying the removal of the restrictionson ownership and transferability of Freddie Mac preferred stock may particularlyaffect those insured institutions.Second, the Board believes that any gains from the sale of Freddie Macstock should generally be applied to improve the capital position of insuredinstitutions not yet meeting their fully phased-in capital requirementsas set forth in 12 CFR 563.13 and 12 CFR 563.14. As the Board has indicatedin the past, it is important that insured institutions raise their capitallevels as rapidly as possible in order to provide adequate protection toinsured institutions, their depositors, and the FSLIC fund. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 88-1342, 53 FR 51800, 51814 (December 23, 1988);Board Res. No. 88-583, 53 FR 27814 (July 22, 1988); Board Res. No. 87-661,52 FR 23845 (June 25, 1987); Board Res. No. 86-857, 51 FR 33571-73 (September22, 1986); Board Res. No. 86-426, 51 FR 16550, 16552 (May 5, 1986).To address these specific concerns without impairing the ability of themajority of insured institutions who are meeting their capital requirements,the Board determined to adopt a temporary rule affecting only institutionsnot meeting their capital requirements. The temporary rule was intendedto ensure that supevisory review occurred before these institutions tookcertain actions in regard to Freddie Mac stock that might affect theirportfolios or capital. The Board requested comments on the temporary rule,which is scheduled to expire on December 31, 1988. <T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 88-583, 53 FR 27814 (July 22, 1988).<ITAG tagnum="84">A. Discussion of the Comments</ITAG>The Board received a total of eight comments. Four of these letters werefrom insured institutions, three were received from industry trade associations,and one from a law firm representing several insured institutions. Althoughall but one of these comment letters were supportive, several criticismsand suggestions were offered, which are discussed in greater detail below.1. The need for a Final RuleOne commenter opposed replacing the temporary regulation with a final rule.This commenter asserted that a ``permanent'' rule was unnecessary becauseFreddie Mac preferred stock would no longer be volatile once it could bepublicly traded.The Board concludes, however, that a final rule is necessary because thereis no certainty whether or not the market for Freddie Mac preferred stockwill be volatile once the stock can be publicly traded. For this reason,the Board believes that a final rule addressing the same concerns as thetemporary regulation remains necessary for the same reasons as promptedthe temporary regulation. As discussed more fully in Part B below, however,in 1989 the Board will be examining issues affecting Freddie Mac stockand its possible volatility in its review of its equity-risk investmentand capital regulations. As a result of such review it may revisit thenecessity for this rule and take any appropriate action in the final equity-riskinvestment regulation to modify or terminate any unnecessary provisions.2. Restrictions on the Sale of StockThree commenters opposed the restrictions on the sale of Freddie Mac preferredstock by insured institutions that fail to meet their minimum regulatorycapital requirements. These three commenters did, however, see merit inplacing restrictions on the use of the proceeds from such sales by insuredinstitutions whose capital structure is impaired. These commenters assertedthat the sale of Freddie Mac preferred stock would bolster the capitalof such institutions. They doubted that the unrestricted sale of such stockby insured institutions that fail to meet their minimum capital requirementswould harm either depositors or the FSLIC fund. All three of these commentersindicated their belief that Freddie Mac preferred stock was a sound andconservative asset and that restrictions on its sale would distort itsoptimal market value.The Board declines to remove from the final rule the restriction on thesale of Freddie Mac preferred stock by insured institutions failing tomeet their minimum regulatory capital requirements. The Board continuesto believe that the impaired capital status of such insured institutionswarrants supervisory scrutiny of certain business decisions. The PSA forthe institution is best able to determine whether an insured institution'sdecision to sell Freddie Mac preferred stock may have adverse consequencesfor the institution and ultimately the FSLIC as insurer of the institution.The Board rejects the contention that the sale of Freddie Mac preferredstock would never have an adverse effect on insured institutions that failto meet their minimum regulatory capital requirements. A decision to sellthe stock in a widely fluctuating market may have a significant negativeimpact on the capital position of such an institution. By retaining thisrestriction in the final regulation, determinations can be made on a case-by-casebasis whether the sale of Freddie Mac preferred stock by such institutionsenhances the capital position of such institutions while simultaneouslysafeguarding the positions of the depositors and FSLIC. The Board doesnot believe that this requirement of supervisory review distorts the marketvalue of Freddie Mac stock in any appreciable manner. The PSA can approveapplications by insured institutions failing to meet their minimum regulatorycapital requirements to sell their Freddie Mac preferred stock if suchsale is determined to be in the overall best interests of the institution.3. Restrictions on the Purchase of StockOne of the commenters opposed the general requirement that insured institutionsthat fail to meet their minimum capital requirements must obtain PSA approvalbefore purchasing Freddie Mac preferred stock. This commenter believedthat Board has ample authority under other regulations to restrict thepurchase of Freddie Mac preferred stock on a case-by-case basis. This commenteralso thought that the regulation's restriction on the sale of Freddie Macpreferred stock or the use of proceeds therefrom makes a restriction onthe purchase of such stock unnecessary.The Board declines to remove from the final rule the restriction on thepurchase of Freddie Mac preferred stock by institutions that fail to meettheir minimum regulatory capital requirements. The Board believes thatthe elimination of the ownership and transferability restrictions thathad previously applied to Freddie Mac preferred stock may subject the valueof those securities to increased market fluctuations. This could, in turn,have a significant impact on the financial condition of insured institutionsholding such stock. To the extent that institutions can immediately increasetheir holding of Freddie Mac preferred stock, the results of potentialmarket fluctuations in the value of this stock take on more significantconsequences.With the removal of the previous Freddie Mac restriction significantlylimiting the amount any single holder of preferred stock could own, insuredinstitutions can substantially increase their holdings of Freddie Mac preferredstock. At the same time, the value of this stock may be subject to unprecedentedvolatility. The capital position of institutions that are not currentlymeeting their minimum capital requirement may be particularly vulnerableto these variations. The Board continues to believe that before such institutionscan significantly alter their holdings of Freddie Mac preferred stock,there must be an opportunity for the institution's PSA to evaluate thepotential impact resulting from a change in the level of this type of investment.4. Restrictions on the Use of Sale ProceedsSeveral commenters expressed various opinions about the restrictions thatthe regulation imposed on the use of the proceeds from the sale of FreddieMac preferred stock by insured institutions that fail to meet their phased-inregulatory capital requirements. None of the commenters opposed the conceptof restricting the use of sale proceeds by such institutions. These commenters,however, suggested various changes to this provision of the regulation.One commenter suggested that restrictions on the use of capital gains fromthe sale of Freddie Mac preferred stock should apply only to originallydistributed stock and not to stock that was acquired as a result of subsequentpurchases. Other commenters requested that the Board either define or removethe term ``equivalent action'' from the final rule.The Board believes that the final regulation should apply to the proceedsof all sales of Freddie Mac preferred stock. The suggestion that 12 CFR565.13(c) should be limited to capital gains from the sale of originalstock is inconsistent with the purpose of the regulation. The rule is designedto compel insured institutions that fail to meet their phased-in regulatorycapital requirements to apply the sale proceeds to capital reserves. TheBoard also rejects the contention that the term ``equivalent action'' istoo ambiguous. The term is intended to cover any actions that would resultin funds, which would otherwise be applied to capital, being removed fromthe institution. These actions include dividends, stock repurchases, orother ``equivalent actions'' that could have similar effect. The Boardbelieves that supervisory review before such action takes effect is importantto ensuring that the industry's capital, as well as that of a particularinsured institution is increased as rapidly as possible.5. Procedures for Obtaining PSA ApprovalSeveral commenters expressed concerns that the procedure by which suchinstitutions obtain PSA approval was too cumbersome. These concerns arisein the context both of institutions that do not meet their minimum regulatorycapital requirements and of institutions that fail to meet their phased-inregulatory capital requirements. Some of the commenters expressed theirbelief that institutions failing to meet their minimum regulatory capitalrequirements will be unable to obtain either the optimal sale or purchaseprice in a fast moving market.The Board received various suggestions for expediting the process by whichthe PSA considers such applications. One commenter proposed that the finalregulation require the PSA to approve or deny an application within tendays of its receipt. Another commenter suggested that the Board carve outa special exception for well-run institutions that fail to meet their regulatorycapital requirements. Another commenter suggested that the Board includein the final rule a blanket approval for Freddie Mac transactions of acertain specified size by institutions within certain parameters of meetingtheir capital requirements. The same commenter also encouraged the Boardto add a provision to the final rule to enable the PSA to approve a planby which a capitally impaired institution intends to sell or purchase FreddieMac preferred stock over a period of time, so that the institution wouldnot be required to obtain separate approvals for each transaction.The Board has determined not to amend these pre-approval requirements.As discussed above, the Board believes that such pre-approval is an importanttool in the effective supervision of any insured institution not meetingits minimum capital requirements, regardless of its size or recent performance.These factors, among others, may be taken into account by the PSA in itsreview.Additionally, experience with the temporary rule has not indicated thatsubstantial delays in approval have, in fact, occurred for approvals ordisapprovals of purchases, sales, or use of proceeds. The Office of RegulatoryActivities has promulgated guidelines to the PSAs indicating the circumstancesunder which it will give its prior concurrence to an application regardinga Freddie Mac stock-related transaction. This has streamlined the process,while providing the opportunity for effective supervisory review, providingthe PSA with needed flexibility, and simultaneously providing the applicantwith the expedient consideration of its application. In this regard, nothingin the regulation prohibits an applicant from structuring its applicationto indicate a plan to purchase or sell such stock or to issue dividendsor take other equivalent action tied to the sale of Freddie Mac stock ina series of transactions over time. The PSA may then make any appropriatedecision on such a plan, or any of its constituent parts.6. ForbearanceTwo of the commenters requested the Board to clarify its position on forbearance.The temporary rule provided that an institution that fails to meet itsminimum regulatory capital requirements must obtain approval from its PSA,subject to the concurrence of ORA, before selling or purchasing FreddieMac preferred stock, notwithstanding any previously granted capital forbearances.Additionally, the temporary rule prohibits, except as approved by the PSA,subject to the concurrence of ORA, an insured institution which fails tomeet its fully phased-in capital regulatory requirements from declaringa dividend, repurchasing its own stock, or taking equivalent actions, notwithstandingany previously granted forbearance. One of the commenters requested that the Board distinguish, in its finalrule, between capital forbearances that are granted to insured institutions,pursuant to Section 404 of the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987,Pub. L. No. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552, and its implementing regulation, 12CFR 563.47 (1988), and those capital forbearances that are granted in thecontext of a supervisory acquisition pursuant to 12 U.S.C. 1730a(m). Inmany supervisory acquisitions, FSLIC granted capital forbearances to theacquirer. Generally, the Board recognized in such supervisory cases thatthe insured institution's failure to comply with capital reserve requirementswas attributable to the supervisory transaction, and therefore, the acquirerwas granted a forbearance from regulations enforcing the capital or reserverequirements for a specified number of years.After considering these comments, the Board has decided not to change theprovisions in the regulation on capital forbearance. The same rationaleapplies for requiring a supervisory review before the purchase or saleof Freddie Mac preferred stock or the subsequent use of sale proceeds byany insured institution whose capital structure is impaired for whateverreason. The Board remains concerned with the overall capital position andhealth of all such institutions, in order to protect both the depositorsand FSLIC. The Board believes that the limited, but critical, supervisoryreview provided in the temporary regulation does not itself forbid anyinsured institution from taking actions, but merely provides the opportunityfor effective supervision of these institutions. The PSA may certainlytake the circumstances surrounding forbearances into account in its decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">B. Description of the Final Rule</ITAG>For the reasons discussed above, the Board today adopts in final form itstemporary rule. The regulation requires that institutions not meeting theirminimum capital requirement must submit written applications to their PSAs.It sets forth general factors to be considered by the PSAs when evaluatingan institution's application to buy or sell Freddie Mac preferred stock.In making a written application to buy or sell Freddie Mac preferred stock,such institutions will be required to demonstrate the effect that the proposedtransaction will have on their overall asset composition. Factors thatare to be addressed in applications include, but are not limited to, theeffect the proposed transactions will have on an institution's future growth,its risk exposure, and its portfolio diversification. The PSA may requirean institution to include in its application any additional informationthat the PSA may consider relevant to evaluating portfolio risk in connectionwith the purchase or sale of Freddie Mac preferred stock. If the institutionproposes to sell its shares of Freddie Mac preferred stock, it must indicatein its application the manner in which the resulting proceeds are to beused. Moreover, it must comply with any conditions imposed by the PSA.In separate but related actions, the Board is currently in the processof reviewing both its regulatory capital and equity-risk investment regulations.<T3>See </T3>Board Res. No. 88-1342, 53 FR 51800 (December 23, 1988) (regulatorycapital); Board Res. No. 88-1393 (December 22, 1988) (equity-risk investments).In both proposals, the Board is specifically requesting comment on whetherthe recent changes affecting Freddie Mac preferred stock should affectthe treatment of the stock under such regulations. Under the current equity-riskregulation, for example, Freddie Mac stock is exempted from the definitionof ``equity security'' for purposes of calculating an institution's aggregateequity-risk investments. <T3>See </T3>12 CFR 563.9-8 (b)(2)(1988). The Board is seeking commenton whether the removal of the restrictions on the ownership and transferabilityof such stock now makes it substantially similar to other equity securitiesand whether it should now be treated as such for purposes of the equity-riskinvestment regulation. The treatment of such stock under that regulationmay also affect the amount of capital that insured institutions must holdagainst such stock holdings. The Board anticipates that it will completefinal action in both of these critical areas before the end of 1989. Theseactions may provide protection against the problems addressed by the purchaseand sale restrictions on Freddie Mac stock. If the final regulations adoptedin those areas fully address the Board's concerns about the effects ofthe potential volatility of Freddie Mac stock on institutions that failto meet minimum regulatory capital requirements, the Board may take actionat that time to modify or terminate the provisions regarding purchase andsale of such stock contained in the final regulation adopted today.Separate and apart from the restrictions applying to those insured institutionsnot meeting their minimum capital requirements, the Board believes thatcertain restrictions may be appropriate for institutions not currentlymeeting their fully phased-in capital requirements as set forth in 12 CFR563.13 and 563.14. The Board believes that the opportunity for effectivesupervisory input is important before such institutions declare dividendsor take other similar actions as a result of any gains on any sale of FreddieMac stock because such actions may potentially delay the date institutionsattain their fully phased-in capital requirements. As noted above, theBoard continues to believe that it is in the best interests of insuredinstitutions, their depositors, and the FSLIC fund that all insured institutionsmove as quickly as is reasonable to reach their fully phased-in capitallevels. Furthermore, given that the gains on the sale of Freddie Mac preferredstock are not likely to be recurring income, the Board believes that suchgains should be used to augment capital. Therefore, the Board has decided to retain the requirement that institutionsnot meeting their fully phased-in capital requirement that sell sharesof Freddie Mac preferred stock must exclude the gain on the sale of theseshares from earnings in calculating allowable dividends under the Board'sregulations without prior approval by their PSA. Additionally, becausecertain other actions in connection with gains from the sale of FreddieMac preferred stock, such as implementation of a stock repurchase program,may have identical adverse consequences on or for an institution's financialcondition and may delay the institution's attainment of its fully phased-incapital requirement, the same prior approval is required for any such action.<T3>Cf.</T3> Board Res. No. 88-331, 53 FR 2477 (January 28, 1988) (restrictionon repurchase of stock of recently converted insured institutions). TheBoard contemplates that among the factors the PSA will take into accountin determining whether to approve a dividend, stock repurchase plan, orany equivalent action based upon proceeds from the sale of Freddie Macstock is whether such proceeds reflect the one-time-only restrictions onoriginally distributed Freddie Mac stock or from gains in the ordinarycourse of business on the sale of subsequently purchased stock. The Board has therefore determined that the final regulation adopted todaywill help to ensure that institutions that are failing their regulatorycapital requirement buy and sell Freddie Mac preferred stock in a mannerconsistent with principles of safety and soundness and that adequate supervisoryinput is provided before institutions take certain actions as a resultof gains from any sale of Freddie Mac stock that might adversely affecttheir ability to attain their fully phased-in capital requirements as expeditiouslyas possible. Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553(b) and 12 CFR 508.14, the Board hereby finds thatgood cause exists for making this final rule effective January 1, 1989,rather than the usual thirty days following publication in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> The temporary rule it replaces expires December31, 1988. If the rule were not made effective as of January 1, 1989, therewould be a lapse in the Board's ability to supervise institutions withimpaired capital. Because the final rule is identical to the temporaryrule that has been in effect since July 22, 1988, no delay is necessaryto allow institutions to become familiar with the rule's provisions. Therefore,good cause exists for dispensing with the thirty-day delay of effectivedate. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 603,the Board is providing the following regulatory flexibility analysis: 1. <T3>Need for and objectives of the rule</T3>. These elements are incorporatedabove in <T2>``SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION''</T2>. 2. <T3>Issues raised by comments and agency assessment and response</T3>.These elements are incorporated above in <T2>``SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION''</T2>. 3. <T3>Significant alternatives minimizing small-entity impact and agencyresponse</T3>. The Board has drafted the final rule to affect only thoseinsured institutions, regardless of size, that because of their levelsof regulatory capital are a matter of particular regulatory and supervisoryconcern. The final rule will not have a disproportionate impact on smallinstitutions. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 563 </ITAG>Bank deposit insurance, Currency, Investments, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Savings and loan associations.  Accordingly, the Board hereby amends Part 563, Subchapter D, Chapter V,Title 12, Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below.  <ITAG tagnum="76">SUBCHAPTER D_FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 563_OPERATIONS  </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 563 continues to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Sec. 1, 47 Stat. 725, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1421 <T3>et seq.</T3>); sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5B, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec.4, 80 Stat. 824, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425b); sec. 17, 47 Stat. 736, asamended (12 U.S.C. 1437); sec. 2, 47 Stat. 128, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1462);sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464); secs. 401-407, 48 Stat.1255-1260, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1724-1730); sec. 408, 82 Stat. 5, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1730a); sec. 1204, 101 Stat. 662 (12 U.S.C. 3806); Reorg. PlanNo. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR 1943-1948 Comp., p. 1071. </ITAG>2. Amend Part 563 by adding a new andSection; 563.13-3 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 563.13-3  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Preferred Stock.  </ITAG>(a) An insured institution that fails to satisfy its minimum regulatorycapital requirement as set forth in andSection;andSection; 563.13 and 563.14of this subchapter, notwithstanding any previously granted capital forebearances,shall not sell or buy Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation preferredstock except as approved by the Principal Supervisory Agent or his designee,subject to the concurrence of the Office of Regulatory Activities. ThePrincipal Supervisory Agent or his designee, may impose any conditionshe deems appropriate in granting such approval, subject to the concurrenceof the Office of Regulatory Activities.  (b) An insured institution that fails to satisfy the regulatory capitalrequirement set forth in andSection;andSection; 563.13 and 563.14 of this subchaptershall make written application to the Principal Supervisory Agent for permissionto buy or sell preferred stock of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.The written application shall provide the Principal Supervisory Agent orhis designee with sufficient information to demonstrate how the proposedsale or purchase of such preferred stock will affect the overall levelof risk of the institution's portfolio, as well as any additional informationwhich the institution may deem relevant to supervisory review. In evaluatingthe overall risks posed by the sale or purchase of preferred stock to theinstitution's portfolio, the Principal Supervisory Agent or his designeeshall consider the purposes for which such sale proceeds will be used,the effect of investment of the proceeds on the composition and qualityof the institution's asset portfolio, the institution's growth plans, thelikely effect on the institution's liquidity, as well as any additionalrelevant information the Principal Supervisory Agent or his designee mayseek in evaluating overall portfolio risk.  (c) Except as approved by its Principal Supervisory Agent or his designee,subject to the concurrence of the Office of Regulatory Activities, an insuredinstitution that fails to satisfy its fully phased-in regulatory capitalrequirement as set forth in andSection;andSection; 563.13 and 563.14 of thissubchapter, notwithstanding any previously granted capital forebearances,shall not be permitted to declare a dividend, repurchase its own stock,or take any equivalent action that might impair its ability to attain itsfully phased-in regulatory capital requirement unless it has first subtractedany gain realized from the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporationpreferred stock from its earnings. <ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Nadine Y. Washington,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-232 Filed 1-5-89; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M   </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>