<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89224-0122 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-24-89.f2.A1121</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7595] et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; Isler Homes, Inc., Profit Sharing Plan, et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice of Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Isler Homes, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan) Located in Okeana,Ohio</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7595]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted, the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of theCode, shall not apply to (1) the sale of certain lots of unimproved realproperty (the Property) from the Plan to Isler Homes, Inc. (the Employer),a disqualified person with respect to the Plan, provided the Plan receivesno less than fair market value for the lots at the time of sale and (2)a short-term extension of credit by the Plan to the Employer as a resultof the sale, provided the terms of the transaction are not less favorablethan the Plan could obtain in an arm's-length transaction with an unrelatedparty.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Because Robert Isler is the sole shareholder of the Employerand the only participant in the Plan, there is no jurisdiction under TitleI of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, there is jurisdictionunder Title II of the Act under section 4975 of the Code.Summary of Factsand Representations1. The Employer is an Ohio corporation engaged primarily in the businessof real estate development and home construction. Robert Isler (Isler)is the president and sole shareholder of the Employer. Isler is also thetrustee of the Plan and the only participant in the Plan. The Plan is aprofit sharing plan which had total assets of $291,915 as of December 31,1987.2. The Property consists of 25 acres of undeveloped real estate locatedin the City of Eaton, Ohio. The Plan acquired the Property for $72,000($2,880 per acre) in cash from an unrelated party in August 1986. Sincethe time of purchase, the Plan has made no improvements to the Property.Any taxes or expenses related to the Plan's holding of the Property havebeen paid by the Employer.3. According to the applicant, the plan originally purchased the Propertyfor investment purposes. However, in July 1987 the City Council of Eaton,Ohio, approved a zoning change for 9.73 acres of the Property from A-1Agricultural to PD-1 Planned Unit Development. The zoning change, whichwas requested by the Plan, created lots containing one-half acre or less.The A-1 Agricultural designation would have required a minimum one acrefor residential use.4. The applicant obtained an appraisal on eight lots of the Property onOctober 26, 1987, from P. Lincoln Mitchell, Jr. (Mitchell) of the realestate firm of Fred A. Schmidt in Cincinnati, Ohio, updated by a letterdated April 20, 1988. The applicant represents that Mitchell is independentof the Plan and the Employer. According to Mitchell, the eight lots arepart of a subdivision which is located in a good residential neighborhood.Mitchell states that in recent years purchasers seeking new homes in the$100,000 plus range have gone to surrounding towns because of the lackof suitable building sites within the City of Eaton and that the subdivisionshould make such sites available. Homes selling for over $100,000 are normallybuilt on lots selling for $20,000 and up. Allowing $15,000 of this amountfor development cost, selling time and developer's profit, the value perlot is estimated to be $5,000. Accordingly, Mitchell estimates the fairmarket value of the eight lots to be $40,000.5. As a result of the change in zoning, the Plan now believes it can realizean advantageous price for certain lots of the Property. Accordingly, thePlan proposes to sell the eight lots of the Property which are the subjectof the appraisal to the Employer. The price will be the higher of $5,000per lot for a total purchase price of $40,000 of fair market value at thetime of sale, as established by an updated independent appraisal. The Employeranticipates that it will build homes selling for approximately $100,000on these lots after developing the lots. Each lot to be sold is about one-halfacre in size. Under the terms of a proposed sales contract (the Contract)between the Plan and the Employer, $1,000 of the $40,000 purchase pricewould be paid at the time of signing of the Contract and the balance wouldbe paid as each lot is transferred to the Employer. The Employer will paythe Plan interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date ofthe signing of the Contract to the date of transfer, based on the unpaidbalance of the purchase price. The Oak Hills Savings and Loan Co. of Cincinnati,an unrelated lending institution, stated in a letter dated October 14,1988, that it considers ten percent to be appropriate for an extensionof credit of this kind. The Plan anticipates that the eight lots will betransferred and paid for during 1989. The Employer will pay cash for thelots and is not purchasing or assuming any debt in connection with thelots. The Plan will pay no fees or commissions in regard to the transaction.The applicant states that the remaining lots of the Property are for saleto the general public and that the Plan hopes to eventually sell theselots at the highest possible price.6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because:(1) The Employer will pay no less than fair market value for the lots atthe time of sale; (2) the fair market value of the lots will be establishedby a current independent appraisal of the lots; (3) the Employer will paycash for each lot as the lots are transferred to the employer; and (4)the Plan will pay no fees or commissions in connection with the transaction.Notice to Interested Persons: Because Isler is the applicant and the onlyparticipant in the Plan, it has been determined that there is no need todistribute the notice of pendency to interested persons. Comments and requestsfor a hearing must be received by the Department within 30 days of thedate of publication of this notice of proposed exemption. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contract:</T2> Paul Kelty of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Northwest Ironworkers_Employers Vacation Trust Fund (the VacationTrust) and the Pacific Northwest Ironworkers and Employers Apprenticeshipand Training Trust Fund (the Training Trust; together, the Trusts) Locatedin Seattle, Washington</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application Nos. D-7657 and D-7658]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting and exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and in accordance with the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemptionis granted the restrictions of section 406(b)(2) of the Act shall not applyto the proposed transfer of $235,000 is unclaimed, surplus funds from theVacation Trust to the Training Trust.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Vacation Trust is a multiemployer welfare plan established in accordancewith section 302 of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, as amended.The Vacation Trust was established on December 21, 1971, and was revisedand susperseded pursuant to the terms and conditions of a revised trustagreement (the Vacation Trust Agreement) on December 31, 1975. The signatoriesto the Vacation Trust Agreement are the Ironworkers District Council ofPacific Northwest (the District Council), the International Associationof Bridge, Structural and Reinforced Ironworkers (the International Union)Locals Nos. 14, 29, 86, 114, 505, and 598 (the Union Locals), and threeemployer associations, the Associated General Contractors (AGC) of America,Inc. (Seattle Chapter, Tacoma Chapter, Inland Empire Chapter, and Oregon-ColumbiaChapter), the Steel and Wire Fabricators Association, Inc., and the MontanaContractors Association, Inc. The Vacation Trust maintains its principalplace of business in Seattle, Washington. The Vacation Trust holds andadministers payments received by contributing employers that are signatoriesto certain collective bargaining agreements with the Union in order toprovide vacation benefits to participants in the Vacation Trust. As ofJune 30, 1987, the Vacation Trust had 2,253 participants and total netassets of $2,065,269.2. The Training Trust is also a multiemployer welfare plan that was establishedin accordance with the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, as amended.The Training Trust was established on July 1, 1976, and was revised andsuperseded pursuant to the terms and conditions of a revised trust agreement(the Training Trust Agreement) on July 1, 1987. The signatories to theTraining Trust Agreement are the District Council, the International Union,the Union Locals, the AGC (Seattle and Tacoma Chapters) and two employerassociations, the Northwest Ironworkers Employers Association and the MissoulaConstruction Council. The Training Trust provides for the training of apprenticeironworkers and the retraining of journeyman ironworkers for the performanceof work within the authority of the Union. As of June 30, 1988, the TrainingTrust had 2,771 participants and total net assets of $92,156.3. The geographic jurisdictions covered by the collective bargaining agreementsunder which the Trusts have been established include various counties inthe States of Washington, Montana, and Oregon. The applicant representsthat the participants of the Vacation Trust and the Training Trust areessentially the same group of persons.The Training Trust is administered by a board of trustees which has twelvemembers (the Training Trust Trustees), six representing employers and sixrepresenting the employees. The Vacation Trust is administered by a boardof trustees which has eighteen members (the Vacation Trust Trustees), nineof which represent the employers and nine of which represent the employees.The Training Trust Trustees all serve on the Vacation Trust as VacationTrust Trustees. However, the other Vacation Trust Trustees do not serveas trustees of the Training Trust.The applicant states that although the Vacation Trust and the TrainingTrust have common trustees, the Trusts are not parties in interest withrespect to each other within the meaning of section 3(14) of the Act. TheTrusts are administered by Welfare and Pension Administrative Services,Inc. of Seattle, Washington (The Plan Administrator).4. The Vacation Trust provides vacation benefits to the participants basedupon employer contributions. The applicant states that a contribution of$1.00 per hour is made by an employer to the Vacation Trust for each hourof covered work performed by an employee. Amounts paid are maintained bya credit union in a separate account for each participant for the purposeof providing vacation benefits to the participant. All such accounts areestablished for the participant in the name of the Vacation Trust. Amountswhich have accumulated in a participant's account may be withdrawn fromthe account by the participant twice a year. The participants' accountsare maintained in the credit union of the Union Local in the jurisdictionwhere the participants performed their work.5. Article X, Section 4 of the Vacation Trust Agreement provides that theamount credited to a participant's account in the Vacation Trust may accumulatefrom year to year. However, as a result of an amendment to the VacationTrust Agreement effective January 1, 1981, Article X, Section 4 providesfurther that if a participant's funds are not withdrawn by the participant(or by his or her beneficiary if the participant is deceased) for a periodof five years, and if communications from the Plan Administrator to theparticipant are returned with no forwarding address known for the fiveyear period, the funds are returned to the Vacation Trust. The amendedArticle X, Section 4 of the Vacation Trust Agreement also provides thatthose unclaimed funds which are returned to the Vacation Trust may be usedby the Vacation Trust to discharge certain administrative expenses of theTrust, or may be paid over to training trusts of the Union Locals thatare signatories to the Vacation Trust Agreement.6. As of June 30, 1987, the Vacation Trust had approximately $429,000 issurplus funds that have gone unclaimed for a period of more than five years.The Trustees attribute the surplus funds to the failure by participantsof the Vacation Trust to withdraw the funds in a timely manner despitediligent efforts by the Plan Administrator to locate the participants.These efforts include sending letters to the participants at their lastknown address in order to inform participants to withdraw their unclaimedvacation funds from the Union Local's credit union. Quarterly statementsare sent by the credit unions, and efforts are made by the credit unionsto contact persons with any unclaimed funds through the Union Local. Theapplicant represents that these efforts continue throughout a five-yearperiod, after which the funds that have not been claimed are turned overto and held in the Vacation Trust. The applicant states that if any participantshould later be found and can prove his identity, he or she is entitledto receive the amount disbursed by the credit union to the Vacation Trust,but without interest after the disbursement. The applicant states furtherthat prior to the involvement of the credit unions, the Vacation Trustsent quarterly statements to the participants and routinely checked withthe Union Locals on at least an annual basis to update addresses wherethere were unclaimed funds. The Vacation Trust maintains records of thenames and amounts due to each of the participants.In addition to the efforts of the Vacation Trust and the credit unions,whenever the Vacation Trust or the credit unions have requested the UnionLocals to locate participants, the Union Locals have requested assistancefrom the District Council, which periodically has checked its records,the records of the International Union, and the home Union Local of theparticipant to try to find the current address of the participant whosefunds have been returned unclaimed. The District Council states that thishas been done at least once for each of the persons on the Vacation Trust'slist. 7. The Trustees request an administrative exemption in order to transfer$235,000 of the unclaimed, surplus funds of the Vacation Trust to the TrainingTrust. The proposed transfer of funds will help to upgrade and improvethe training provided by the Training Trust. The applicant states thatthe transferred funds will not inure to the benefit of any contributingemployer and will be used for the exclusive purpose of providing benefitsto participants and defraying reasonable expenses of administering theTraining Trust. The Trustees have provided a statement, dated August 9, 1988, in whichthey represent that the proposed transfer of funds is in the best interestsof the participants of the Trusts because such funds are presently surplusfunds resulting from unclaimed funds of participants who cannot be located,after diligent efforts, and that such funds are not needed for the operationof the Vacation Trust and can be put to effective use by the Training Trust.In addition, the Training Trust Trustees have executed an indemnificationagreement (the Agreement), dated August 9, 1988. The Agreement providesthat the Training Trust will indemnify the Vacation Trust in an amountup to $235,000 for any unclaimed Vacation Trust contributions that arerequired to be paid to the participants of the Vacation Trust that haveaccumulated as of the date that the Vacation Trust transfers to the TrainingTrust the unclaimed, surplus funds. The indemnification of the VacationTrust under the Agreement will continue so long as any Vacation Trust participanthas the right to make a claim for vacation contributions from the VacationTrust for contributions accruing as of the date for the proposed transfer.8. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a)The transaction will be a one-time transfer of funds between the VacationTrust and the Training Trust; (b) the funds to be transferred are surplusfunds resulting from the unclaimed funds of participants who cannot belocated despite diligent efforts by the Vacation Trust Trustees and thePlan Administrator; (c) the rights of the Vacation Trust participants willbe protected by the Agreement whereby the Training Trust will indemnifythe Vacation Trust for any unclaimed Vacation Trust contributions thatare required to be paid to the participants in an amount up to $235,000;and (d) the Trustees of the Trusts have determined that the proposed transferof funds is in the best interests of the participants and beneficiariesof the Trusts.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact: </T2>Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="85">Hinderliter Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (the Plan) Located in Tulsa,Oklahoma </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">(Application No. D-7743) </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b) (1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the sale ofa parcel of unimproved real property (the Property) from the Plan to HinderliterIndustries, Inc. (the Employer), a party in interest with respect to thePlan, provided the Plan receives no less than fair market value for theProperty at the time of sale and provided further that the Plan experiencesno loss as a result of the previous acquisition and holding of the Property.Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Employer manufacturers various products used in the oil and gasindustries. The Plan is a profit sharing plan having total net assets of$1,048,344 as of June 30, 1988. There are approximately 541 participantsin the Plan.2. The Plan acquired the Property for $29,900 in cash in December 1980from unrelated third parties. The purchase originally was made for investmentpurposes. The Property consists of 9,100 square feet of vacant land locatedin Tulsa, Oklahoma. A lease between the sellers and another party terminatedin April 1981, according to the terms of the sales agreement. Since thattime, the Property has not been leased and is subject to no encumbrance.Also, as provided in the sales agreement, during 1981 the sellers removeda house which was then located on the Property in return for a credit of$2,000 in the original sales price, and the Property has been vacant landsince that time. Since the purchase, the Plan has paid no real estate taxesand has incurred no holding costs with respect to the Property. The Propertyis adjacent to property owned by the Employer which it plans to lease toan unrelated party. The Property has not been used for any purpose by theEmployer or any of its affiliates. 3. The Plan obtained an appraisal on the Property from Warren G. Morris(Morris), a real estate appraiser located in Tulsa. The applicant representsthat Morris is unrelated to the Plan and to the Employer. According toMorris, the highest and best use of the Property would be to attach theparcel to the adjacent property owned by the Employer and use it for commercialor industrial purposes. Considering this proximity to property owned bythe Employer and taking account of comparable sales of similar parcelsof property, Morris estimated that the fair market value of the Propertyas of June 26, 1988, is $15,000. 4. Since the Plan purchased the Property, the economy in the Tulsa areahas deteriorated, according to the applicant, so that the Property hasdepreciated in value. Also, the Property has produced no income for thePlan. For these reasons, the Employer has offered to buy the Property fromthe Plan. The Employer proposes to pay $35,000 in cash for the Property.This purchase price is $20,000 greater than the fair market value of theProperty as established in the appraisal. The Employer will treat the differencebetween the purchase price and the fair market value of the Property asan employer contribution and the applicant represents that such contributionwill be within the limits of section 415 of the Code. The Plan will payno commissions or other expenses in regard to the sale of the Property.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (1)The sale of the Property will be entirely for cash and the Plan will payno commissions or other expenses in regard to the sale; (2) the fair marketvalue of the Property will be established by an appraiser who is independentof the Plan and the Employer; (3) the Employer will pay more than the currentfair market value of the Property so that the Plan will not experiencea loss as a result of the acquisition and holding of the Property; and(4) the transaction will relieve the Plan of an investment which has depreciatedin value and which has produced no income for the Plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact: </T2>Paul Kelty of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Herbert S. Kaufman, M.D. Pension Plan (the Plan)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Located in San Francisco, California</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7759]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authoirtyof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) and 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (D) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedcash sale by the Plan of a parcel of unimproved real property (the Land)located in Napa, California to Herbert S. Kaufman (Dr. Kaufman), a partyin interest with respect to the Plan; provided that the terms of the saleare no less favorable to the Plan than similar terms negotiated at arm'slength between unrelated third parties; and provided further that the salesprice is not less than the fair market value of the Land.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan was a money purchase defined compensation plan with five (5)participants and assets of $979,977, as of December 31, 1987. It is representedthat the Plan terminated November 1, 1987, and that IRS issued a favorabledetermination letter on August 15, 1988, on such termination. Dr. Kaufmanis a participant in the Plan and serves as trustee to the Plan. Dr. Kaufmanis also an officer and 100% shareholder of Herbert S. Kaufman, M.D., (theEmployer), the corporate sponsor of the Plan. The Employer is engaged inthe practice of medicine in San Francisco, California.2. The Plan purchased the Land for $32,795 on July 1, 1977, from Mr. WilliamH. Peterson and Mrs. Barbara I. Peterson, unrelated third parties withrespect to the Plan. It is represented that the expenses to the Plan tohold the Land since 1977 were negligible and included primarily the costof general maintenance and property taxes. As of October 31, 1988, theLand represents only 7.06% of the total assets of the Plan.3. The Land is described as a residential homesite located in a plannedunit development adjacent to the Silverado Country Club area of Napa County,California, approximately two (2) miles distant from the center of theNapa City business district. The Land is vacant, unimproved, and has anirregular shape. It is represented that the Land is situated on the northeasterncorner of the intersection of Westgate and Canyon Drives and consists ofapproximately .08 acres. Power and telephone utilities are available tothe site. Water and sanitation service are represented to be under thecontrol of the Silverado Community Services District. It is representedthat attempts have been made to sell the Land by displaying a ``for sale''sign on the site, but no inquiries from persons interested in purchasingthe Land have been received.4. Accordingly, Dr. Kaufman proposes to purchase the Land for cash fromthe Plan at the greater of $89,600 or the fair market value of the Landon the date of sale. It is represented that Dr. Kaufman will pay all costsassociated with the sale and that the Plan will not pay any costs involvedwith the proposed transaction. Dr. Kaufman represents that the transactionis in the interest of the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries because:(a) Benefits from the Plan could be distributed to participants with aminimum of delay;(b) The Plan would avoid marketing expenses or paying a real estate brokeragecommission;(c) Benefits from the Plan could be distributed without conflicts arisingover the ownership of the Land;(d) Participants could roll their benefits based on the proceeds of thesale into basic IRA's since only cash or equivalents will be distributedand thereby avoid the greater expense associated with the administrationof IRA's which accept real property as rollover assets from qualified plans.5. Marcelle M. Kerruish (Ms. Kerruish), a realtor/broker with Browns ValleyRealty located at 3243 Brown Valley Road in Napa, California, has appraisedthe value of the Land at $89,600 as of November 17, 1988. Because the Landis unimproved raw land, Ms. Kerruish did not employ the replacement valuemethod in her appraisal. Rather, she represents that the fair market valueof the Land was based on comparable undeveloped vacant land in residentialareas in the same vicinity as the Land and were of similar size with comparableaccess to town and tourist sites. Ms. Kerruish represents that there areno notable physical features on the Land that would distinguish it fromother comparables. Ms. Kerruish represents that she is independent of anypersonal association with Dr. Kaufman and has no present interest in theLand. Ms. Kerruish's qualifications include experience as a full-time realtorand broker in the Napa Valley since September 1970. In that time, Ms. Kerruishrepresents that she has prepared valuations on more than 125 propertiesin the Napa Valley, the majority of which sold at or near her appraisedvalue.6. In summary, Dr. Kaufman represents that the proposed transaction meetsthe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause:(a) The sale of the Land will be a one time transaction for cash;(b) The Plan will not incur expenses on the sale;(c) The sales price is based on a fair market appraisal prepared by a qualifiedindependent appraiser; and(d) Participants will receive timely distribution of their accrued benefitsat maximum value from the cash proceeds of the sale of the Land.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Angelena C. Le Blanc of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Leanin' Tree Publishing Co.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Profit Sharing Trust (the Plan)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Located in Boulder, Colorado</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7787]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to a proposed cashsale by the Plan of two unimproved parcels of real property and an outlot(Outlot 1) which is an addition to one of the parcels (collectively, theProperty) to Edward P. Trumble, a party in interest with respect to thePlan, provided that the Plan receives the greater of $671,000 or the fairmarket value at the time of the sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan, adopted in 1969, is a single employer profit sharing plan.The Plan had 195 participants and $1,257,598.70 in net assets as of December31, 1987. The current trustees of the Plan are Edward P. Trumble, JohnB. Trumble, Thomas E. Trumble, and J. David Snyder (the Trustees). Allthe Trustees are full-time employees of Leanin' Tree Publishing Co. (theEmployer), a Colorado corporation incorporated in 1965. Edward P. Trumbleand Thomas E. Trumble are also shareholders of the Employer. The Propertyconsists of three parcels of real property, Lot 3, Lot 5, and Outlot 1.All three parcels are located in Longbow Park Subdivision, Boulder County,Colorado. The Property is presently unimproved and does not yield any income.It has been represented that the Property has remained vacant and unoccupiedsince it was acquired by the Plan.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ In this proposed exemption the Department expresses noopinion as to whether acquisition and holding of the Property by the Planviolated any provision of Part 4 of the Title 1 of the Act.2. On July 13, 1973, Lot 3 was purchased from the Employer for $73,925on behalf of the Plan by its trustee at the time, First National Bank (theBank) in Boulder, Colorado. On July 10, 1974, Lot 5 was purchased fromthe Employer on behalf of the Plan by the Bank for $66,386. The Bank waslater terminated as the trustee of the Plan and the trusteeship was assumedby Edward P. Trumble and John Trumble.Outlot 1 was created when Longbow Drive was realigned to a new locationadjacent to the Plan's Lot 5, by Valley Lab Inc. (Valley), an unrelatedColorado corporation. Valley owned land adjoining Lot 5. It is representedthat as an adjoining lot owner, it was necessary for the Plan to agreeto this realignment. Longbow Drive was realigned in such a way that 5,227square feet of Valley's land was severed. This severed portion became Outlot1 which on December 10, 1987, was deeded to the Plan by Valley and becamepart of Lot 5. In exchange for the transfer of Outlot 1, Valley receivedthe consent of the Plan to the realignment of Longbow Drive. Other thanagreeing, the Plan did not pay any money or provide any actual considerationto Valley in exchange for the conveyance of Outlot 1. It is representedthat the transfer of Outlot 1 by Valley to the Plan was an arms-lengthtransaction between two unrelated entities, and did not involve any considerationor elements other than those described above.3. The applicant proposes to sell Lots 3, 5 and Outlot 1 to Edward P. Trumble.An appraisal of the Property was prepared by Mark D. Walker (Mr. Walker),staff appraiser with Bradford M. Beeler, M.A.I. The appraisal, dated December31, 1987, estimates the aggregate value of the Property to be $671,000.In a letter dated December 19, 1988, Burton Lee (Mr. Lee), a staff appraiseralso with Bradford M. Beeler, M.A.I., addresses the fact that Lots 3 and5 are adjacent to Lot 4, which is owned by Edward P. Trumble, personally.Mr. Lee concludes that this factor does not merit a premium in the valueto Mr. Trumble of Lots 3, 5, and Outlot 1.Mr. Walker and Mr. Lee represented that they are qualified in that theyhave experience as real estate staff appraisers since 1987 and are bothcanidates for M.A.I. from the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers.Mr. Walker and Mr. Lee represent that they are independent in that theyhave no present or prospective interest in the Property and have no personalinterest or bias with respect to the parties involved.The applicant represents that the transaction is in the interest of thePlan because it is a one time cash sale. Also, the transaction convertsnon-income producing land into cash, thus allowing the Plan's portfolioto be diversified. The applicant represents that attempts to find an independentthird party purchaser would take a prolonged period of time, given thecurrent real estate market in Boulder, Colorado. The Plan will pay no transactioncosts associated with the purchase. The fair market value of the Propertyhas been determined by an independent appraisal. The applicant representsthat he will pay the greater of the value of the Property established byan independent appraisal or the fair market value at the time of the sale.4. In summary, the applicant represents that the transaction satisfiesthe statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act and 4975(c)(2) of theCode because:(a) The proposed sale is a one time transaction for cash;(b) The price to be paid to the Plan will be the greater of $671,000 asestablished by an independent appraisal or the fair market value of theProperty at the time of the sale.(c) The Plan will pay no expenses associated with the sale; and(d) The sale will allow the Plan to liquidate its investment portfolioand to diversify its assets.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Ekaterina A. Uzlyan, of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Malcolm M. McHenry, M.D., Inc.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Defined Benefit Pension Plan (the Plan)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Located in Sacramento, California</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7800]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975).3<NOTE/> If the exemption is granted the sanctions resulting fromthe application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposed sale by thePlan for cash of certain real property (the Real Property) to Malcolm M.McHenry, M.D., trustee of the Plan, and hence a disqualified person withrespect to the Plan, provided that the price paid be no less than the fairmarket value of the Real Property as of the date of sale, as establishedby an independent and qualified appraiser.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>3The applicant represents that Malcolm M. McHenry, M.D. andhis wife, Anne B. McHenry, are 100% owners of all of the issued and outstandingcapital stock of Malcolm M. McHenry, M.D., Inc., the Plan sponsor, andthe sole participants in the Plan. Accordingly, there is no jurisdictionunder Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, thereis jurisidction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975 of theCode.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined benefit pension plan sponsored by Malcolm M. McHenryM.D., Inc. (the Plan Sponsor). Malcolm M. McHenry M.D. and his wife, AnneB. McHenry, are 100% owners of the capital stock of the Plan sponsor, andtrustees of and sole participants in the Plan. As of June 30, 1988, thetotal value of Plan assets was $847,180.2. On September 21, 1976, the Plan purchased Lot 1171, Auburn Lake TrailsUnit No. 5 from Transamerica Land Development Co., an unrelated party,for $17,500. On July 22, 1982, the Plan purchased Lot 1172, Auburn LakeTrails Unit No. 5 From Joseph A. and Janice K. Yound, unrelated parties,for $25,000. These two lots (the Real Property) are located in the townof Cool, in El Dorado County, California, on a ridge overlooking a proposeddam site near Auburn, California.3. The Real Property, intended to serve as an investment in lakeside lots,has decreased in value because of the failure to complete the Auburn damproject. At this time there is no reasonable prospect for the completionof the dam and hence for the formation of the lake.4. The applicant represents that the Plan will be terminated in the nearfuture. Conversion of the value of the Real Property into liquid assetswill allow for greater flexibility in rolling over the Plan's assets intoIndividual Retirement Accounts, and would replace a non-productive assetwith income producing assets.5. On September 3, 1988, Edward P. Goodrum, CREA, an independent and qualifiedreal estate appraiser located in Sacramento, California, appraised thefair market value of the Real Property at $34,100.6. Accordingly, the applicant proposes that the Plan sell the Real Propertyfor cash to Malcolm M. McHenry M.D. (Dr. McHenry) for the fair market valueof the Real Property as of the date of sale as determined by an independentand qualified appraiser. The applicant represents that the Plan will notbe required to pay any transfer or sales costs and expenses in connectionwith the sale.7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the criteria of section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because: (a) TheReal Property will be sold for its fair market value as of the date ofsale as determiend by an independent and qualified appraiser; (b) the salerepresents a one-time transaction for cash which can be easily verified;(c) the sale will not require the payment of any commissions, fees, ortaxes by the Plan; and (d) Dr. McHenry and his wife, the sole participantsin and trustees of the Plan and the only persons affected by the transaction,desire that the transaction be consummated.Notice of Interested Persons: Because Dr. McHenry and his wife are theonly participants in the Plan, it has been determined that there is noneed to distribute the notice of pendency to interested persons. Commentsand requests for a hearing must be received by the Department within 30days of the date of publication of this notice of proposed exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Joseph L. Roberts III of theDepartment, telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Elarbee, Thompson and Trapnell Savings Incentive and Salary DeferralPlan (the 401(k) Plan) and Elarbee, Thompson and Trapnell Profit SharingPlan (the Profit Sharing Plan; collectively, and Plans), Located in Atlanta,GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application Nos. D-7841, D-7842 and D-7843]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedsale of certain unimproved real property (the Tracts), for the total cashconsideration of $57,978, by Mr. John R. Trapnell (Mr. Trapnell), a partyin interest, to his individual accounts (the Accounts) in the Plans, providedsuch amount is not greater than the fair market value of the Tracts onthe date of the sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plans consists of the 401(k) Plan which contains a cash or deferredarrangements and the Profit Sharing Plan. As of the plan year ending September30, 1987, the 401(k) Plan had 21 participants and total assets having afair market value of approximately $4,872,036. As of November 2, 1987,the Profit Sharing Plan had 20 participants and total assets having a fairmarket value of $81,868. As of September 30, 1988, Mr. Trapnell, a 13.68percent partner in the law firm of Elarbee, Thompson and Trapnell of Atlanta,Georgia (the Partnership), had total assets having a fair market valueof $227,970 and $5,876 in his individual accounts in the 401(k) Plan andthe Profit Sharing Plan, respectively. The trustees of the Plans (the Trustees)are Mr. Trapnell and Messrs. William M. Earnest and Robert L. Thompson.Both of the Plans provide for participant-directed investment.2. The Partnership is a general partnership formed under the laws of theState of Georgia. The Partnership is the sponsor of the Plans as well asthe Plans' administrator.3. Mr. Trapnell wishes to direct the investment of a portion of his Accountsin the 401(k) Plan and the Profit Sharing Plan in certain real propertylocated in Newberry, South Carolina. Mr. Trapnell believes the propertywould represent an excellent investment opportunity for the Accounts. Thesubject property consists of approximately 348.5 acres of undeveloped landthat has been divided into eleven tracts which range in size from 1.1 acresto 80.5 acres. Mr. Trapnell acquired a 20 percent interest in the Tractsfrom his mother and the remainder from other relatives, between April 1975and April 1983. Mr. Trapnell paid appriximately $85,000 to $87,000 forthe Tracts. The property of which the Tracts are comprised is not encumberedby a mortgage or a deed of trust nor is it presently being used or leasedby parties in interest with respect to the Plans.4. The fair market value of the entire property is $86,776 or $249 peracre. This amount was determined on April 26, 1988 by Mr. Hugh M. Bedenbaugh,Jr. (Mr. Bedenbaugh), C.R.E.A., an independent appraiser from Newberry,South Carolina. In his appraisal report, Mr. Bedenbaugh states that bebased his opinion of value on comparable sales of properties in Newberry,South Carolina. In an October 20, 1988 update to his appraisal report,Mr. Bedenbaugh states that he personally inspected the property and heexplains that he believes the highest and best use of the land is for theproduction of timberland and pulpwood. He also states that the $249 peracre value he determined for the property would apply equally to the individualTracts.5. The purchase price for the Tracts will be paid by the Accounts in cash.Such purchase price will be allocated among the 401(k) Plan and the ProfitSharing Plan so that not more than 25 percent of Mr. Trapnell's Accountin each Plan will be invested in the property. Specifically, Mr. Trapnell'sAccount in the 401(k) Plan will purchase a portion of the property worthapproximately $56,709. This will represent approximately 24.87 percentof Mr. Trapnell's Account in the 401(k) Plan. Mr. Trapnell's Account inthe Profit Sharing Plan will purchase a portion of the property worth approximately$1,269 and which represents about 21.6 percent of that Account's assets.Tracts 1, 3, 5, 7, 8 and 9 (consisting of 24.5 acres, 37.7 acres, 16.75acres, 9.9 acres, 80.5 acres and 58.4 acres, respectively) will be purchasedby Mr. Trapnell's Account in the 401(k) Plan; Tracts 10 and 11 (consistingof 1.1 acres and 4 acres) will be purchased by Mr. Trapnell's Account inthe Profit Sharing Plan. The remainder of the Tracts will be retained byMr. Trapnell. Title to the property will be held by the Trustees of eachPlan for the benefit of Mr. Trapnell's Accounts.6. The Accounts will incur no real estate commissions or fees in connectionwith the sale. In addition, there will be no co-ownership arrangement ofthe Tracts between Mr. Trapnell and the Accounts. Following the sale, theproperty acquired by the Accounts will be used for the production of timberor pulpwood. It is not anticipated that such land will used by or leasedto parties in interest with respect to the Plans.7. In summary, it is represented that the proposed transaction will satisfythe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) The sale will be a one-time transaction for cash; (b) thesales price for the Tracts has been based upon the fair market value ofthe property as established by an independent appraiser; (c) the Tractsacquired by the Accounts will not represent more than 25 percent of theassets of such Accounts; (d) the Accounts will not be required to pay anyreal estate fees or commissions in connection with the sale; and (e) Mr.Trapnell, who is the only participant in the Plans whose individual Accountswill be affected by the subject transaction, desires that the sale be consummated.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Notice to Interested Persons:</T2> Because Mr. Trapnell is the onlyparticipant in the Plans whose Accounts will be affected by the proposedtransaction, it has been determined that there is no need to distributethe notice of proposed exemption to interested persons. Written commentsand requests for a public hearing are due 30 days following the date ofpublication of the notice of proposed exemption in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information</ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 17th day of February, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-4334 Filed 2-23-89 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>