<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89427-0111 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-27-89.f2.A1110</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-277 and 50-278] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Philadelphia Electric Co. el al.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendmentto Facility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing </ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of amendments to Facility Operating License Nos. DPR-44 and DPR-56,issued to Philadelphia Electric Company, Public Service Electric and GasCompany, Delmarva Power and Light Company, and Atlantic City Electric Companyfor operation of the Peach Bottom Atomic Power Station, Unit Nos. 2 and3 located in York County, Pennsylvania. The proposed amendments would delete certain thermal effluent monitoringrequirements from the Environmental Technical Specifications (ETS) in viewof the issuance of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System(NPDES) permit by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in partial responseto the licensee's application for amendment dated October 17, 1986. The proposed amendment would also make other conforming changes of an administrativenature to the ETS. The staff is not granting these proposed changes atthis time since they are not adequately supported in the application. Previous amendments to the ETS have deleted all protection limits and reportlevels, and all monitoring requirements, except for those relating to thermaleffluent monitoring. (See Amendment Nos. 92 and 94 dated February 24, 1984and Amendment Nos. 102 and 104 August 3, 1984.) As stated in the NRC lettertransmitting Amendnemt Nos. 92 and 94, deletion of thermal discharge monitoringrequirements was ``held in abeyance pending the NPDES 316 proceeding andlitigation.'' This application proposes deletion of the last monitoringrequirement (thermal discharge monitoring) since the 316(a) proceedinghas been resolved and effective thermal discharge requirements have beenincorporated into the NPDES Permit. Specifically, the licensee's basis for deletion of the thermal monitoringrequirement on ETS pages 5, 5a, and 5b is that the revised NPDES Permitprovides an effective thermal discharge program for the Peach Bottom AtomicPower Station. The permit establishes operating limits, as well as monitoringand reporting requirements resulting from resolution of the NPDES 316 proceeding.With the conclusion of this proceeding, deletion of the thermal monitoringprovisions from the Peach Bottom ETS on current pages 5, 5a, and 5b isappropriate. Before issuance of the proposed license amendments, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not: (1) Involve a significant increasein the probability of consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The basis, as provided by the licensee, for thisproposed finding is that the proposed amendment does not constitute a significanthazards consideration since it does not: <ITAG tagnum="21">(1) involve a significant increase in the probability or consequencesof an accident previously evaluated. The thermal discharge monitoring requirementswhich are proposed for deletion have no safety implications or bases. Theydo not impact the cooling capability of systems associated with nuclearsafety and have no effect on the probability or consequences of any accident.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accidentfrom any accident previously evaluated because the thermal discharge doesnot impact the design considerations associated with nuclear safety. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(3) involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety since therequested changes involve no safety margins. The effective NPDES Permitprovides the necessary protection of the environment, and essential reportingprovisions to the NRC and administrative controls of activities that mayimpact the environment are retained. </ITAG>The staff has reviewed the licensee's no significant hazards considerationanalysis. Based upon this review, the staff believes that the licenseehas met the three standards. Therefore, based on these considerations andthe three criteria given above, the Commission has made a proposed determinationthat the amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be addressed to the Regulatory Publications Branch,Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Office ofAdministration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-216, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland,from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments received may beexamined at the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington,DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to interveneis discussed below. By May 30, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designating Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order. As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above. Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.  Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would resultin derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission may issue the licenseamendment before the expiration of the 30-day notice period, provided thatits final determination is that the amendment involves no significant hazardsconsideration. The final determination will consider all public and Statecomments received. Should the Commission take this action, it will publisha notice of issuance and provide for opportunity for a hearing after issuance.The Commission expects that the need to take this action will occur veryinfrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Att: Docketing and Servicing Branch, or may be deliveredto the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW. Washington,DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during the last ten (10)days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitioner promptlyso inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to Western Unionat (800) 325-6000 (in Missouri (800) 342-6700). The Western Union operatorshould be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the following messageaddressed to Walter R. Butler, Director, Project Directorate I-2, Divisionof Reactor Projects I/II: petitioner's name and telephone number; datepetition was mailed; plant name; and publication date and page number ofthis <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington,DC 20555, and to Conner and Wetterhahn, 1747 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW.,Washington, DC 20006, attorney for the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of factors specified in 10 CFR2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated October 17, 1986, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington,DC 20555, and at the Government Publications Section, State Library ofPennsylvania, Education Building, Commonwealth and Walnut Streets, Harrisburg,Pennsylvania 17126.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 21st day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Walter R. Butler,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate I-2, Division of Reactor Projects I/II,Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10092 Filed 4-26-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>