<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89706-0087 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-06-89.f2.A1086</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority</ITAG>Part F. of the Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations ofAuthority for the Department of Health and Human Services, Health CareFinancing Administration (HCFA), Federal Register, Vol. 51, No. 191, pp.35288-35291, dated Thursday, October 2, 1986; Vol. 52, No. 91, pp. 17832-17833,dated Tuesday, May 12, 1987; Vol. 52, No. 163, pp. 31818-31819, dated Monday,August 24, 1987; Vol. 53, No. 53, p. 8977, dated Friday, March 18, 1988;and Vol. 53, No. 150, pp. 29382-29383, dated Thursday, August 4, 1988)is amended to indicate a reorganization within the Bureau of Data Managementand Strategy (BDMS) in the Office of the Associate Administrator for Management.The reorganization changes the organizational and functional alignmentof each of BDMS' four offices: The Office of Information Resources Management(OIRM), the Office of Health Program Systems (OHPS), the Office of Statisticsand Data Management (OSDM), and Office of Computer Operations (OCO). Thechanges consolidate the data administration function and the planning andsupport activities for the Project to Redesign Information Systems Management(PRISM) in OIRM. This was accomplished by abolishing the Data AdministrationBranch in the Division of Statistical Analysis, OSDM and transferring thefunction to the Data Administration Staff in OIRM. The PRISM Redesign Staffin OHPS is abolished and its functions transferred to the new Divisionof PRISM Redesign in OIRM. In addition, the Technical Research and PlanningStaff is established in OCO, and there is a minor realignment of data centerfunctions in OCO's subordinate components. Although several organizationsin BDMS are unchanged, the entire set of BDMS functional statements arebeing republished to facilitate the amendment of Part F. of the Departmentstatement.The specific amendments to Part F. are described below:andbullet; Section FH.10.D., Bureau of Data Management and Strategy (FHE)(Organization)The Bureau of Data Management and Strategy (BDMS), under the leadershipof the Director, BDMS, is comprised of the following organizational components:1. Office of Information Resources Management (FHE1)2. Office of Computer Operations (FHE6)3. Office of Statistics and Data Management (FHE7)4. Office of Health Program Systems (FHE8)andbullet; Section FH.20.D., Bureau of Data Management and Strategy (FHE)(Functions), is deleted in its entirety and replaced by a new set of functionalstatements for the Bureau and its subordinate components. The Bureau title,functional statement, and administrative code remain unchanged; however,they are being republished in order to keep all of the Bureau's functionalstatements together in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>The new Section FH.20.D reads as follows:<ITAG tagnum="84">D. Bureau of Data Management and Strategy (FHE)</ITAG>Manages statistical data systems on HCFA programs to support program decisionsby various HCFA components. Provides mathematical and statistical programmingrequired to answer research inquiries. Develops and coordinates statisticaland information policy. Coordinates the development of HCFA informationpolicy as it relates to HCFA's long-range information plans with non-Federalsegments of the health care industry. Develops common coding standardsand quality assurance monitoring mechanisms. Provides technical informationplanning and developmental review of HCFA data collection initiatives.Coordinates the development of special purpose statistical data bases requiredfor assessing the impact of proposals which change health care financingprograms, special research and evaluation studies, and general data dissemination.Designs and develops the production of periodic statistical tabulationsto assess the characteristics of HCFA beneficiaries and the utilizationand cost of program benefits. Provides direction for the nationwide operationof a centralized automated data processing (ADP) and telecommunicationsfacility for HCFA including systems analysis, programming, computer operations,and data transmission. Establishes and maintains computerized records supportingHCFA programs including records for determining entitlement to the utilizationof Medicare benefits and program management records that facilitate theadministration of HCFA programs. Negotiates and administers agreementsand provides ADP liaison between HCFA users, the Social Security Administration,and other external organizations for the provision of ADP capacity andsupport services. Develops, coordinates, and directs the HCFA ADP SystemsSecurity Program including its application to Medicare contractors, inaccordance with the Office of Management and Budget, General Services Administration,and Department of Health and Human Services guidelines.1. Office of Information Resources Management (FHE1)Serves as the focal point for the planning of HCFA's information systems,information resources management (IRM), data administration, and activitiesunder the Project to Redesign Information Systems Management (PRISM). Developsand assures compliance with HCFA's long and short range information plansand processes. Determines and assures compliance with internal HCFA IRMpolicies and procedures including information systems planning, systemsapproval, and security. Provides systematic identification, assessment,and certification of new, revised, or existing HCFA information systemsand processes in accordance with departmental, other higher monitoringauthorities, and with HCFA policies, standards, and information plans.Develops and maintains an inventory of HCFA's information systems. Coordinatesand provides liaison on policy and planning for information systems withinHCFA and between HCFA and other governmental agencies and nongovernmentalgroups. Develops, implements, and maintains a HCFA-wide IRM financial managementprogram to fund and support IRM operation and information systems developmentactivities. Formulates and executes the HCFA IRM common expense budgetand Information Technology System plan and budget in conjunction with Agency-widebudgetary submissions to the Department. Administers the HCFA ADP workloadmanagement program to monitor selected system-related activities. Performsthe Agency-wide ADP resource management function to assess and monitorADP resource utilization. Develops, coordinates, and directs the HCFA ADPSystems Security Program to ensure the protection of HCFA systems and ADPequipment. Negotiates and administers agreements and provides liaison betweenHCFA, the Social Security Administration, and other external organizationsfor the provision of ADP support services. Develops and coordinates HCFA'sparticipation in the Federal Information Processing Standards Program.Develops policies, procedures, and guidelines relating to the IRM aspectsof data administration. Directs the management and monitoring of data exchange,privacy, data dictionary, systems interface, and data base support activities.Designs, evaluates, and conducts analyses related to data administrationand data base management improvement projects. Establishes and maintainsa data library and an inventory of HCFA data bases. Plans, designs, anddevelops the Data Base Integration Program. Directs and coordinates implementationof PRISM, including all contractor support activities.<ITAG tagnum="81">a. IRM Planning Staff (FHE1-1)</ITAG>Formulates and assures compliance with HCFA's Information Resources Managemenmt(IRM) Plan and associated long-range and short-range IRM plans. Developsand assures compliance with HCFA's IRM policies. Formulates the HCFA informationtechnology system 5-year plan and budget in conjunction with the Agency'sbudget submissions to the Department Develops HCFA's annual ADP spendingplan. Develops, implements, and maintains the systems required to monitorthe progress of selected bureau projects. Coordinates and provides liaisonon information systems policy and planning within HCFA (including regionaloffices) and between HCFA and other governmental agencies. Provides systematicidentification, assessment, and certification of new, revised, or existingHCFA information systems and processes in accordance with departmental,other higher monitoring authorities, and HCFA policies, standards, andinformation plans.<ITAG tagnum="81">b. ADP Resources Staff (FHE1-2)</ITAG>Develops, implements, and maintains a HCFA-wide financial management programto fund and support information resources management (IRM) operations andinformation systems development activities. Plans, budgets, and controlsthe acquisition and contractual procurement of all HCFA equipment and relatedADP services. Formulates and executes the HCFA ADP common expense budgetand executes the information technology system budget. Develops, implements,and maintains the HCFA ADP workload management program to monitor selectedsystem-related activities. Performs an Agency-wide resource accountingfunction to assess and monitor ADP resource utilization. Develops, coordinates,and directs the HCFA ADP Systems Security Program to ensure that adequatesafeguards are in place to protect HCFA systems and ADP equipment. Negotiatesand administers agreements and provides ADP liaison between HCFA users,the Social Security Administration, and other external organizations forthe provision of ADP capacity and support services. Develops and coordinatesHCFA's participation in the Federal Information Processing Standards Program,including the promulgation of Agency ADP standards and review of externallydeveloped standards. Provides staff support to the bureau director in her/hisrole as the individual authorized to initiate ADP procurement actions andadministers HCFA's ADP Contract Administration Program.<ITAG tagnum="81">c. Data Administration Staff (FHE1-3)</ITAG>Develops and implements policies, standards, performance requirements,and guidelines for data administration activities. Directs the management/controlof data exchange, access, data dictionary, systems interface, and database support initiatives. Develops and implements the HCFA data dictionaryin accordance with data administration policies, goals, and objectives.Designs, evaluates, conducts analyses, and provides support services relatedto data administration and data base management improvement projects. Maintainsan inventory of HCFA data bases and provides guidelines for their access.Plans, design, develops, and implements the Data Base Integration Program.Directs the establishment, issuance, and enforcement of standards for datadefinition and record data base design. Develops and implements plans andpolicies for the classification, standardization, identification, development,and administration of data to meet HCFA's information requirements. Developsand conducts programs to promote data sharing among HCFA components andbetween HCFA and other organizations. Develops and maintains a strategyand plan for applying data planning and management techniques to supportthe redesign and functioning of Agency systems. Provides staff supportto the Information Strategy Council. Determines and ensures compliancewith policies and procedures regarding implementation of the Privacy Actand the Freedom of Information Act and responds to related external requests.Provides external liaison on data administration issues. Directs contractorsupport for data administration.<ITAG tagnum="81">d. Division of PRISM Rediesign (FHE11)</ITAG>Plans, organizes, coordinates, and controls the activities required toassure the timely, accurate, cost-effective, and successful completionof the Health Insurance/Supplementary Medical Insurance (HI/SMI), Medicare/MedicaidDecision Support System (MMDSS), Program Management (PM), and AdministrativeLogical Application Groups (LAGs) related to the development, conversion,and implementation of the Project to Redesign Information Systems Management(PRISM). Advises HCFA managers in the preparation of short, intermediate,and long range plans for the improvement of HCFA information systems. Keepsinformed of organizational, legislative, administrative, and technologicalchanges that affect the PRISM LAG processes which impact upon future planning.Works continuously with the appropriate levels of management and with BDMSstaff to provide liaison and assistance with respect to Agency-wide planningand participates in planning activities to ensure that the Agency's ADPsystems meet the needs of the user community for high quality, reliabledata. Develops and designs methods and processes which assure the qualityof the enhancements to existing systems and the development of new systsmsfor PRISM LAGs. Plans and conducts comprehensive analyses of complex anddiversified areas such as systems analysis and design methodologies, computerprogramming methods and techniques, softwear testing, validation, systemsacceptance, ADP telecommunications resources configuration, and data basesecurity and integrity. Develops ADP systems quality assurance and softwaretesting standards and guidelines for the Agency's ADP systems which ensurethat they meet the requirements of the Agency components and support Agencygoals and objectives. Plans the integration and validation of the currentand future development of all PRISM LAG systems. Formulates contractingstrategies and prepares procurement packages for major contractual agreementsto support the PRISM systems design, development, and implementation. Coordinatesproject management for long-range system design plans.2. Office of Computer Operations (FHE6)Directs the management, selection, acquisition, operation, maintenanceof, and establishes workload planning and controls for HCFA's automateddata processing (ADP) and data communications (DC) facilities and equipmentincluding mainframe computers, minicomputers, microcomputer and word processingequipment, associated vendor supplied software, and ADP training (hereafterreferred to as ADP). Serves as the project office for the Facility ManagementContract. Establishes Agency minicomputer standards for hardware/softwareand authorizes exceptions to established hardware and software standards.Assesses new technology, determines HCFA's programmatic requirements, anddevelops plans to meet HCFA's needs. Provides technical assistance andconsultation to all HCFA components regarding solutions to ADP equipmentand support software problems including system design, selection, procurement,technical evaluation, security, utilization, and operations. Controls ADPresources including cost estimates; planning and scheduling of expenditures;and inventory, purchase, lease, and maintenance of ADP hardware, software,and services. Provides technical review and serves as the Agency's finaltechnical authority for the approval of the purchase, lease, and maintenancefor all ADP equipment and systems throughout HCFA. Develops budget estimatesand spending plans for activities managed by the office including thosewith Agency-wide scope in conjunction with the Agency budget process administeredby the Office of Budget and Administration. Manages the ADP resource planningfunction to ensure the availability of HCFA Data Center resources for managingthe Project to Redesign Information Systems Mangement (PRISM). Providestechnical evaluation and liaison to the Department and other Federal agenciesrelated to ADP procurement actions. Provides analyses, installation, modification,and maintenance of operating systems, microcomputers and minicomputers,and DC systems software for all HCFA components. Manages systems softwareand software products including data base management systems, graphics,program generators and statistical analysis packages, personal computerpackages, and office automation systems. Monitors ADP equipment utilizationcapacity and performance and makes available the necessary reports forall levels of management. Responsible for all long-term technical and operationalcapacity planning for solutions to HCFA's ADP mission needs and requirements.Advises the bureau and HCFA executive staff on ADP issues and concernsand represents HCFA in dealings with Federal and non-Federal agencies andorganizations on the Agency-wide range of the office's functions includingvendor supplied software, hardware systems plans, and ADP acquisition andutilization.<ITAG tagnum="81">a. Technical Research and Planning Staff (FHE61)</ITAG>Advises the Director, Office of Computer Operations, and executives throughoutHCFA components of the impact in the HCFA Data Center (HDC) of programmanagement activities including new requirements, growth, and new technology.Plans, organizes and directs the acquisition of ADP/DC hardware and softwarewithin HCFA. Plans, organizes, coordinates, and controls activities requiredto maintain a contingency and disaster recovery plan for the HDC. Performstechnical assessments of new products, conducts independent evaluations,and acts as liaison for all beta testing. Conducts comprehensive impactanalyses on network planning and design to ensure continuity in supportof the total HCFA user community. Conducts studies to determine and definecommunications network user requirements. Tests and evaluates state ofthe art systems software for planning and development. Serves as the Agencyrepresentative and inter- and intra-Department liaison for technology changesin the total ADP environment. Serves as principal focus and coordinatorfor major system designs resulting from new technology (e.g. PRISM) orsignificant legislation (e.g. Catastrophic Coverage).<ITAG tagnum="81">b. Division of Computer and Communications Services (FHE61)</ITAG>Manages, operates, and maintains HCFA's Data Center (HDC) and data communication(DC) facilities. Establishes workload planning and controls and scheduleswork to be processed. Directs and manages the Agency-wide installations/relocationsof ADP/DC equipment. Manages, evaluates, installs, and maintains HDC operatingsystems software and software products. Analyzes, evaluates, implements,modifies as necessary, and maintains data base management systems (DBMS).Provides direct interface with vendors and communication carriers for orderingand installing DC facilities. Conducts studies to determine communicationsnetwork user requirements and provides technical advice and consultationto the user community.<ITAG tagnum="81">c. Division of User Services and Support (FHE62)</ITAG>Serves as the principal focal point for coordinating matters relating tothe acquisition of end user ADP hardware and software with in HCFA. Developsand manages the HCFA/wide chargeback system for HCFA Data Center (HDC)users for determining and/or recommending the allocation of HDC resourceswithin the user community. Manages and operates an Information Center toprovide Agency-wide training and technical assistance for user of the HDC.3. Office of Statistics and Data Management (FHE7)Develops and implements plans and policies for the identification, classificationcoding, standardization, development, and security of data, procedures,and standards to meet HCFA's information requirements. Develops and maintainsthe Agency program information strategy and plan for applying data planningand management techniques to support the redesign and functioning of Agencysystems. Designs, implements, maintains, and ensures the continuing operationof current and revised national health care information and program designsupport systems. Extracts health care data necessary to support HCFA activitiesand HCFA, the Social Security Administration, and other health-relatedsources using large-scale computer systems and/or personal computers, asnecessary. Provides sophisticated computational and statistical services,mathematical modeling, simulations, systems analysis, and statistical programming.Designs information systems, data bases, and software applications forresearch and development. Conducts special purpose information retrievaland processing activities in support of projects undertaken by HCFA. Developsprograms to array data in accordance with general specifications developedwithin HCFA. Develops standards for and monitors the quality of programmanagement and statistical data. Develops policy and procedures concerningthe release of program data. Provides direction to HCFA staff, other agencies,and the private sector on the implementation and administration of thesepolicies. Coordinates and provides liaison on data standards activities,the release of data, matters dealing with program data confidentiality,and research plans within HCFA and between HCFA and other governmentalagencies and non-governmental groups. Coordinates and provides liaisonwith HCFA's Privacy Officer and Freedom of Information Officer on all matterspertaining to the Privacy Act or the Freedom of Information Act. Servesas the focal point for the planning and evaluation of HCFA's data standardsdevelopment. Disseminates statistical data, estimates, analyses, and otherinformation on health-related programs in response to questions from legislators,program administrators, policymakers, researchers, and health plannersin the public and private sectors. Screens, evaluates, and responds torequests for publicly available data including developing guidelines andinitiating data release agreements. Prepares statistical reports for externalpublications and management reports on HCFA programs and related areas.Provides support for program analysis, policy development, and epidemiologicalresearch for the Federal and Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) Program and disseminatesESRD program information in publications, management reports, and responsesto ad hoc requests.<ITAG tagnum="81">a. Division of Data Development (FHE71)</ITAG>Designs, implements, maintains, and ensures the continuing operation ofnational health care information and decision support systems. Extractshealth care data necessary to support HCFA activities from HCFA components,the Social Security Administration, and other health-related sources usinglarge-scale computer systems and/or personal computers, as necessary. Developsprograms to array data in accordance with general specifications developedwithin HCFA. Develops and maintains file management systems, data storagetechniques, file documentation libraries, and information retrieval systems.Ensures the quality and integrity of program statistical data by advisingand consulting on data collection policy and procedures, forms designs,and forms clearance with other HCFA components requiring program data.Arranges for necessary revisions in source records due to legislation orchanges in administrative operations.<ITAG tagnum="81">b. Division of Information Analysis (FHE73)</ITAG>Disseminates statistical data, estimates, analyses, and related informationon health-related programs in response to questions from legislators, programadministrators, policymakers, reseachers, and health planners in the publicand private sectors. Maintains a data library including publications, computeroutput, microfilm, and machine-readable data files. Designs and maintainsdata systems for the analysis and dissemination of program data. Preparesstatistical reports for external publications and management reports onHCFA programs and related areas. Provides support for program analysis,policy development, and epidemiological research for the Federal End StageRenal Disease (ESRD) Program and disseminates ESRD program informationin publications, management reports, and responses to ad hoc requests.<ITAG tagnum="81">c. Division of Data Documentation and Release (FHE75)</ITAG>Develops policy to measure the quality of data to improve the efficiencyand effectiveness of information management in HCFA. Develops and implementsprocedures to ensure the integrity and proper usage of statistical data.Develops, maintains, and coordinates documentation on the sources, uses,and data limitations on files produced from HCFA statistical systems. Participatesin the development and establishment of data standards used for areas suchas uniform billing, uniform reporting, and uniform coding systems. Develops,maintains, and coordinates the publication and dissemination of manualssuch as the Statistical Files Manual and HCFA Data Profiles to inform othergovernment agencies and non-government organizations of the data maintainedin HCFA's statistical systems. Provides advice and consultation on theavailability and use of HCFA's data. Develops and implements data releasepolicies and costing methodologies to be used when releasing informationto the public. Develops policy and procedures concerning the release ofprogram data. Develops and implements confidentiality policies applyingto the generation, collection, analysis, interpretation, and release ofMedicare program and enrollment data. Coordinates with HCFA's Privacy Officerand Freedom of Information Officer in developing and applying Privacy Actand Freedom of Information Act policies and procedures to HCFA programdata released to other Federal components, research organizations, HCFAcontractors, and the public.<ITAG tagnum="81">d. Division of Statistical Analysis (FHE76)</ITAG>Performs the planning, organizing, and coordinating of activities requiredto build and control HCFA's program data needs. Plans, organizes, coordinates,and controls activities required to assure the timely, accurate, cost-effective,and successful development and implementation of new and revised decisionsupport systems to support Medicare statistical policy and program managementinformation development. Plans and conducts comprehensive analyses of complexand diversified areas such as systems analysis and design methodologies,computer programming methods and techniques, software testing, validationand systems acceptance, configuration of HCFA's automated data processing(ADP) and data communications resources, and data base security and integrity.Formulates contracting strategies and prepares procurement packages formajor contractual agreements concerning office workload. Provides highlytechnical data analysis and processing support needed to analyze currentand proposed health care delivery systems; the implications of experimentalfinancing methods on providers and physicians; the quality and accessibilityof care being received by beneficiaries; the monetary effects of new legislationon alternative reimbursement methodologies; and related research studiesof concern to policymakers and program managers. Develops data bases andcomputer software for addressing research initiatives; ad hoc data requests;statistical, legislative, and policy issues; and computer-based simulationsin support of studies by HCFA's researchers and program managers. Managesthe Hospital Cost Report Information System which is the national database of all Medicare hospital cost reports. Collects, validates, and processesautomated and hard copy cost reports; generates routine and user-specificresearch, actuarial, and budgetary reports; and incorporates modificationsto the systems that will handle revised user requirements and changes incost reports. Prepares documentation for and participates in the preparationof fiscal intermediary manual instructions. Coordinates program supportto office staff in such areas as disk space requirements, ADP equipmentacquisition, and tape handling. Provides office focus for ADP systems standardsand documentation.<ITAG tagnum="81">e. Division of Medicaid Statistics (FHE77)</ITAG>Collects annual (HCFA-2082) Medicaid program statistical reports from StateMedicaid agencies. Works with State Medicaid agencies to correct errorsand collect missing information. Conducts consistency checks across databases to verify the validity of submitted data and makes corrections tocurrent and historical data to produce accurate statistics. Publishes annualMedicaid statistics in various HCFA publication series and produces statisticaltables for use by HCFA Managers in administering the Medicaid program.Collects special project statistics (i.e., early and periodic screening,diagnosis, and treatment and sterilization) to be used by HCFA staff toadminister or monitor special Medicaid programs. Responds to Medicaid datarequests from HCFA staff, other agencies in the Department of Health andHuman Services, the Office of Management and Budget, members of Congress,other Federal departments, State agencies, public and private higher educationinstitutions, and individual researchers. Provides statistical consultationto other HCFA components concerning the Medicaid program. Designs and developsthe computerized mechanisms for collecting person-based Medicaid data.Collects individual eligibility, provider, and claims data from State automated-datasystems. Processes these data to verify the accuracy of the data consistentwith developed standards. Provides technical assistance to the States inthe development and submittal of these data and maintains ongoing contactwith State agencies to maintain a high quality of data submitted. Designs,develops, and maintains a system for computerizing and making availableto all HCFA components the Medicaid program characteristics data containedin State Medicaid Plans. Designs and develops computer systems to utilizethe data collected for statistical and actuarial purposes. Provides technicalassistance to other components of HCFA in the development and use of thesestatistical data as they relate to specific program areas.4. Office of Health Program Systems (FHE8)Designs, develops, implements, and maintains automated data processing(ADP) and telecommunications systems and software, data files and formats,and manual procedures required to support the Agency's programmatic missionfrom operational, program management, and quality control aspects. Establishesand maintains a national file of eligible Medicare beneficiaries. Establishesand maintains a history of Medicare benefit utilization. Integrates entitlementdata and information from other programs (e.g., Medicaid, Veterans Administration)into Medicare files. Receives and responds to queries regarding beneficiaryentitlement and benefit and deductible status from a nation-wide networkof Medicare fiscal agents. Provides program data and related informationto authorized requestors. Maintains systems that support the certificationof providers of service in the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Determinesand reconciles payment liability for group health organizations. Maintainssystems that support the certification of health maintenance organizationsand capitation demonstration projects. Prepares billings for, receives,and processes ADP records for Medicare premium remittances from third-partypayers and beneficiaries. Prepares a variety of program management reports(e.g., workloads, processing times) for distribution throughout the Agency,Department, and to Medicare fiscal agents. Provides ADP support to theAgency for quality control systems and beneficiary and provider overpaymentsystems. Consults with central and regional office components and othergovernment agencies to define programmatic ADP system performance requirements.Negotiates reviews, and approves systems designs. Consults with bureaucomponents to define ADP and teleprocessing resource requirements and providesinput to the budget planning and procurement processes. Ensures awarenessof and compliance with government-wide and local security and privacy requirementswithin the office. Provides office focus for systems security, standards,and documentation.<ITAG tagnum="81">a. Division of Beneficiary and Utilization Systems (FHE82)</ITAG>Designs and implements automated data processing (ADP) systems, manualprocesses, and procedural instructions for development and maintenanceof a master file of all individuals eligible for Medicare benefits (includingRailroad Retirement annuitants); enrollment of beneficiaries and issuanceof identification cards; posting of benefit utilization data and respondingto utilization queries from intermediaries and carriers; issuance of noticesof benefit utilization; maintenance of controls for reconciliation andaudit of providers and carriers; and determination, billing, and collectionof Medicare premium liability from third party entities and direct payingbeneficiaries. Furnishes a variety of management data for review, appraisal,and planning purposes and assists other HCFA systems components in developingand interpreting the data. Provides systems support and technical expertiseto the Office of Budget and Administration in resolving electronic exceptionsand processing correspondence.<ITAG tagnum="81">b. Division of Capitation Systems (FHE83)</ITAG>Designs and implements automated data processing (ADP) systems and operatinginstructions for development and maintenance of the master file of allindividuals enrolled in group health plans; preparation of beneficiarymailings for beneficiaries enrolling in ``lock-in'' Health MaintenanceOrganizations (HMOs) and certain HMO solicitation projects; determinationand reconciliation of payment liability for group health plans; developmentand maintenance of certification and financial systems for all HMOs; anddevelopment and maintenance of systems to support demonstration projectson Private Health Plan Options (PHPO). Furnishes a variety of managementdata for review, appraisal, and planning purposes and assists other HCFAsystems components in developing and interpreting the data. Provides systemssupport and technical expertise to the Office of Prepaid Health Care inthe payment, audit, reconciliation, certification, and quality assuranceof PHPO systems.<ITAG tagnum="81">c. Division of Program Management Systems (FHE84)</ITAG>Design, develops, and implements a wide variety of automated data processing(ADP) and telecommunications systems in support of HCFA program managementfunctions including workload and operating systems; Supplemental MedicalInsurance physician and laboratory payment information systems; managementsupport systems, beneficiary and provider overpayment systems; providercertification and billing data including an on-line query and reply subsystem;accounting controls for the reconciliation and audit of providers and carriers;and Medicare quality control systems. Provides technical support to HCFA'sregional offices in program management systems areas. Provides technicaland state-of-the-art expertise in the use of current program data basesfor the design and development of new systems which support HCFA's programmanagement objectives.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: June 28, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis B. Hays,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator, Health Care Financing Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-15796 Filed 7-5-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>