<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89927-0102 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-27-89.f2.A1101</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Rel. No. IC-17144; 812-7051]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">SEI Liquid Asset Trust, et al.; Application</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">September 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC'').</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice of Application for Exemption under the InvestmentCompany Act of 1940 (``1940 Act'').<T3>Applicants:</T3> SEI Liquid Asset Trust, SEI Tax Exempt Trust, SEICash+Plus Trust, SEI Index Funds, SEI Institutional Managed Trust (the``Trusts''), SEI Financial Management Corporation (``SFM''), SEI FinancialServices Company (``SFS''), and all other similar investment companiesmanaged and distributed in the future by SFM and SFS, respectively (collectively,``Applicants'').<T3>Relevant 1940 Act Sections:</T3> Exemptions requested pursuant to section6(c) from sections 18(f), 18(g) and 18(i).<T3>Summary of Application:</T3> Applicants seek an order to permit theissuance and sale of two classes of shares representing interests in eachof several investment portfolios, which classes would be identical in allrespects except for differences related to the distribution expenses and/orsupport services expenses, and the related class designation, voting rights,and dividend payment differences.<T3>Filing Dates:</T3> The application was filed on June 23, 1988, andamended on May 9, 1989, June 12, 1989, August 8, 1989, and September 14,1989.<T3>Hearing or Notification of Hearing:</T3> An order granting the applicationwill be issued unless the SEC orders a hearing. Interested persons mayrequest a hearing by writing to the SEC's Secretary and serving Applicantswith a copy of the request, personally or by mail. Hearing requests shouldbe received by the SEC by 5:30 p.m. on October 16, 1989, and should beaccompanied by proof of service on the Applicants, in the form of an affidavitor, for lawyers, a certificate of service. Hearing requests should statethe nature of the writer's interest, the reason for the request, and theissues contested. Persons who wish to be notified of a hearing may requestnotification by writing to the SEC's Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES:</T2> Secretary, SEC, 450 5th Street, NW., Washington, DC20549. Applicants c/o Robert J. Zutz, Kirkpatrick andamp; Lockhart, 1800M Street, NW., South Lobby, Suite 900, Washington, DC 20036.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Barbara Chretien-Dar, Staff Attorney,at (202) 272-3022, or Karen L. Skidmore, Branch Chief, at (202) 272-3023,Division of Investment Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> Following is a summary of the application;the complete application is available for a fee from either the SEC's PublicReference Branch in person or the SEC's commercial copier who can be contactedat (800) 231-3282 (in Maryland (301) 258-4300).<ITAG tagnum="84">Applicants' Representations</ITAG>1. The Trusts are registered investment companies sponsored by SFM, a registeredinvestment adviser, which also serves as each Trust's Manager and UnitholderServicing Agent. In this capacity, SFM receives a management fee from eachTrust. Separate fees are paid by each Trust to independent investment advisers.Each Trust is authorized to issue an unlimited number of units of beneficialinterest (``Shares'') without par value, including Shares representingseparate investment portfolios (``Portfolios'') and multiple classes ofShares regarding each Portfolio.2. All Shares are offered only to institutional investors for the investmentof their own funds or funds for which the institutions are nominal butnot beneficial owners of the investment. Typically, they would be actingin a fiduciary, agency or custodial capacity. A fiduciary account is generallyone in which an institutional investor has discretionary investment authority.An agency account is generally one in which the institutional investoris investing upon the instruction of another party because the institutiondoes not possess investment discretion. A custodial account is generallyone in which the primary role of the institutional investor is custodianof assets. However, under limited circumstances involving independent investmentmanagement services provided by SFM, some officers, trustees and employeesof Applicants can purchase directly Trust shares. Applicants anticipatethat the aggregate investments by all such officers, trustees and employeeswill constitute substantially less than one percent of the total assetsof such class or Portfolio.3. Shares of each Portfolio are sold at net asset value without a salesor redemption charge by SFS, a registered broker-dealer and an affiliateof SFM, which serves as the principal distributor of each Trust. The netinvestment income of each Portfolio which is a money market fund is declareddaily and paid on the first business day of each month. The net investmentincome of each Portfolio which is not a money market fund is declared dailyor monthly and paid monthly.4. Applicants propose to establish a second class of Shares (``Class B'')within some or all Trust Portfolios in order to broaden their range ofproducts and services, and to expand marketing alternatives. The ClassB Shares would be sold to institutional investors who invest on behalfof customer accounts and to whom they provide distribution-related services.The two proposed classes would differ in (i) the amount and type of feesunder differing Rule 12b-1 plans and related distribution agreements, (ii)the voting rights with respect to the Rule 12b-1 plan of each class and(iii) the dividend payments resulting from the differing Rule 12b-1 fees.Both classes would represent interests in the same Portfolio, and the investmentobjectives, policies and limits, and all other rights and fees (includingadvisory and management fees and related expense caps) will be identicialfor each class of each particular Portfolio.5. The currently outstanding class of Shares of each Trust will be designatedClass A Shares. Class A shareholders will continue to be subject to theRule 12b-1 distribution plans and distribution agreements which are currentlyin effect for each Trust. The 12b-1 plans and agreements adopted by eachTrust provide that the Trust will bear the cost of its distribution expensesas provided in a budget approved annually and reviewed quarterly by theBoard of Trustees. The expenses which are subject to reimbursement arelimited to (i) the cost of preparing, producing and delivering prospectuses,shareholder reports, sales literature and other materials for distributionto poential shareholders, (ii) the costs of complying with state and federalsecurities laws pertaining to the distribution of Shares, (iii) advertising,and (iv) expenses incurred in connection with the promotion and sale ofthe Shares, including SFS's expenses for travel, communication, compensationand benefits of sales personnel. Each Class A Rule 12b-1 distribution planlimits the annual distribution budget and expenditures under the budgetto .30% of the Trust's average daily net assets, except for the SEI IndexFunds' plan which establishes a limit of .05% of the Trust's average dailynet assets.6. Class B Shares will be identical to Class A Shares, except that eachTrust's Class B shareholders will be asked to adopt a modified Rule 12b-1plan and distribution agreement. Such modified plan and agreement wouldhave identical terms as the Rule 12b-1 plans for Class A, except that theClass B plan and agreement would require Class B Shares to pay SFS an additionaldistribution fee equal to .30% of the average daily net assets of the Trust'sClass B Shares. SFS would be authorized to pay part or all of its feesderived from these payments to Class B institutional shareholders whichprovide distribution-related administrative services to customer accountson whose behalf these shareholders have purchased Shares (``Service Payments'').These services will be provided pursuant to agreements between SFS andcertain shareholders (``Servicing Agreements''), and will include suchservices as: establishing and maintaining customer accounts and records,aggregating and processing purchase and redemption requests from customers,placing net purchase and redemption orders with SFS, automatically investingcustomer account cash balances, providing periodic statements to theircustomers, arranging for bank wires, answering routine customer inquiriesconcerning their investments in the Shares, assisting customers in changingdividend options account designations and addresses, performing sub-accountingfunctions, processing dividend payments from the Trust on behalf of customers,and forwarding certain shareholders communications from the Trust (suchas proxies, shareholder reports, and dividend, distribution and tax notices)to their customers. SFM will contine to provide these same types of servicesto Class A shareholders and to the Class B institutional shareholders.However, SFM will not directly provide such services to the beneficialowners of the Class B Shares where such owner is a party other than theinstitution. Rather, the institution which is the nominal shareholder pursuantto a Servicing Agreement will provide these services to the beneficialowners. No Service Payments will be made to institutions with respect tofunds invested on the institution's own behalf.7. The adoption and implementation of a Rule 12b-1 plan by a Trust forany of its Portfolios and classes will be independent of, and not conditionedupon, the adoption or implementation of a Rule 12b-1 plan by the Trustfor any other Portfolio and class. In addition, no Trust will use the Rule12b-1 plan fees charged to one class within a Portfolio to support themarketing of any other class of Shares within that Portfolio or any otherPortfolio.8. The dual class structure will enable each Portfolio to reflect moreprecisely the different distribution costs and related administrative expensesincurred in connection with different types of investors, while avoidingthe risk and expense of creating separate Portfolios for each type of investor.Under the proposed arrangement, each Share in a particular Portfolio, regardlessof class, would represent an equal pro rata interest in such Portfolioand would have identical voting, dividend, and liquidation rights, preferences,powers, restrictions, limitations, qualifications, designations, and termsand conditions, except for (i) Rule 12b-1 fees, (ii) voting rights relatedto each 12b-1 plan, and (iii) dividend differences resulting solely fromthe different Rule 12b-1 fees. In addition, each Share of a Portfolio willbear pro rata with every other Portfolio Share all Portfolio expenses notcovered by the Rule 12b-1 plans, including fees of the manager, investmentadviser, trustees, transfer agent, custodian, auditors, legal counsel,registration expenses, taxes and other operating expenses. The expenselimits which apply to certain of these expenses will apply uniformly toall classes of a Portfolio.9. The Rule 12b-1 fees reflect different distribution and related administrativecosts of making sales to and servicing the accounts of different typesof investors. For instance, the sale of Class A Shares with their lowerRule 12b-1 fee would be more appropriate for institutional investors whichinvest for their own accounts or for a few very large fiduciary, agencyor custodial accounts which do not cause the institution to incur substantialadditional costs. In contrast, the Class B Shares might be more appropriatefor institutional investors which (i) purchase Shares in their fiduciary,agency or custodial capacity and (ii) incur substantial additional costsby directly providing distribution and related administrative servicesto the many, but relatively small, accounts of beneficial investors itrepresents. These institutions can economically service such accounts onlythrough the receipt of the Service Payments provided by Class B Shares.At the same time, the proposed class structure does not compel Class Ashareholders to bear the higher costs which would be incurred by the Trustif SFM and SFS directly performed such services for the beneficial investors.10. The distribution expenses of a particular class will be borne solelyby that class. Charges under a Rule 12b-1 plan of a particular class willbe deducted from the net income of that class only, and dividends payableto the holders of Shares of that class thus will reflect the distributionexpenses paid pursuant to the Rule 12b-1 plan adopted by that class. Accordingly,the dividends distributed to shareholders of one class may differ fromthe dividends distributed to shareholders of the other class within thesame Portfolio as a result of varying allocations of distribution expensesunder the respective Rule 12b-1 plans. The methodology and procedures usedto calculate the net asset value of every class of a Portfolio shall beidentical. In addition, Applicants shall disclose in each applicable prospectusthat, although the methodology and procedures are identical, the net assetvalue of classes within a Portfolio may differ because of the differentRule 12b-1 fees charged to each class.<ITAG tagnum="84">Applicants' Legal Conclusions</ITAG>1. Applicants request an exemptive order under section 6(c) to permit thecreation of the proposed classes and the issuance and sale of Shares representinginterests in each of Applicants' Portfolios to the extent that such issuanceand sale might be deemed to (i) result in a ``senior security'' withinthe meaning of section 18(g) of the 1940 Act and to be prohibited by section18(f)(1), and (ii) violate the equal voting provisions of section 18(i).2. The creation of two classes does not present the concerns which section18 was designed to address. The proposed arrangement does not involve borrowings,affect any Trust's existing assets or reserves, or increase the speculativecharacter of any Shares in a Portfolio. The proposed capital structurewill not induce any group of shareholders to invest in risky securitiesto the detriment of any other group of shareholders because the investmentrisks of each Portfolio will be borne equally by all of its shareholders.3. Mutuality of risk will be preserved with respect to all Shares in aPortfolio because (i) and Shares of each Portfolio will be redeemable atany time, and (ii) no class of Shares will have any distribution or liquidationpreferences with respect to particular assets and no class will be protectedby any special reserve or other account.4. Insiders will not be able to manipulate expenses and profits among theclasses of Shares because no Trust or Portfolio is organized in a pyramidfashion, all the expenses and profits of a Portfolio will be borne prorata by all Shares of the Portfolio, irrespective of a class, and all classeswill have equal voting rights with other classes within the same Portfolio,except for the allocation of distribution expenses and voting rights underseparate Rule 12b-1 plans adopted by the respective classes. The dangerthat a complex capital structure may shift control to those without equityor other investment is not present.5. Finally, the proposed arrangement raises no valuation concerns becauseall classes of a Portfolio have pro rata interests in the same pool ofassets. Moreover, Applicants will implement appropriate steps to ensurethat the respective yields to shareholders of each class of Shares arefairly disclosed in the relevant Portfolio's prospectus and shareholderreports.6. The proposed arrangement would permit each Trust to facilitate the distributionof its securities and expand the scope and depth of its administrativeservices without assuming excessive organizational, legal, administrative,accounting and bookkeeping costs or unnecessary investment risks. Further,each Trust could compensate institutional shareholders for providing administrativeservices that are tailored to the needs of their customers. In turn, suchcustomers would enjoy not only the benefits of the services so provided,but also the additional investment safety and stability anticipated fromthe opportuity to invest in established, low-cost, diversified portfolios.7. The dual class structure will permit each Trust to save the organizationaland other continuing costs that would be incurred if each Trust were requiredto establish a separate Portfolio for each class of Shares. Moreover, eachTrust's beneficial owners, irrespective of class, may benefit to the extentthat (i) the pro rata operating expenses per Share are lower than theywould be otherwise, due to economies of scale and spreading fixed costsover a larger asset base, and (ii) the larger pool of assets in each Portfoliobetter enables the investment adviser to achieve investment objectives,including Portfolio diversification.8. The proposed allocation to a class of Shares of expenses and votingrights relating only to its particular Rule 12b-1 plan in the manner describedin equitable and would not discriminate against any group of shareholders.Investors purchasing Shares in a particular class and receiving the serviceprovided under the Rule 12b-1 plan adopted by that class would bear thecosts associated with those services, but would also enjoy exclusive shareholdervoting rights with respect to matters affecting such plan. <ITAG tagnum="84">Conditions on Relief</ITAG>If the requested relief is granted, Applicants agree to the following conditions:Class Differences1. Each class of Shares will represent interests in the same Portfolioof investments of a Portfolio and will be identical in all respects, exceptfor certain differences related to (i) the method of financing DistributionExpenses, including Service Payments and other Rule 12b-1 fees, and (ii)the related voting, dividend payment and class designation differences.Any additional incremental expenses other than Rule 12b-1 fees which aresubsequently identified and should be properly allocated to one class ofShares shall not be so allocated until approved by the SEC pursuant toan amended order. Trust Approval of Service Plans 2. Each Rule 12b-1 plan will (i) conform with Rule 12b-1, (ii) be approvedand reviewed by the Board of Trustees of the applicable Trust and (iii)be approved by that Trust's applicable shareholders, each in accordancewith the procedures and standards set forth in Rule 12b-1 as that ruleis currently in effect and in accordance with any future modificationsto that rule. 3. Each Servicing Agreement (including any related agreements) will beapproved annually by the Board of Trustees of the applicable Trust, includinga majority of the independent Trustees, only after a thorough examinationof all relevant facts. In evaluating the Servicing Agreements, the Trusteeswill specifically consider whether (i) the Servicing Agreements are inthe best interest of each Portfolio's classes and their respective shareholders,(ii) the services to be performed thereunder are required for the operationsof the Portfolios, (iii) the service provider can provide services at leastequal, in nature and quality, to those provided by others, including theTrusts, offering the same or similar services, and (iv) the fees for suchservices are fair and reasonable in light of the usual and customary chargesmade by other entities, especially non-affiliated entities, for servicesof the same nature and quality. In addition, the Trustees who vote to approvewill do so, exercising reasonable business judgment and in light of theirfiduciary duties under state law and under Sections 36(a) and (b) of the1940 Act. The minutes of the meetings of the Trustees of each Trust regardingsuch deliberations and approvals shall describe the factors consideredand the basis for the decisions. The minutes will be available for inspectionby the SEC staff and any Servicing Agreements will be preserved for a periodof not less than six years from the date of such plan, the first two yearsin an easily accessible place. 4. The Board of Trustees of the Trusts will receive quarterly and annualstatements of the amounts received and expended under the Servicing Agreementsand the purposes for which such expenditures were made. In the statements,only service expenditures properly attributable to the servicing of a particularclass of Shares will be used to justify the Servicing Agreement fees. NoServicing Agreement will be operated in such a manner as to cause paymentsthereunder to subsidize the servicing of the Shares of any class of thesame Portfolio.Class Conflicts5. Dividends paid by each Trust with respect to a class of Shares of aPortfolio will be calculated in the same manner, at the same time, on thesame day, and will be in the same amount as dividends paid by the Trustwith respect to each other class of shares in the same Portfolio, exceptthat distribution fee payments made by a class under its Rule 12b-1 Planand any related Service Payments made by a class under Service Agreementswill be borne exclusively by that class. 6. On an ongoing basis, the Trustees of the Trusts, pursuant to their fiduciaryresponsibilities under the 1940 Act and otherwise, will monitor each Portfoliofor the existence of any material conflicts among the interests of thevarious classes of Shares. The Trustees, including a majority of the independentTrustees, shall take such action as is reasonably necessary to eliminateany such conflicts that may develop. Applicants agree to take the actionsnecessary to ensure that the investment advisers, distributors, and serviceproviders will be responsible for reporting any potential or existing ocnflictsto the Trustees. If a conflict arises, SFM or SFS, at their own cost, willremedy such conflict by appropriate actions including, if necessary, establishingnew and separate registered management investment companies or portfolios.7. The conditions pursuant to which the exemptive order is granted andthe duties and responsibilities of the Trustees of the Trust with respectto the multi-class system will be set forth in guidelines to be furnishedto the Trustees.8. Trustees of the Trusts will be entitled to directly purchase Sharesof any Portfolio after implementation of the two class distribution systemonly if the purchased Shares will be equally divided among the variousclasses, provided, however, that the actual holdings of the various classesof Shares may differ to a minor degree if a Trustees elects to have dividendsreinvested. In this connection, purchases of Class B Shares need not bedivided among all service providers, but may be limited to only one suchprovider chosen on a random basis.9. Any Servicing Agreement between SFS and an institution shall providethat in the event an issue pertaining to the Rule 12b-1 plan is submittedfor shareholder approval, the institution shall vote any Shares held forits own account in the same proportion as the vote of those Shares heldfor its customers' benefit. Disclosure 10. Each Trust will clearly disclose the difference in the respective yieldsof the different classes of Shares of a Portfolio in the prospectus, shareholderreports and any advertising materials, including newspaper advertisements.For instance, the supplementary financial information, including the pershare table in each prospectus and the balance sheet in each prospectusor statement of additional information, will be separately presented forthe different classes. Similarly, the information provided by Applicantsto any newspaper or similar listing of the Trusts' net asset values andpublic offering prices will separately present the different classes ofShares. 11. Each prospectus relating to a class of Shares that is offered in connectionwith a Rule 12b-1 plan will describe the distinct expenses with respectto each class of Shares and the related services provided to that class,including any expenses and related services provided under any ServicingAgreement. In addition, each Servicing Agreement entered into by SFS pursuantto a Rule 12b-1 plan will contain a representation by the institutionalinvestor involved that any compensation payable to the institution in connectionwith the investment of its customers' assets in a Portfolio (i) will bedisclosed by it to its customers, (ii) will be authorized by its customers,and (iii) will not result in an excessive fee to the institution. 12. If salespeople or other people become entitled to receive a portionof a distribution or servicing fee which differs based upon the class ofShares so purchased, the applicable prospectuses will include a statementto this effect. Calculation of New Asset Value/Allocation of Expenses and Retention ofan Outside Expert 13. The methodology and procedures for calculating the net asset valueand divided distribution of the various classes and the proper allocationof expenses among the classes has been reviewed by an expert (the ``Expert'')who has rendered a report to the Applicants, which has been provided tothe staff of the SEC, that such methodology and procedures are adequateto ensure that such calculations and allocations would be made in an appropriatemanner. On an on-going basis, the Expert, or an appropriate substituteExpert, would monitor the manner in which the calculations and allocationsare being made and, based upon such review, would render at least annuallya report to the Funds that the calculations and allocations are being madeproperly. The reports of the Expert would be filed as part of the periodicreports filed with the SEC pursuant to Sections 30(a) and 30(b)(1) of the1940 Act and the work papers of the Expert with respect to such reports,following requests by the Trusts which the Trusts agree to provide, willbe available for inspection by the SEC staff upon written request by asenior member of the Division of Investment Management or a Regional Officerof the SEC. Authorized staff members would be limited to the Director,an Associate Director, the Chief Accountant, the Chief Financial Analyst,an Assistant Director, and any Regional Administrator or Assistant RegionalAdministrator. The initial report of the Expert is a ``Special Purpose''report on the ``Design of a System'' and on-going reports would ``SpecialPurpose'' reports on the ``Design of a System and Certain Compliance Tests''as defined and described in Statement of Auditing Standards No. 44 of theAmerican Institute of Certified Public Accountants (``AICPA''), as it maybe amended from time to time, or in similar auditing standards as may beadopted by the AICPA from time to time. 14. Applicants have adequate facilities in place to ensure implementationof the methodology and procedures for calculating the net asset value anddividend/distributions of the various classes of Shares and the properallocation of expenses among the classes of Shares and this representationhas been concurred with by the Expert in the initial report referred toin condition 11 above and would be concurred with by the Expert or an appropriatesubstitute Expert on an on-going basis at least annually in the on-goingreports referred to in that condition. Applicants agree to take immediatecorrective action if the Expert, or appropriate substitute Expert, doesnot so concur in the on-going reports. Rule 12b-1 Payments 15. Applicants acknowledge that the grant of the requested exemptive orderdoes not imply SEC approval, authorization of or acquiescence in any particularlevel of payments that Applicants may make to institutions pursuant toany plan in reliance on this exemptive order. <ITAG tagnum="21">For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, underdelegated authority. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jonathan G. Katz, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-22824 Filed 9-26-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 8010-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>