<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89427-0113 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-27-89.f2.A1112</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-333]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Power Authority of the State of New York; Consideration of Issuanceof Amendment to Facility Operating License and Proposed No significantHazardous Consideration Determination and Opportunity for Hearing </ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. DPR-59 issuedto Power Authority of the State of New York (the licensee) for operationof James A. FitzPatrick Nuclear Power Plant located in Oswego, New York.The proposed amendment would revise the Technical Specifications (TS) Section3.11.A.3 concerning the Main Control Room Emergency Ventilation System(MCREVS) Limiting Condition for Operation (LCO). The present TS allowsthe plant to operate for a period of up to seven days with both trainsof MCREVS out of service and does not specify an LCO for one train operation.The proposed change would add an allowable out of service time requirementof 14 days with one filter train inoperable and change the allowable outof service time to three days with both trains inoperable. Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the request for amendmentinvolves no significant hazards consideration. The Commission has provided guidance concerning the application of criteriafor determining whether a significant hazards consideration exists by providingcertain examples (March 6, 1986, 51 FR 7751). One of the examples of actionsnot likely to involve significant hazards considerations is example (ii)which is a change that constitutes an additional limitation, restrictionor control not presently included in the technical specifications. The staff has reviewed the proposed amendment to change the MCREVS LimitingCondition for Operation and concluded that it falls within the envelopeof example (ii) because the proposed amendment would result in more restrictiveconditions for operation than presently included in the TS. Therefore, based on the above considerations, the Commission has made aproposed determination that the amendment request involves no significanthazards considerations. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-216, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Marylandfrom 7:30 to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments received may be examinedat the NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW.,Washington, DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions for leaveto intervene are discussed below. By May 30, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order. As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above. Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendments under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party. Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards considerations. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the request for amendment involves nosignificant hazards considerations, the Commission may issue the amendmentand make it effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearingheld would take place after issuance of the amendment.If a final determination is that the amendment involves significant hazardsconsiderations, any hearing held would take place before the issuance ofany amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitionsare filed during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1-(800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to Robert A. Capra: (petitioner'sname and telephone number), (date petition was mailed), (plant name), and(publication date and page number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice). A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Mr. Charles M. Pratt, 10 Columbus Circle,New York, New York 10019.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board designated to rule on the petition and/orrequest, that the petitioner has made a substantial showing of good causefor the granting of a late petition and/or request. That determinationwill be based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the licensee's commitmentletter dated May 13, 1988, which is available for public inspection atthe Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC and at the Local Public Document Room located at StateUniversity of New York, Penfield Library, Reference and Documents Department,Oswego, New York 13216.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockvile, Maryland, this 21st day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert A. Capra,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate I-1, Division of Reactor Projects I/II,Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10094 Filed 4-26-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>