<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89306-0033 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-06-89.f2.A1032</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 42, Monday, March 6, 1989 / ProposedRules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Aviation Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Parts 23, 91, and 135</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 25812; Notice No. 89-6]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Program Notice No. 5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This notice is one of a series of notices that proposesto adopt new and amended airworthiness standards for small airplanes. Italso proposes to amend the flight instrument requirements in the generaloperating rules and the operating rules for air taxi and commercial operators.This particular notice proposes amended design requirements for complexsystems critical for safety in small airplanes, and to amend the requirementsfor locating certain instruments, including new technology electronic displayindicators. It proposes to add a new airworthiness standard for electronicdisplay instruments. It also includes related changes to the general andair taxi operating rules to allow a third attitude indicator in lieu ofa rate-of-turn indicator. These proposals arise from the recognition, byboth government and industry, that updated safety standards are neededfor an acceptable level of safety in the design requirements for airplanesthat are used in both private and commercial operations. The proposalsof this notice, when adopted, will include design requirements applicableto advancements in technology being incorporated in current designs, andreduce the regulatory burden in showing compliance with some requirementswhile maintaining an acceptable level of safety.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE:</T2> Comments must be received on or before July 5, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> Comments on this notice may be mailed in triplicate to:Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel,Attn: Rules Docket (AGC-10), Docket No. 25812, 800 Independence Avenue,SW., Washington, DC 20591, or delivered in triplicate to: Room 915-G, 800Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591. Comments delivered mustbe marked Docket No.25812. Comments may be inspected in Room 915-G between8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays, except Federal holidays.In addition, the FAA is maintaining an information docket of comments inthe Office of Assistant Chief Counsel, ACE-7, Federal Aviation Administration,Central Region, 601 East 12th Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64106. Commentsin the information docket may be inspected in the Office of Assistant ChiefCounsel weekdays, except Federal holidays, between the hours of 7:30 a.m.and 4:00 p.m.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Earsa Tankesley, Standards Office(ACE-110), Aircraft Certification Division, Central Region, Federal AviationAdministration, 601 East 12th Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64106; Telephone(816) 374-5688.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Comments Invited </ITAG>Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposedrule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire.Comments relating to the environmental, energy, or economic impact thatmight result from adopting the proposals in this notice are invited. Communicationsshould identify the regulatory docket or notice number and be submittedin triplicate to the address specified above. All communications receivedon or before the closing date for comments specified above will be consideredby the Administrator before taking further rulemaking action. Commenterswishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of comments submitted in responseto this notice must include a self-addressed, stamped postcard on whichthe following statement is made: ``Comments to Docket No. 25812'' The postcardwill be date stamped and returned to the commenter. All comments receivedwill be available, both before and after the closing date for comments,in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report summarizingeach substantive public contact with FAA personnel concerned with thisrulemaking will be filed in the docket. <ITAG tagnum="84">Availability of NPRM </ITAG>Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to theFederal Aviation Administration, Office of Public Affairs, Attn: PublicInquiry Center (APA-200), 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC20591, or by calling (202) 267-3484. Communications must identify the noticenumber of this NPRM. Persons interested in being placed on the mailinglist for future NPRMs should also request a copy of Advisory Circular No.11-2A, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Distribution System, which describesthe application procedure.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>The FAA announced the Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Program in NoticeNo. CE-83-1 (48 FR 4290; January 31, 1983) and invited all interested personsto submit proposals for consideration. The review program objective wasto encourage public participation in improving and updating the airworthinessstandards applicable to small airplanes.The FAA issued Notice No. CE-83-1A in response to requests from interestedpersons, which reopened the proposal period for submission of proposals.This action (48 FR 26623; June 9, 1983) was based upon an FAA determinationthat it would be in the public interest to allow more time for the publicand the aviation industry to submit their proposals.By the close of the proposal period on May 3, 1984, the FAA had receivedapproximately 560 proposals in response to Notice Nos. CE-83-1 and CE-83-1A.On July 25, 1984, the FAA issued Notice No. CE-84-1 (49 FR 30053; July25, 1984) announcing the Availability of Agenda, Compilation of Proposals,and Announcement of the Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Program Conferenceto discuss the proposals. The conference was held on October 22-26, 1984,in St. Louis, Missouri. A copy of the transcript of all discussions heldduring the conference is filed in Docket No. 23494.Since the conference, the FAA has received petitions for exemptions fromthe requirements of Parts 91 and 135 to allow the installation of a thirdattitude indicator in lieu of the required rate-of-turn indicator. Further,the FAA has received a significant number of applications for installationof complex instrument systems not envisioned in the current requirementsof Part 23.Notice No. 1 of the Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Program is directedtoward improvement of crashworthiness. After a further review of the conferenceproposals and conference transcript, the FAA concluded that proposals plannedfor Notice No. 2 were next in priority. Notice No. 2 development did notprogress as planned; therefore, the proposals to amend Part 23 in thisnotice were taken out of planned Notice No. 2 to expedite their issuance.Current computer and instrumentation technology has resulted in systemsand equipment being available for small airplanes that are novel and unusualrelative to what was envisioned and considered when the current Part 23requirements were promulgated. Therefore, the FAA is finding it necessaryto issue special conditions and expend significant resources to assureadequate airworthiness standards for these systems. To reduce the needfor further processing of special conditions and exemptions and to allowconcentration of FAA rulemaking resources on updating the airworthinessrules, the proposals in this notice are being given priority over the remainingPart 23 Airworthiness Review rulemaking actions.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory and Economic Evaluations</ITAG>The proposals to amend Part 23 contained in this notice would upgrade airworthinessstandards to include design requirements for complex systems critical forsafety in Part 23 airplanes. These upgraded standards would apply to airplanesfor which an application for a type certificate or change to type certificateunder Part 23 is made after the effective date of the proposed rule. Theproposals to amend Part 23 contained in this notice would require examinationof systems and equipment for their criticality to the continued safe flightof the airplane, require reliability of such systems based on their criticality,define ``essential loads'', set forth power requirements for essentialloads, and set forth standards for installation of instrument systems utilizingelectronic display indicators.The proposals to amend Parts 91 and 135 contained in this notice wouldallow the installation of a third attitude indicator in lieu of the requiredrate-of-turn indicator. The complex instrument systems now being proposedfor installation may not include the rate-of-turn function. Allowing anadditional attitude indicator with a dedicated power supply relieves theburden on the manufacturer and allows safer operations because of greaterutility of the third attitude indicator.These proposals impose no cost on the aviation community or other personsbut rather include provisions which are currently being applied by specialconditions.Current computer and instrumentation technology has resulted in systemsand equipment being available for airplanes that are novel and unusualrelative to what was envisioned and considered when the current Part 23requirements were promulgated. Therefore, the FAA finds it necessary toissue special conditions and expend significant resources to assure adequateairworthiness standards for these systems. These proposals are of a cost-relievingnature because they would eliminate the need for special conditions processing,which often involves costly and unnecessary delays. In addition, manufacturersare not being directed to incorporate the newest technology in their futuremodels but are instead being afforded a set of regulations to observe shouldthey choose the new equipment. Furthermore, it was determined that thesethree amendments involved fairly substantial quantifiable benefits overthe 20-year study period (see Table 1). The benefits were estimated onthe basis of two alternative assumptions of small airplane production.The conservative assumption projects a continuation of the depressed conditionof this industry. A more optimistic assumption that the industry will regainits economic health was also used to estimate the benefits. These two assumptionswere used to estimate a range for the expected benefits.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4> Table</T4> 1._<T4> Summary of Range of Estimated Benefits (Discounted) and Costs</T4><ITAG tagnum="96">[Millions of dollars]</ITAG><H1> Proposed rule </H1><H1> Best estimate of benefits</H1><H1> Range</H1><H1> Costs</H1>A. Based on a continuation of recent production trends:<ITAG tagnum="3">23.1309 Equipment, Systems</ITAG><D> 1.80</D><D> N/A</D><D> Relieving.</D><ITAG tagnum="3">23.1311-23.1321 Instrument displays</ITAG><D> 0.33</D><D> 0.14-0.43</D><D> Relieving.</D><R>n,sandCx.3;</R><ITAG tagnum="4">Total<D> $2.13</D><D> </D><D/></ITAG>B. Based on assumption of a rebound in small airplane production:<ITAG tagnum="3">23.1309 Equipment, Systems</ITAG><D> 13.1</D><D> N/A</D><D> Relieving.</D><ITAG tagnum="3">23.1311-23.1321 Instrument displays</ITAG><D> 2.0</D><D> 1.0-3.1</D><D> Relieving.</D><ITAG tagnum="4">Total<D> $15.1</D><D> </D><D/></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Trade Impact Analysis</ITAG>The proposals in this notice would have little or no impact on trade forboth U.S. firms doing business in foreign countries and foreign firms doingbusiness in the U.S. In the U.S., foreign manufacturers would have to meetU.S. requirements, and thus they would gain no competitive advantage. Inforeign countries, U.S. manufacturers would not be bound by Part 23 requirementsand could, therefore, implement the proposal under study solely on thebasis of competitive considerations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Determination</ITAG>The FAA has also determined that the proposed rule changes will not havea significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. The FAA's criteria for a small airplane manufacturer is one employingless than 75 employees, a substantial number is a number which is not lessthan 11 and which is more than one-third of the small entities subjectto the proposed rule, and a significant impact is one having an annualcost of more than $14,900 (in 1978 dollars) per manufacturer. A review of domestic general aviation manufacturing companies indicatesthat only six companies meet the size threshold of 75 employees or less.The proposed amendments to 14 CFR Part 23 will therefore not affect a substantialnumber of small entities. The majority of the small entities impacted by the proposals to amendthe operating rules would represent operators of unscheduled aircraft forhire. The proposed changes to the operating rules provide alternativesto existing requirements and therefore do not impose any additional burden.These proposals, if enacted, would not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities.<ITAG tagnum="84"> Federalism Implications</ITAG> The regulations proposed herein would not have substantial direct effectson the states, on the relationship between the national government andthe states, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities amongthe various levels of government. Therefore, in accordance with ExecutiveOrder 12612, it is determined that this proposal would not have sufficientfederalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.<ITAG tagnum="84"> Conclusion</ITAG> For reasons discussed earlier in the preamble, the FAA has determinedthat this document (1) involves a proposed regulation that is not majorunder the provisions of Executive Order 12291, (2) is not significant underDOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979),and (3) in addition, I certify that under the criteria of the RegulatoryFlexibility Act, this proposed rule, if promulgated, will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. In addition,this proposal, if adopted, would have little or no impact on trade opportunitiesfor U.S. firms doing business overseas, or on foreign firms doing businessin the United States.<ITAG tagnum="84"> List of Subjects</ITAG> 14 CFR Part 23 Aircraft, Air transportation, Aviation safety, Safety. 14 CFR Part 91 Air carriers, Aircraft, Aircraft pilot, Airspace, Air transportation,Aviation safety, Pilots, Safety. 14 CFR Part 135 Air carriers, Aircraft, Airman, Airplanes, Airspace, Air taxi, Air transportation,Airworthiness, Aviation safety, Pilots, Safety.<ITAG tagnum="56"> PART 23_AIRWORTHINESS STANDARDS: NORMAL, UTILITY, AND ACROBATIC CATEGORYAIRPLANES </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 23 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4> Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1344, 1354(a), 1355, 1421, 1423, 1425, 1428,1429, 1430; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983).</ITAG>2. Section 23.1309 is amended by revising it to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80"> andSection; 23.1309</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Equipment, systems, and installations.</ITAG> (a) Each item of equipment, each system, and each installation: (1) When performing its intended function, may not adversely affect theresponse, operation, or accuracy of any_ (i) Equipment essential to safe operation, or (ii) Other equipment unless there is a means to inform the pilot of theeffect. (2) Of a single-engine airplane must be designed to minimize hazards tothe airplane in the event of a probable malfunction or failure. (3) Of a multiengine airplane must be designed to prevent hazards to theairplane in the event of a probable malfunction or failure. (b) The design of each item of equipment, each system, and each installationmust be examined separately and in relationship to other airplane systemsto determine if the airplane is dependent upon its function for continuedsafe flight and landing and, for airplanes not limited to VFR conditions,if its failure would significantly reduce the capability of the airplaneor the ability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions. Eachitem of equipment, each system, and each installation identified by thisexamination, upon which the airplane is dependent for proper functioningto ensure continued safe flight and landing, or whose failure would significantlyreduce the capability of the airplane or the ability of the crew to copewith adverse operating conditions, must be designed to comply with thefollowing additional requirements: (1) It must perform its intended function under any foreseeable operatingcondition. (2) When systems and associated components are considered separately andin relation to other systems_ (i) The occurrence of any failure condition which would prevent the continuedsafe flight and landing of the airplane must be extremely improbable; and (ii) The occurrence of any other failure condition which would significantlyreduce the capability of the airplane or the ability of the crew to copewith adverse operating conditions must be improbable. (3) Warning information must be provided to alert the crew to unsafe systemoperating conditions, and to enable them to take appropriate correctiveaction. Systems, controls, and associated monitoring and warning meansmust be designed to minimize initiation of crew action which would createadditional hazards. (4) Compliance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(2) of this sectionmay be shown by analysis and, where necessary, by appropriate ground, flight,or simulator tests. The analysis must consider_ (i) Modes of failure, including malfunctions and damage from externalsources; (ii) The probability of multiple failures, and undetected faults; (iii) The resulting effects on the airplane and occupants, consideringthe stage of flight and operating conditions; and (iv) The crew warning cues, corrective action required, and the capabilityof detecting faults. (c) Each item of equipment, each system, and each installation whose functioningis required by this chapter and that requires a power supply is an ``essentialload'' on the power supply. The power sources and the system must be ableto supply the following power loads in probable operating combinationsand for probable durations:(1) Loads connected to the power distribution system with the system functioningnormally.(2) Essential loads after failure of_(i) Any one engine on two-engine airplanes; or(ii) Any two engines on three or more engine airplanes.(iii) Any power converter, or energy storage device.(3) Essential loads for which an alternate source of power is requiredby this chapter, after any failure or malfunction in any one power supplysystem, distribution system, or other utilization system.(d) In determining compliance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section, thepower loads may be assumed to be reduced under a monitoring procedure consistentwith safety in the kinds of operation authorized. Loads not required incontrolled flight need not be considered for the two-engine-inoperativecondition on airplanes with three or more engines.(e) In showing compliance with this section with regard to the electricalpower system and to equipment design and installation, critical environmentaland atmospheric conditions, such as radio frequency energy and the effects(both direct and indirect) of lightning strikes, must be considered. Forelectrical generation, distribution, and utilization equipment requiredby or used in complying with this chapter, the ability to provide continuous,safe service under foreseeable environmental conditions may be shown byenvironmental tests, design analysis, or reference to previous comparableservice experience on other airplanes.(f) As used in this section, ``systems'' refers to all pneumatic systems,fluid systems, electrical systems, mechanical systems, and powerplant systemsincluded in the airplane design, except for the following:(1) Powerplant systems provided as part of the certificated engine; and(2) The flight structure (such as wing, empennage, control surfaces andtheir systems, the fuselage, engine mounting, and landing gear and theirrelated primary attachments) whose requirements are specific in SubpartsC and D of this part.<ITAG tagnum="84">Explanation</ITAG>Current Part 23 airplane airworthiness requirements are based on single-faultor fail-safe concepts and, when they were promulgated, the FAA did notenvision use of complex, safety-critical systems in such airplanes. Thisproposal will require examination of systems and equipment for their criticalityfor continued safe flight and will permit the continued use of the existingreliability requirements of Part 23 for airplanes whose systems are notcomplex and do not perform safety-critical functions. For those cases wherethe manufacturer finds it necessary or desirable to include complex, safety-criticalsystems, the proposal includes requirements for identifying those systemsand defines additional requirements needed for their certification. Theproposed changes to andSection; 23.1309 are summarized as follows:Proposed paragraphs (a), (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(3) of andSection; 23.1309are derived from current paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of andSection; 23.1309.Under proposed andSection; 23.1309(a)(1), the systems and installations,as well as the items of equipment, will be required to meet those requirementscontained in current andSection; 23.1309(a). Under proposed andSection; 23.1309(a)(2),the systems and installations, as well as the items of equipment, for single-engineairplanes will be required to meet those requirements contained in currentandSection; 23.1309(c) and proposed andSection; 23.1309(a)(3) will requirethese items on a multiengine airplane to meet the requirements containedin current andSection; 23.1309(b).(2) A new andSection; 23.1309(b) is proposed which will require a detailedexamination of each item of equipment, system, and installation. This examinationis to determine whether a failure would affect the airplane's continuedsafe flight and landing. Each item of equipment, each system, and eachinstallation identified by such an examination as being critical to thesafe operation of the airplane would be required to meet additional requirements.This will permit the approval of more advanced systems, that were not envisionedwhen andSection; 23.1309 was added to Part 23, without the need for specialconditions.A new andSection; 23.1309(c) is proposed to require identification of loadswhich are ``essential loads'' and requires the airplane power sources forthese loads to meet requirements consistent with other airplane airworthinessrequirements. These requirements are substantially equivalent to section59(c) of Appendix A to Part 135.A new andSection; 23.1309(d) is proposed to allow reduction of power loadswhen showing compliance with proposed andSection; 23.1309(c)(2). This provisionis substantially equivalent to section 59(c)(3) of Appendix A to Part 135.A new andSection; 23.1309(e) is proposed to require that the design of eachelectrical system, each item of equipment, and each installation take intoaccount critical environmental conditions. Critical environmental and atmosphericconditions would include radio frequency energy and direct and indirecteffects of lightning. Section 23.867 now requires the airplane structureto be protected from the effects of lightning and andSection; 23.954 nowrequires the airplane fuel system to be protected from the effects of lightning.A new andSection; 23.1309(f) is proposed to provide a definition of the systemsto which the requirements of this section are applicable and specificallyidentifies certain items to which they are not applicable.Early in the development of minimum requirements for transport categoryairplanes, it was realized that more complex systems were being added toairplane designs and there was a need to include requirements which specificallyaddressed equipment, systems, and their installation. This was accomplishedby the addition of andSection; 4b.606 to Part 4b of the Civil Air Regulations(CAR). Amendment 4b-6, effective March 5, 1952, in part, accomplished thisobjective. The preamble to that amendment included the following in regardto that addition:<ITAG tagnum="21">An amendment clarifying the requirements for equipment, systems, andinstallations with regard to functioning and reliability is made in SubpartF. In addition, it specifies dual power supply for those installationsthe functioning of which is necessary to show compliance with the CivilAir Regulations.</ITAG>This requirement, as adopted by that amendment, was retained in CAR Part4b until that regulation was recodified to the Federal Aviation Regulations,Part 25, effective February 1, 1965. At that time, this requirement, substantiallyunchanged, was identified as andSection; 25.1309. For many years the ``singlefault'' or ``fail safe'' concept of this requirement, along with experiencebased on service-proven designs and engineering judgment, were used tosuccessfully evaluate most airplane systems and equipment. However, in the late 1960's there appeared a number of safety-criticalsystems that were utilizing new technical complexity to accomplish safety-criticalfunctions. Due to the increasing complexity of the technology being usedto develop these systems, it was becoming increasingly difficult to applyengineering judgment as the only means of determining the effects or likelihoodof failure conditions. The increasing difficulty in evaluating these complexsystems, along with the potential hazards to the airplane that could resultfrom their failure made it necessary to provide duplicate and triplicatesystems to assure an acceptable level of safety. At about this same time, the development of rational methods for safetyassessment of systems led to the conclusion that an inverse relationshipshould exist between the probability of a failure condition and its effecton the airplane. That is, the more serious the effect, the lower the probabilitymust be that it will occur. The availability of this rational method for safety analysis of systems,along with the increasing difficulty in applying the then existing ``singlefault'' or ``fail safe'' concept, prompted the FAA to propose an amendmentto andSection; 25.1309 which would permit the use of this rational methodas an acceptable means of accomplishing safety analysis. That proposedrevision to andSection; 25.1309, which specified a level of safety in qualitativeterms, and required assessments to be made, was adopted by Amendment 25-23on April l, 1970. At that time, the FAA also realized that more complex systems were beingutilized in small airplanes and that there was a need to add a reliabilityrequirement to Part 23. Accordingly, rulemaking action was initiated whichresulted in andSection; 23.1309 being added to Part 23 by Amendment 23-14,effective December 20, 1973. The requirements of that new andSection; 23.1309were similar to those of andSection; 25.1309 prior to Amendment 25-23 whichwere based on the ``single fault'' or ``fail safe'' concept. At that time,it was not envisioned that complex safety-critical systems, utilizing technologynow available, would be used in the designs of small airplanes. Therefore,there was no identified need to include provisions for use of the rationalmethod of analysis in Part 23, as had been done in Part 25 by Amendment25-23.  Experience has shown that the envisioned rate of technical growth of systemsused in small airplanes was inaccurate and that safety-critical systemsare now being proposed for use on Part 23 airplanes. As with the earlierexperience with Part 25, the FAA is finding that it is difficult to apply``single fault'' concepts to these complex systems and to utilize the applicationof engineering judgment as the only means of determining the effects orlikelihood of certain failure conditions. Accordingly, there is now a needto revise the reliability requirements of Part 23 to allow the use of thelatest available rational method for safety analysis of these complex safety-criticalsystems to assure continuation of the level of safety intended for airplanescertificated to Part 23. Such safety critical systems are currently beingproposed for approval and there is an urgent need to accomplish this proposedrule change. A recommendation for a complete change of andSection; 23.1309 was submittedas a part of the Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Program. That recommendation,conference proposal number 434, was discussed during the October 22-26,1984, Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Program conference held in St.Louis, Missouri. A copy of the transcript of all discussions held duringthe conference is filed in Docket No. 23494, and may be examined by interestedpersons. At that conference a commenter on the recommendation noted that it dealtwith failures that cause hazards which do not have catastrophic potential,but does not deal with hazards which are potentially catastrophic. As notedin the above discussion, in the development of requirements for small airplanesystems it was originally recognized that failures of systems could producehazards and the earlier requirements addressed protection from those failures,but did not address safety-critical systems whose failures could be potentiallycatastrophic or would be catastrophic. As proposed, andSection; 23.1309 addressesall levels of hazards and the proposed requirements are based on the criticalityof the system. This would be accomplished by requiring all of the airplane's systemsto be reviewed to determine (1) if the airplane is dependent upon a systemfunction for continued safe flight and landing, and (2) if a failure ofany system on the airplane, not limited to VFR conditions, would significantlyreduce the ability of the crew to cope with the adverse operating conditions.For airplanes that do not include systems which perform either of thesesafety critical functions, the single-fault or fail-safe concept requirementswould continue to be applicable as proposed in andSection; 23.1309(a). If the design of the airplane includes systems that perform a functionthat is needed for continued safe flight and landing of the airplane and,accordingly, whose failure could be catastrophic, the systems would berequired to meet standards that establish that failures of the system mustbe extremely improbable. In addition, on airplanes designed for any typeof operation other than VFR, the systems whose failure would significantlyreduce the airplane's capability, or the ability of the crew to cope withthe adverse operating conditions and, thereby, be potentially catastrophicwould be required to meet standards that establish that failures of thesesystems are improbable. This standard is applicable if a system failurewould reduce the capability of the airplane or the crew to cope with adverseoperating conditions. It was recognized that any failure will reduce theairplane's or crew's capability by some degree, but that reduction maynot be of the degree that will make operation of the airplane potentiallycatastrophic. The intent of this proposed standard, andSection; 23.1309(b),is to have those systems whose failure would be catastrophic or potentiallycatastrophic be evaluated using the latest available techniques and, thereby,better assure that failures of such systems will not occur. At the conference, a commenter expressed the opinion that the languageof conference proposal 434 would require all system items to meet the analysistest and proof of compliance means. This commenter noted that simple andconventional systems can be assessed on the basis of service experienceand engineering judgment and noted that low performance, simple designedairplanes should be able to use the existing method of determining compliance.The FAA agrees with this commenter and, as previously stated, proposedandSection; 23.1309(a) is structured to allow the use of existing proceduresfor simple airplane system designs. Another conference commenter expressed a concern over the applicabilityof Section XX.1309 of any of the airworthiness parts. To clarify the applicabilityof andSection; 23.1309, a definition of ``system'' is included in proposedandSection; 23.1309(f).One commenter noted the difference in the way Part 23 and Part 25 airplanesare used and suggested different probability values for Part 23, but didnot provide recommended values. In reviewing this comment, it should benoted that the probability terms do not have values assigned in these proposedrequirements or other airworthiness parts. Extremely improbable failureconditions have been defined in FAA guidance material as those which areso unlikely that they are not expected to occur within the total operationallife of all airplanes of one type. If such a definition were to be appliedto items of structure, a failure that would cause the loss of a wing wouldbe a type of catastrophic failure that would not be expected to occur inthe life of all airplanes of one type. As cited, current requirements applicableto other portions of Part 23 airplanes, such as structures, establish alevel of safety that does not permit the occurrence of catastrophic failuresand, accordingly, there is no justification for allowing a lower levelof safety for possible catastrophic system failures. Accordingly, the proposedlanguage of this proposal uses the term ``extremely improbable'' to definethis critical type of failure condition. Less critical failure conditionterms used in airworthiness requirements for other categories of aircraftare also included in this proposal.Other review conference comments, not limited to any one commenter, questionedthe applicability of the rational method for analysis to two- to four-placeairplanes. While this proposal allows the continued use of existing certificationprocedures for certification of simple airplane designs, it would, however,also require the use of rational procedures if the airplane's design includessystems for the accomplishment of safety-critical functions. Because theproposed additional requirements of this proposal are added in such a manneras to make their use dependent on the complexity of the affected designand because the degree of reliability required in a particular design willdepend upon the criticality of the system function, there is no reasonto limit these requirements to a size of airplane or to differentiate betweensingle- or multiengine types of airplanes.One review conference commenter questioned the power supply requirementsof the conference proposal number 434. This commenter asked if this proposedrequirement is related purely to electrical power, and if it is, shouldn'tit be located elsewhere in Part 23. During the discussion of this question,it was pointed out by FAA panel members that the proposed requirement doesnot specify an ``electrical'' power supply and, therefore, would be applicableto any form of power supply provided for a system that is required by thischapter. No additional language has been added to identify the types ofpower supply. The proposal language, which is similar to that used in otherairworthiness parts, identifies requirements for power supplies used foreach item of equipment, system, and installation required by this chapter.By its applicability, it is clear that the requirements are not limitedto electrical power supplies.Additional discussions at the conference suggested that current andSection;23.1309 was adequate and that the only need was an Advisory Circular (AC)to identify acceptable means of compliance. At that time, the FAA madeit known that was not the case, and cited instances in which a complexsafety-critical system had been used in the design of small airplanes thatcould not be properly evaluated under the existing ``single fault'' conceptof andSection; 23.1309. The FAA further noted that the number of occurrenceswhere such a complex safety-critical system was being used in the designwas increasing rapidly and noted the need to revise the requirements tokeep them current with this rapid expansion of technology being appliedto the design of small airplanes.The FAA attempted to address some current issues relative to electronicflight instrument systems and autopilot monitors and limiters in advisorycirculars. FAA reviews of resulting material in the draft advisory circularsdetermined that the contents were rulemaking in nature and not suitablein an advisory circular. The concern was relative to the complexity andcriticality of such equipment. This proposal, when adopted, will providea regulatory basis for determining the criticality level of such systemsand require corresponding levels of reliability. Therefore, the FAA findsthat there is a need to proceed and develop a proposal without furtherdelay. Proposed andSection; 23.1309 of this notice provides reliability requirementswhich are based on the criticality of the system's function and will providethe updated standards needed for the certification of complex safety-criticalsystems in small airplanes.<T3>Reference:</T3> Conference proposal 434. 3. Part 23 is amended by adding a new andSection; 23.1311 under the heading``General'' to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 23.1311</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Electronic display instrument systems.</ITAG>Unless an applicant requests evaluation for a more limited kind of operationpursuant to andSection;andSection; 23.1525, 23.1559, and 23.1583(h), it isassumed that each airplane certificated to the requirements of this sectionis to be approved for operation in IFR conditions and the assessment offailures for compliance with andSection; 23.1309 must consider these conditions.Electronic display indicators, including those incorporating more thanone function, must comply with paragraph (a) or (b) as appropriate.(a) Electronic display indicators may be grouped on the instrument paneland centered as nearly as practicable about the vertical plane of eachrequired pilot's forward vision for compliance with andSection; 23.1321_(1) Provided the instruments required by andSection; 23.1303 (a), (b), and(c) that are independent of the airplane's electrical power system, areinstalled in accordance with the requirements of andSection; 23.1321(a),and (2) The electronic display systems comply with paragraphs (c) and (d) ofthis section and other applicable sections of this part.(3) This paragraph applies independently to each pilot station requiredfor certification or by the applicable operating rules.(b) Except for instruments required by andSection; 23.1303 (a), (b), and(c), electronic display indicators may be installed in lieu of mechanicalor electromechanical instruments provided the installations comply withparagraphs (c) and (d) of this section and other applicable sections ofthis part.(c) Electronic display indicators, including those with features that makeisolation and independence between powerplant instrument systems unfeasible,must_(1) Be easily legible under all lighting conditions encountered in thecockpit, including direct sunlight, considering the expected electronicdisplay brightness level at the end of the electronic display indicator'suseful life. Specific limitations on display system useful life must beaddressed in the Instructions for Continued Airworthiness requirementsof andSection; 23.1529.(2) Not inhibit the primary display of attitude, airspeed, altitude, orpowerplant parameters needed by any pilot to set power within establishedlimitations, in any normal mode of operation. (3) Not inhibit the primary display of engine parameters needed by anypilot to properly set or monitor powerplant limitations during the enginestarting mode of operation. (4) Have independent secondary attitude and rate of turn instruments thatcomply with andSection; 23.1321(a) if the primary electronic display instrumentsystem for a pilot presents this information. Instrument displays thatare located in accordance with andSection; 23.1321(d) are considered theprimary displays. (5) Incorporate sensory cues for the pilot that are equivalent to thosein the instrument being replaced by the electronic display indicators,and (6) Incorporate visual displays of instrument markings, required by andSection;andSection;23.1541 through 23.1553 or visual displays that alert the pilot to abnormaloperational values, or approaches to established limitation values, ofeach parameter required to be displayed by this part. (d) The electronic display indicators, including their systems and installations,and considering other airplane systems, must be designed so that one displayof information essential for continued safe flight and landing will remainavailable to the crew, without need for immediate action by any pilot forcontinued safe operation, after any single failure or probable combinationof failures. (e) As used in this section, ``instrument'' includes devices that arephysically contained in one unit, and devices that are composed of twoor more physically separate units or components connected together (suchas a remote indicating gyroscopic direction indicator that includes a magneticsensing element, a gyroscopic unit, an amplifier, and an indicator connectedtogether). As used in this section, ``primary'' display refers to the displayof a parameter that is located in the instrument panel such that the pilotlooks at it first when wanting to view that parameter.<ITAG tagnum="84"> Explanation</ITAG>A significant number of electronic display systems have become availablefor installation in small airplanes. These systems include display of allparameters that are typically displayed on a small airplane instrumentpanel. Approval of these systems in small airplanes was addressed by severalconference proposals that proposed to amend andSection;andSection; 23.1303,23.1305, 23.1321, 23.1323, and 23.1337. Conference proposal 420 from the General Aviation Manufacturers' Association(GAMA) recommended removing the words ``instrument'' and ``indicator''from andSection; 23.1303 and require specific ``data'' be displayed ratherthan require specific ``instruments''. Conference proposal 428 recommendedamending andSection; 23.1305 by changing ``powerplant instruments'' to ``powerplantdisplays'' and ``indicators'' and ``indicating'' to ``displays''. Conferenceproposal 436 recommended amending andSection; 23.1321 by changing ``instrument''to ``display'' or ``data on the flight displays''. Conference proposal439 recommended amending andSection; 23.1323 by changing ``instrument'' and``indicator instrument'' to ``display''. Conference proposal 450 recommendedamending andSection; 23.1337 by adding a new paragraph (e) to state ``Displaysother than individual indicators may be used if it is shown that adequateisolation is provided between engines and engine parameters.'' The basic justification given for all of the recommended changes is thatthe current requirements of Part 23 were written when the required datacould only be supplied using individual instruments. New technology nowallows this same data to be displayed in a different manner, possibly withall the data on a common display. It is desirable to take advantage of available new technology. The benefitsinclude safer (less prone to misreading) displays with less cockpit spaceand of equal or lower cost than the cluster of typical individual instruments.As technology advances, the amount of energy used for these displays andthe cost can be further reduced. The FAA agrees that when current requirements of Part 23 were written,only mechanical or electromechanical instruments that functioned independentlyfor each parameter displayed were envisioned. The engine instruments andsystems envisioned were isolated and independent. A single failure of anyengine or any of its systems could not affect the operation of any otherengine. The requirements were based on ``single fault'' or ``fail safe''concepts and, when these current requirements were promulgated, the FAAdid not envision use of complex, safety-critical systems in small airplanes.All envisioned instruments were single function; i.e., a failure wouldcause loss of only one instrument function, although several instrumentfunctions may have been housed in a common indicator case. Since the conference, the FAA has further studied the problems associatedwith installation of current technology indicators in small airplanes.As is discussed relative to amending andSection; 23.1309, these current technologysystems have potential for being critical for continued safe flight ofthe airplane. The potential for increased clarity in data display and theconcentration of data displays in a single indicator increases the potentialcriticality of failures. It is anticipated that pilots using these newinstrument systems will become increasingly dependent on the use of thembecause of the tasks they perform for the pilot. After a period of time,where these electronic indicators are located in the primary instrumentpanel locations, it is anticipated that pilots will find it more difficultto transition to back-up or secondary indicators when failure occurs, suchas reverting to use of needle-ball and airspeed for airplane attitude controlwhen the artificial horizon instrument system fails. The electronic indicators are expected to have significantly differentmodes of failure where they go from performing perfectly to total failure,whereas the mechanical and electromechanical indicators typically deterioratedin performance over a period of time such that they were replaced beforea total failure that prevented them from providing useful information tothe pilot. Current technology instrument systems with electronic indicators for smallairplanes may vary considerably in functional capability, complexity, andcost. Due to the economic considerations, the most expensive, complex,and reliable electronic instrument systems will only be installed in airplanesfitting a like description. The electronic instrument systems can readily provide digital indicationof exact numbers, moving pointer on a scale, and various other formatsand combinations of them all. The FAA is especially concerned that pilotsbe provided adequate sensory cues as to whether numbers displayed are increasingor decreasing and how fast they are changing. Also of concern is that digitalindication may not show the normal operating range cues to direction orrate of change or operational limits.As a result of these concerns and this further review of possible waysto address electronic instrument systems in Part 23, the FAA concludedthat a new andSection; 23.1311 for these systems is better than amendingseveral sections, which may result in an unclear treatment of the issue.Relative to identifying the indicating means of the electronic instrumentsystem, the FAA has reviewed existing materials and functions to be performedand has concluded the proper identifier is ``indicator'' rather than ``display''as recommended.Sections 23.1303 (a), (b), and (c) require basic flight and navigationalinstruments for small airplane certification. These mechanical instrumentshave performed their intended function very well over the years and thesebasic instruments will remain necessary for safety even when the currenttechnology systems are installed. Therefore, this proposal will allow displacementof these instruments from the primary location for such instruments forcompliance with the requirements of andSection; 23.1321, provided their locationin a secondary location is such that they are usable and in compliancewith andSection; 23.1321(a) requirements. It is the FAA's intent that thiswill continue the requirements that airspeed, altitude, and magnetic compassinformation will remain available to the pilot after total failure of theairplane's electrical power system.This proposal will allow electronic display indicators for engine parameterswithout isolation and independence of engine instruments as is now required.In developing this proposal, the FAA considered the operational characteristicsof airplane engines, the proposed amendment to andSection; 23.1309 in thisnotice for assessing failures and their consequences, and the cues availableto the pilots for assuring an engine instrumentation failure would notcreate a condition where the pilot would encounter significant difficultyin operating the engines.Due to the dependence pilots are expected to place on use of electronicindicators when the indicators include information essential to airplaneattitude control, the FAA is proposing secondary attitude and rate-of-turninstrument systems that comply with andSection; 23.1321(a) when the electronicindicators include display of attitude and rate-of-turn.Electronic indicator legibility is expected to change as the cathode raytubes (CRT) used in the electronic indicators age. Therefore, it is considerednecessary that instructions for continued airworthiness relative to theuseful life be addressed in compliance with andSection; 23.1529.Electronic indicator systems will have great potential for inhibiting informationto maximize the effect of other information in various phases of flight.Attitude, airspeed, altitude, and powerplant parameters needed to set powerwithin established limits are information the FAA has concluded must bedisplayed during all normal modes of operation and, therefore, may notbe inhibited during normal modes of operation. Information that is consideredessential to continued safe flight must remain available on indicatorsusable by the pilot after any single failure or combination of probablefailures without need for immediate crew action. At a minimum, withoutconsidering specific characteristics of an airplane's design, attitude,airspeed, and altitude must remain available without any crew action aftersuch a failure, whereas a failure that would remove other essential informationfrom displays, without resulting in an immediate hazard, would be acceptableprovided the essential information could be returned to a usable indicatorin a safe elapsed time.<T3> Reference:</T3> Conference proposals 420, 428, 436, 437, 439, and450.4. Section 23.1321 is amended by revising paragraph (a) and the introductorytext of paragraph (d); and by adding a new paragraph (d)(5) to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80"> andSection; 23.1321</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Arrangement and visibility.</ITAG> (a) Each flight, navigation, and powerplant instrument for use by anyrequired pilot during takeoff, initial climb, final approach, and landingmust be located so that any pilot when seated at the controls can monitorthe airplane's flight path and these instruments with minimum head andeye movement. The powerplant instruments for these flight conditions arethose needed to set power within powerplant limitations.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG> (d) For each airplane certificated for flight under instrument flightrules or of more than 6,000 pounds maximum weight, the flight instrumentsrequired by andSection; 23.1303, and, as applicable, by the operating rulesof this chapter, must be grouped on the instrument panel and centered asnearly as practicable about the vertical plane of each required pilot'sforward vision. In addition:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG> (5) Electronic display indicators may be used for compliance with paragraphs(d)(1) through (d)(4) of this section when such displays comply with requirementsin andSection; 23.1311.<ITAG tagnum="84"> Explanation </ITAG>This proposal would require those instruments used during certain maneuversto be located such that minimum eye or head movement is needed to monitorthe airplane's flight path and these instruments. Powerplant instrumentsfor which the location requirements apply would be limited to those neededto set power within powerplant limitations. The proposed revision of paragraph(d) would extend the T-arrangement of flight instruments to include allsmall airplanes certificated for all flight under instrument flight rules.This revision also clarifies the rule relative to instrumentation thatmust be provided for each pilot required for type certification or by theapplicable operating rules. If a pilot is required by any applicable requirement,then that pilot must be provided all instrumentation required for any operationsfor which the airplane is approved. Airplanes certificated to Part 23, in most cases, are certificated withonly one required pilot. However, many of such airplanes subsequently enterPart 135 operations where two pilots are required. A significant functionof the second required pilot is to monitor the airplane's flight path regardlessof whether or not this second pilot is controlling the flight path. Therefore,this second pilot must have flight instruments available that are installedin accordance with all of the criteria of Part 23 and the affected operatingrules, with specific emphasis on the requirements of andSection; 23.1321. Conference proposal 436 recommended provisions for electronic displaysto be included in andSection; 23.1321. The current rules were written whenelectro-mechanical instruments were all that were available and the requireddata could only be supplied using individual instruments. Current technologynow allows this same data to be displayed in a different manner, possiblywith all the data on a common electronic display indicator. The benefitsinclude safer (less prone to misreading) displays using less cockpit spacewith equal or lower cost than the cluster of individual instruments. Astechnology advances, the amount of energy used for these instrument systemsand their cost can be reduced. As previously discussed relative to proposedandSection; 23.1311, the FAA has determined that a new section on electronicindicators is the appropriate method of incorporating such requirementsinto Part 23, with a cross reference to that new section (andSection; 23.1311)in andSection; 23.1321. Conference proposal 437 recommended additional requirements relative topilot sensory cues and digital displays. The digital displays that needsensory cues for the pilot are addressed in proposed andSection; 23.1311.Further requirements relative to sensory cues in andSection; 23.1321 arenot considered necessary at this time. Conference proposals 435 and 436 recommended changing paragraphs (d)(2)and (d)(3) of andSection; 23.1321 to delete or replace the requirement forlocating airspeed and attitude displays directly to the left and rightrespectively of the altitude display. The recommended replacement requirementfor ``directly'' was ``Its vertical orientation must be such that it easilyfits into the pilot's cross check eye scan.'' These proposals were supportedby commenters at the conference. The FAA has encountered significant difficulty in administering requirementsthat are dependent on purely subjective evaluations. The FAA is also awarethat the current requirements have been administered, in some cases butnot all, such that the centers of airspeed, attitude, and altitude indicatorsmust be on a straight horizontal line. Since the conference, the FAA hasfurther evaluated these recommended changes and has determined that therequirement contains adequate flexibility for foreseeable designs and isnot proposing the recommended change as part of this action. By not proposinga change, this requirement will remain consistent in Parts 23 and 25.<T3> Reference:</T3> Conference proposals 435, 436, and 437.<ITAG tagnum="52"> PART 91_GENERAL OPERATING AND FLIGHT RULES</ITAG>5. The authority citation for Part 91 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4> Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1301(7), 1303, 1344, 1348, 1352 through1355, 1401, 1421 through 1431, 1471, 1472, 1502, 1510, 1522, and 2121 through2125; Articles 12, 29, 31, and 32(a) of the Convention on InternationalCivil Aviation (61 Stat. 1180); 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.; E.O. 11514; 49U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983).</ITAG>6. Section 91.33, paragraph (d)(3)(i), is amended by removing the word``Large'', by capitalizing the following word to read ``Airplanes'', andby adding the words ``the instrument requirements prescribed in'' afterthe words ``in accordance with''.<ITAG tagnum="84"> Explanation:</ITAG> The FAA proposes to remove the word ``Large'', which begins the sentencethat states the alternative to the requirement for a gyroscopic rate-of-turnindicator in andSection; 91.33 and add words to clarify that incorporatingthe requirements of andSection; 121.305(j) by reference extends the criteriaof andSection; 121.305(j) to all airplanes operating under Part 91 regardlessof size or propulsion means. The proposal, if adopted, would permit operationof small airplanes in accordance with the instrument and equipment requirementsfor instrument flight in the same manner as presently permitted for largeairplanes by the installation of a third attitude indicating instrumentsystem complying with the instrument and installation requirements of andSection;121.305(j).The FAA fully recognizes that, for instrument flight, andSection; 91.33 onlyrequires, in part, a single gyroscopic bank-and-pitch indicator (artificialhorizon/attitude indicating instrument system) in addition to a singlegyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator, except on certain aircraft. The FAAdoes not consider it appropriate, nor in the interest of safety in thoseairplanes where only a single bank-and-pitch indicator is installed, topermit the substitution of a second bank-and-pitch indicator in lieu ofthe required gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator. The bank-and-pitch indicator,being of a more complex design and, therefore, subject to additional failuremodes than a gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator, could have a higher failurerate. In the case when one attitude instrument fails, the pilot is deniedinformation as to which of only two installed attitude instruments is providingcorrect attitude reference. In contrast, installation of a third attitudeinstrument, in lieu of the gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator, will providean inherent voting system. Three independent attitude instruments allowthe crew to select two attitude instruments which agree to be the correctattitude of the airplane.This proposal would respond to issues raised in petitions for exemptionsand type certificate applications for airplanes when electronic instrumentsystems are installed that do not include a gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicatorand when the airplane design includes three attitude indicating instrumentsystems with at least one such system installed in accordance with andSection;121.305(j) instrument installation criteria. While not specifically discussedat the Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Conference, the FAA considersproposals herein addressing andSection;andSection; 23.1309, 23.1311, and 23.1321to be directly related to this proposed revision to andSection; 91.33, andto the proposals to amend andSection;andSection; 135.149 and 135.159 in proposals5-8 and 5-9 of this notice.The cited proposals to amend andSection;andSection; 23.1309, 23.1311, and 23.1321provide criteria applicable to approval of electronic flight instrumentsystems (EFIS) installations. Some EFIS do not incorporate a rate-of-turnindicator in the design. Other EFIS present the rate-of-turn indicationin the normal mode of operation; however, in the approach mode, the indicationnormally presented as rate-of-turn becomes an indication of deviation fromthe localizer course. The FAA does not consider it necessary for safetyor in the public interest to require a rate-of-turn indicator in a smallairplane when three attitude indicating instrument systems are installedin accordance with the instrument installation criteria of andSection; 121.305(j)as permitted for large airplanes.Section 121.305(j), instrument installation criteria, has been appliedto transport category airplanes successfully for many years. However, thisproposed change to andSection; 91.33 will extend these criteria such thatthey will be applied to small airplanes by persons who are not accustomedto evaluating an airplane's electrical system to determine whether theairplane is eligible to have a third attitude indicator installed. Therefore,the FAA plans to issue an advisory circular to provide guidance for installationof third attitude indicators in small airplanes.This proposed change to andSection; 91.33 does not change the FAA's intentrelative to pilot certification and continued proficiency in the use ofpartial panel instrumentation. Airplanes that are not configured such thatpartial panel proficiency can be demonstrated will not be accepted fordemonstration of instrument proficiency during initial IFR ratings or fordemonstrations of recurrency. The FAA has been considering rulemaking to relieve the regulatory burdenimposed by the requirement for a rate-of-turn indication, regardless ofother airplane design features that would provide the intended level ofsafety, since the Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Conference. In theFAA deliberations to formulate this proposed rule, a lesser requirement(than a third attitude instrument) was considered and rejected becauseit did not result in an acceptable level of safety after a single probablefailure.Recently, on May 5 and 20, 1987, Beech Aircraft Corporation petitionedfor amendment of andSection;andSection; 91.33(d)(3) and 135.159(a), respectively,to allow adding an additional attitude instrument in lieu of the requiredrate-of-turn instrument. The FAA agrees the rules should be amended relativeto the rate-of-turn instrument, but does not agree that direct replacementof the rate-of-turn instrument with an attitude instrument will providethe necessary level of safety because many airplanes could then be equippedwith two attitude instruments and no rate-of-turn instruments. The safetyissues concerning aircraft with less than three attitude instruments andwith no rate-of-turn instrument were previously discussed herein. Therefore,the FAA is addressing the issue, raised by Beech Aircraft Corporation inits petition, in this notice, but is not proposing the lesser requirementrecommended by Beech.<T3>Reference:</T3> No conference proposals addressed this proposed revision.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 135_AIR TAXI OPERATORS AND COMMERCIAL OPERATORS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Citation</ITAG>7. The authority citation for Part 135 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1355(a), 1421 through 1431, and1502; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983).</ITAG>8. Section 135.149 is amended by revising paragraph (c) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 135.149</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Equipment requirements: General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG> (c) For turbojet airplanes, in addition to two gyroscopic bank-and-pitchindicators (artificial horizons) for use at the pilot stations, a thirdindicator that is installed in accordance with the instrument requirementsprescribed in andSection; 121.305(j) of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Explanation</ITAG>The FAA is proposing a revision to this section to establish uniformityin the installation requirements of the various operating rules when athird attitude instrument system is required to be installed. The currentrequirements as set forth in andSection; 135.149 (c)(1) through (c)(6) aresubstantially the same as set forth in andSection; 121.305(j) and the requirementsof andSection; 91.33 reference andSection; 121.305(j) as the applicable criteriafor approval of the third attitude instrument system in lieu of the rate-of-turnindicator in large airplanes. Therefore, to preclude any misunderstandingof requirements that are to be identically applied, the FAA is proposingto incorporate the instrument requirements of andSection; 121.305(j) intoandSection; 135.149 by reference.<T3> Reference:</T3> No Conference proposals addressed this proposed revision.9. Section 135.159 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2)as (a)(2) and (a)(3) respectively; and by adding a new paragraph (a)(1)to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 135.159</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Equipment requirements: Carrying passengers under VFR at night orunder VFR over-the-top conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG>(a) * * *(1) Airplanes with a third attitude instrument system usable through flightattitudes of 360 degrees of pitch-and-roll and installed in accordancewith the instrument requirements prescribed in andSection; 121.305(j) ofthis chapter.<ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Explanation</ITAG>The FAA proposes an alternative requirement to the required gyroscopicrate-of-turn indicator in andSection; 135.159 applicable to airplanes. Theproposal, if adopted, would permit operation with any airplane used inPart 135 operations in substantially the same manner as airplanes similarlyequipped and used in Part 121 operations.The FAA fully recognizes that carrying passengers under VFR at night andunder VFR over-the-top conditions requires, as a minimum, a single gyroscopicbank-and-pitch indicator (artificial horizon/attitude indicating instrumentsystem) in addition to a single gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator. TheFAA does not consider it appropriate nor in the interest of safety in thoseairplanes where only a single bank-and-pitch indicator is installed topermit the substitution of a second bank-and-pitch indicator in lieu ofthe required gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator. The bank-and-pitch indicator,being of a more complex design and, therefore, subject to more failuremodes than a gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator, could have a higher failurerate. In the case where one attitude instrument fails, the pilot is deniedinformation as to which of only two installed attitude instruments is providingcorrect attitude reference. In contrast, installation of a third attitudeinstrument, in lieu of the gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator, will providean inherent voting system. Three independent attitude instruments allowthe crew to select the two attitude instruments which agree to be the correctattitude of the airplane.Part 135 operators of turbojet-powered airplanes are required to have installedthree bank-and-pitch instruments (andSection; 135.149(c)) and, at least onerate-of-turn indicator (andSection; 135.159(a)). In contrast, Part 121 operatorsof turbojet-powered airplanes are required to have installed three bank-and-pitchindicators but not a rate-of-turn indicator. The equipment requirementsof andSection;andSection; 135.149(c) and 135.159(a) impose more stringent instrumentinstallation requirements upon operators of turbojet-powered airplanesunder Part 135 than do the operating rules of Part 121. The FAA considersthat, when taken together, the requirements of andSection;andSection; 135.149(c)and 135.159(a) are an unnecessary regulatory burden and the proposed revisionsare in the public interest.<T3>Reference:</T3> There were no conference proposals addressing thisproposed revision.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on February 23, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">M.C. Beard,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Aircraft Certification Service. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-4952 Filed 3-3-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>