<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89524-0073 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-24-89.f2.A1072</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Young Scholars Projects for High Ability and High Potential SecondarySchool Students; Guidelines for Proposal Submission and Notice of SubmissionDeadline</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Introduction</ITAG>The Research Career Development Division of the Directorate for Scienceand Engineering Education (SEE) manages and coordinates a variety of programmaticefforts that aid young men and women in their development toward productiveresearch and teaching careers in science, mathematics and engineering.Each effort, in its own way, focuses on a period in the lives of such studentsduring which important career options must be analyzed and critical choicesmade. The designation of a field of specialization, selection of a graduateschool, and choice of first employing organization are decisions made duringperiods targeted by current Division activities_periods when a modest amountof individual support can stimulate the development of careers that willstrengthen the academic base and economic competitiveness of the UnitedStates.One of the first decisions for young men and women is the choice of a career.For many the commitment to a career in science, mathematics, or engineeringbegins to develop during their secondary school years. In order to assiststudents in reaching an informed decision about a potential career in science,the National Science Foundation initiated in Fiscal Year 1988 the NSF YoungScholars Program, which offers two-year continuing awards, with a secondyear of support contingent on NSF review of project activities and theavailability of funds. To date the Foundation has supported 137 projectswhich will provide enrichment experiences in science, mathematics and engineeringfor more than 4,700 high ability or high potential secondary school studentsduring the summer 1989.The underrepresentation of women, minorities and the disabled at the advancedlevels of science, mathematics and engineering deprives the Nation of muchpotential talent. Consequently the Foundation strongly encourages the fullparticipation of members from these groups as proposers, staff and participants.<ITAG tagnum="84">Purpose/Scope</ITAG>The goals of the Young Scholars Program are to:andbullet; Increase participant knowledge of and exposure to science, mathematicsand/or engineering as careers in order to facilitate their making realisticdecisions based on the full range of career options available;andbullet; Stimulate participant interest in science disciplines as possiblecareer choices;andbullet; Increase student awareness of the academic preparation necessaryfor such careers;andbullet; Acquaint students with the environment and resources of universities,colleges and research organizations;andbullet; Contribute to students' confidence in their ability to make careerdecisions.These experiences with the scientific enterprise should develop studentawareness of the work of scientists through a variety of activities including:andbullet; Intellectually challenging experiences which are not a part ofthe school curriculum.andbullet; Experiences in laboratories and classrooms that broaden understandingof the subject matter through first-hand experience in the research process,andbullet; Personal interaction with researchers by working side-by-sidewith them,andbullet; Career guidance by scientists and educational counseling personnel,andbullet; Discussion of the philosophy and ethics of the science disciplineof the project.<ITAG tagnum="84">Eligibility</ITAG>There are three categories of eligibility for the Young Scholars program:submitting organization, activities and discipline focus. Proposals mustmeet the requirements in all three categories as outlined below to be eligiblefor consideration for funding.Submitting OrganizationProposals may be submitted by colleges or universities, their associationsor consortiums, scientific or professional societies whose members areprimarily university faculty or researchers, and for-profit industriesor other organizations which are engaged in significant advanced researchefforts and have experience in interacting with pre-college students. Academicinstitutions are encouraged to combine efforts with industries with appropriateresearch facilities.Secondary schools and school districts and other organizations with programsfocused on secondary education are not eligible to apply as submittingorganizations.Of course, any organization is welcome to collaborate in a project proposaldeveloped and submitted by an eligible institution.ActivitiesRequired and eligible activities are discussed under Project Design. YoungScholars project activities are not intended to duplicate or replace thesecondary school curriculum or offer tutorial or remedial services. Thusthe project should not provide course work primarily designed to improveperformance in regular school courses. Nor should the goal of activitiesbe to prepare students for standardized tests for college admissions oradvanced placement courses, or to duplicate regular college courses. Further,secondary school or college credit for the successful completion of projectactivities is neither required nor encouraged. Exceptions may be made whenthe institution or schools involved require that credit be given. However,grant funds cannot be used to pay per credit fees.Discipline Focus<T3>Grants for Research and Education in Science and Engineering [GRESE]</T3>(NSF 83-57, rev. 3/89, p. 1) specifies the fields of science and engineeringwhich are eligible for support. Consistent with these guidelines, the YoungScholars program will not support activities focused on clinical or healthscience disciplines.Any questions regarding a proposed project's eligibility under these categoriesshould be referred to the program staff. Proposers may be asked to submitadditional information regarding organizational or project characteristics.In some cases it may be necessary for NSF staff to review a formal proposalbefore a final and fair determination of eligibility can be made.<ITAG tagnum="84">Project Design</ITAG>Except where otherwise indicated, the Foundation intends to allow projectdirectors maximum flexibility in designing their projects to address specificdiscipline areas and participant age groups. The Young Scholars programactively seeks innovative approaches to cost-effective enrichment activitiesfor young students. These include off-campus sites where scientific inquiryis especially intense, unusual designs for instruction and demonstration,and creative techniques for academic-year follow-up.Particular attention should be paid to the following areas in the proposal:EnvironmentThe project should create a learning environment which challenges the students'intellectual abilities and encourages the development of the requisiteskills for the use of these abilities. The environment also should fosterclose interaction among the participants, and between the participantsand science, mathematics, and engineering practitioners, including theproject director and senior staff. These group activities should preventisolation and promote group identity and support, and facilitate studentinvolvement in project activities. The opportunities for interaction shouldbe both formal and informal and the identification of mentors is stronglyencouraged.ActivitiesProposers should keep in mind that students learn science best by practicingscience; that is, by exercising their natural curiosity and participatingin the process of scientific discovery. Projects may consist of any combinationof activities involving instruction, problem solving, research and exposureto the research environment and research methods that are appropriate forthe targeted age group and the discipline focus. However, proposers shouldstrive for balance between lecture, laboratory and field experiences. Activitiesshould be strongly participatory, be intellectually challenging, and promotepositive interaction among students and staff.It also should be noted that while some assignments or tasks will be individualized,a major characteristic of Young Scholars projects is group activities (instructional,field work and social activities) which foster mutual support and feedback.The goal is to facilitate peer support for participant interest in scienceand to encourage networking among participants for future support and informationexchange.Required Activities_The following components must be included in all proposedprojects and outlined in a Schedule of Activities:Research Methodology_The specific methods and techniques of scientificresearch differ by field, but the scientific method serves as the basisfor the discover of knowledge across disciplines. Projects should includea general discussion of research methodology, with specific attention tothe techniques and methods utilized in the disciplines which serve as thefocus of the project.Career Exploration_Since a major objective of this program is to heightenstudent awareness of science, mathematics and engineering as possible careers,each project must include career exploration activities which offer informationand guidance regarding the opportunities of science as a profession, particularlyin the discipline area of the project. These activities also should includeattention to precollege science and mathematics teaching as a career choice.Specific attention should be given to the secondary school and collegeacademic requirements for a degree in the selected discipline.The participation of female, minority and disabled scientists in this activityis especially encouraged. Philosophy and Ethics of Science_The development of a mature and participatingcitizen, scientist or not, requires an appreciation of the role of sciencein society. Therefore, all projects must include some activity that focuseson the philosophy of science and scientific ethics specific to the disciplinefocus of the project. Examples of appropriate topics might be guidelinesfor the collection and use of scientific data, research ethics or the needfor a ``Hippocratic oath'' for scientists. Follow-up activities_An academic-year follow-up for summer programs tosustain the intensity of the experience is also required. Proposed activitiesshould reinforce and expand the knowledge and skills learned during thesummer by helping students utilize these skills in classroom activities.To this end, the follow-up academic-year component need not be limitedto summer participants, but may also involve their classmates and teachers.A summer follow-up component may be proposed for academic-year programs.Project Assessment_Proposers must specify project goals and objectives,planned outcomes and plans to measure the success of the project. (Thisis in addition to participation in Young Scholars program data collectionactivities, described below.) Established projects should include a discussionof previous project outcomes. Current Young Scholars project directorssubmitting new proposals should summarize previous accomplishments. Setting Residential or commuter projects during the summer are recommended as theprincipal mechanism for creating an enrichment experience. The summer componentsshould include a minimum of two weeks of activity. Projects offering anafter school/weekend academic-year program as the principal mechanism arealso eligible for funding. Participants Junior/Senior High Focus_Proposers are expected to design projects whichtarget subsets of students entering grades 8-12, who are US citizens orpermanent residents. (Established programs seeking support to augment programactivities or expand participant groups are also eligible if the <T3>majority</T3> of current participants are within this grade range.)The selection of a specific age group, or grade level should be justifiedin the proposal. Participants should be students of high ability or high potential, withinterest in science, mathematics or engineering. The Foundation assumesthat students defined as high ability have demonstrated this ability onsome objective criteria, and the proposer must indicate these criteria(i.e. grades, examination scores, honors, awards in science competitions,etc.). Students of high potential are those suspected of high ability,and the proposer must define the criteria to be utilized in identifyingthese participants (i.e. interviews, recommendations, extracurricular activities,etc.). The number of project participants will depend on the proposed activitiesand staff but should allow for substantial one-on-one or small group interactionamong students and between students and senior staff. Participant Tenure_The overall program philosophy is to reach as many studentsas possible. Each year of project activity is intended as a separate unit,with new participants selected each year. This does not preclude considerationof a proposal in which some students return for the second year. However,such a design must be justified in the proposal. In all other cases proposersare strongly discouraged from accepting students who have participatedin any YS project the previous year. Participant Recruitment and Selection Proposals must specify how participants will be identified, recruited andselected. Admission decisions regarding participants should be made onthe basis of materials submitted by applicants. This information mightinclude (a) recommendations from current or recent science or mathematicsteachers and counselors, (b) a short essay by the student on why he orshe would like to participate or some other appropriate topic and (c) selectedbackground and biographical information. Other selection mechanisms suchas examinations and interviews can also be considered. Recruitment proceduresmust include a mechanism that allows individual students to initiate theapplication process. The Young Scholars program offers assistance in theidentification of disabled students. The Foundation expects broad-based participation in these projects regardingthe number of schools, geographic areas covered and participant characteristics.That is, participants should be selected from a variety of secondary schoolsand excessive representation from any one school is discouraged. Regardinggeographic distribution, projects should be designed, where possible, toattract students on a regional or national basis, rather than only locally.Also projects must be open to all eligible students in the targeted geographicarea, except for those projects designed for disabled students and thoseproposals responding to the Early Alert Initiative (EAI). In the selectionof participants, minorities and females generally should reflect theirrepresentation in the designated geographic area. In the Early Alert Initiative which is described in this announcement,participant selection may focus exclusively on women, minorities or othergroups. Participant Costs Lack of personal or family financial resources should not be a barrierto participation by any eligible student. Therefore proposers may requestNSF funding for all or a portion of student expenses, including room andboard for residential projects, travel and a small stipend for studentswhose participation will preclude needed employment income. Stipends forparticipants must be justified in terms of their use in attracting thetarget population. Further, the age of participants in terms of earningpotential should be taken into consideration in requesting stipends. Stipendsshould not exceed $100/week per student for high school students. Stipendsfor younger students should be less. Stipend amounts can be supplementedby other funding sources. Proposers can require payment for room and board from participants whomthey determine are able to assume responsibility for these expenses. Thenarrative should detail per student costs for room and board if applicable,travel and any stipends proposed, as well as the percentage of any or allof these costs NSF is being asked to assume. Proposers who plan to chargeroom and board fees that will vary among NSF-supported participants shouldoutline how applicant financial need will be determined. Ability to paymay be assessed on an individual or group basis. Proposals must includea plan for providing financial assistance to eligible students, if needed.StaffProject staffing requirements will depend on the design of the projectand participant needs. Senior staff, defined as those who will have primaryresponsibility for the selection of participants, the supervision of intellectualactivity and the demonstration of research techniques and field instruction,should be academic faculty or active research scientists, mathematiciansand engineers in industry. Staffing levels should be adequate to allowfor substantive one-on-one interaction between participants and seniorstaff.The Project Director (Principal Investigator), who must be a member ofthe senior staff, will serve as the intellectual leader of the projectand as the administrative contact with NSF. The proposal narrative mustinclude a brief statement of the role and responsibilities of the ProjectDirector and his/her time commitment to the project. Except in unusualcases, the program discourages the designation of more than one co-PD.We encourage the participation as support staff of precollege science andmathematics teachers, counselors, undergraduate and graduate students,and in projects involving middle school students, high school students.Proposers are encouraged to solicit volunteers and to utilize part-timeas well as full-time staff in order to reduce costs. Skill in teachingand the ability to interact with young students should be a prerequisitefor the selection of all staff. The participation of women, minority anddisabled scientists is strongly encouraged.Site(s) (Resources and Equipment)Since a major objective of this program is to acquaint students with theenvironment and resources of universities, colleges and research organizations,projects should be located at facilities where higher education or advancedresearch takes place.Established ProgramsThe Foundation is aware that a number of activities similar to Young ScholarsProjects, sometimes known at Secondary School Student Science TrainingProjects (SST), have been offered at various campuses in recent years,and have reached funding stability. The Foundation strongly encouragesthe continuation of such programs, and will not normally award supportfor such projects where NSF support would serve mainly to replace establishedfunding. The Foundation, however, does invite proposals from institutionsthat organized such activities in the summer of 1989 or regularly in thelast few years, where NSF support would serve to strengthen such projectsby funding new key components, or expand such projects by broadening participationfrom previously underrepresented groups.Established projects for which supplementary support is proposed must intheir entirety be eligible for Young Scholar support, and thus must includeall the required Young Scholar components, and must be described fullyin the proposal. Proposals from these projects also must include a statementdescribing the use of NSF funding, with attention to how these funds willenhance the project.<ITAG tagnum="84">Budget</ITAG>Proposers may request from the Foundation appropriate direct, indirectand participant costs. Separate budgets must be prepared for year one andyear two of project activities, along with a cumulative budget. Normallyawards will be funded initially for the first year only, with support forthe second year contingent on the availability of funds and after reviewof the activities of the first year.NSF has specific provisions regarding allowable costs for salaries andwages, indirect costs, fringe benefits, equipment purchases, participantsupport costs, tuition remission, consultant services and subcontracts.In general the Young Scholars Program is subject to these provisions asstated in the GRESE referenced below and proposers must follow these provisionsin preparing the budget for a Young Scholars project.General NSF provisions of special relevance to this program as well asadditional program specific regulations are summarized below:andbullet; Our previous experiences indicate that the average project costto NSF per student, per week is less than $500 for residential projects.Commuter projects are considerably less. Higher costs must be fully justifiedin the proposal.andbullet; The Foundation will consider requests for extra compensation forfaculty (overload). Such requests should be clearly outlined in the budgetjustification section and will be reviewed on an individual basis withattention to the nature of the project as well as institutional and currentNSF policies.andbullet; Support will not be provided for general purpose office equipmentsuch as typewriters or furniture, nor for permanent scientific equipment.Permanent equipment is defined as any item with a unit cost of $500 ormore and an expected service life of two or more years. Where such equipmentis deemed necessary, proposals should consider borrowing or renting. Rentalcosts are allowable under this program. However, when rental costs exceedthe purchase price of an item, purchasing the item will be considered.andbullet; Indirect costs will not be paid on participant costs.andbullet; Funds should be included for the project director (one persononly) to attend the annual two-day project directors meeting in the Springin Washington DC. Proposers should use their institutional guidelines regardingper diem allowances.  andbullet; Support may not be requested for social activities, attendanceat any conference except the project directors meeting, or for teachertraining components.   andbullet; Proposers are advised to determine whether insurance coveragenormally available to students and faculty on campus applies to participantsin these, projects. The budget may request funds to purchase health andaccident insurance for participants not covered by the usual student healthplans. Insurance costs should be specifically justified, and will be reviewedon a case-by-case basis.  andbullet; The Young Scholars Program requires a reasonable degree of cost-sharingin all proposals. Arrangements for cost-sharing should be clearly detailedin the proposal's budget justification section, and will be taken intoconsideration in decisions on the extent of NSF support. Fees assessedof participants are not considered cost-sharing.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Proposal Preparation and Submission  </ITAG>Reference Documents  A formal proposal should be prepared following the guidelines containedin the NSF document ``Grants for Research and Education in Science andEngineering'' [GRESE] NSF 83-57, rev. 3/89 and the instructions containedin this solicitation. Additional information may be obtained from the NSF``Grants Policy Manual, Revised, NSF 77-47''.  Proposal Submission Forms  There are several NSF and Young Scholars program forms which are necessaryas part of the submission of a proposal to this program. These includea ``Young Scholars Program Data Sheet' (Appendix B) which will be usedin the assignment of proposals to appropriate review panels. All formsand a checklist for proposal preparation can be found in the appendicesto this solicitation. Please check that all forms are filled out completelyand signed, where necessary. Forms may be photocopied.  Narrative Content and Format  The narrative is limited to 30 double-spaced pages (15 single-spaced pages).There is no limited on the length of the appendices. However, proposersshould be judicious in this regard as NSF leaves to individual reviewerdiscretion what part of the appendices, if any, should be read. The narrativeshould discuss each of the following areas (in the order given) in sifficientdetail to allow the proposal to be evaluated in accordance with the goalsof this program:  andbullet; Project Goals and Objectives  andbullet; Disciplinary Focus  andbullet; Project Design (must include a Schedule of Activities)  <ITAG tagnum="15">_Disciplinary Focused Activities   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Activities Focused on Research Methodology  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Career Exploration Activities  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Philosophy and Ethics of Science Activities  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Project Assessment  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Follow-up Activities  </ITAG>andbullet; Setting  andbullet; Selected Population  andbullet; Participant Recruitment andamp; Selection  andbullet; Project Staff  andbullet; Project Site  (A checklist for proposal preparation specifying the order of presentationcan be found in Appendix A. Note that the budget and budget explanationare a separate part of the proposal.)<T3>The deadline for submission of proposals for the Young Scholars Programis August 21, 1989</T3>Fifteen (15) complete copies of the formal proposal; one copy of the requiredNSF form 1225 and three (3) additional sets of forms each stapled as aunit, containing one Cover Sheet, one Summary Budget and one Young ScholarsProgram Data Sheet should be sent to the address listed below:<ITAG tagnum="15">Data Support Section, Room 223, National Science Foundation, 1800G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20550.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Evaluation and Selection of Proposals</ITAG>General criteria used in the evaluation of proposals are described in theNSF GRESE referenced above. They are performance competence, intrinsicmerit, utility or relevance, and effect on the infrastructure of scienceand engineering.Within the context of the Young Scholars Program specific evaluation criteriawill include the appropriateness and quality of the following project elements:(1) Overall project design including time frame for implementation, disciplinefocus and setting (commuter/residential; summer or academic year); (2)reseach, laboratory, field and classroom activities focused on the sciencediscipline chosen, including hands-on projects and planned interactionbetween students and scientists and mathematicians; (3) project staff qualificationsand mix; (4) participant recruitment and selection procedures and demographics;(5) follow-up activities; (6) scientific ethics and career awareness activities;(7) project site and resources; (8) budget, including total costs, proposedcost sharing and participant costs; and (9) for established projects, theproposed use of NSF funds to enhance the operation and the success of currentactivities.Proposals will be reviewed for scientific and educational merit by scientists,mathematicians, engineers, science educators including precollege teachers,and experts in other fields represented by the proposals.<ITAG tagnum="84">Awards</ITAG>The announcement of Young Scholars Program awards should be made in February1990. Notification of awards is made in writing by the Foundation. As soonas possible thereafter the Foundation will publish and distribute a projectdirectory as a reference guide for potential applicants.Awards will normally provide for one year of support, with a second yearof support contingent upon acceptable progress in implementing programobjectives and the availability of funding. Participants admitted and successfully completing these projects will beidentified in NSF records as National Science Foundation Young Scholars.Project Directors may use this terminology in the title of their proposedproject and in any presentations made in closing ceremonies and any referenceto the participants thereafter. The terms ``Science'', ``Mathematics''and ``Engineering'' may be inserted as appropriate.<ITAG tagnum="84">Program Assessment Activities</ITAG>The Foundation has established a plan to facilitate early and regular assessmentof program impact. This includes data collection instruments for administrationto project applicants, participants, and staff. As a part of these activitiesNSF will provide copies of these instruments and guidance on their administrationat the time of the award. The cooperation of project directors will bean important factor in assuring the success of this effort.<ITAG tagnum="84">Grant Administration</ITAG>NSF grants are administered in accord with the terms and conditions ofNSF GC-1 (10-88), Grant General Conditions, or FDP II, Federal DemonstrationProject General Terms and Conditions (10/88), copies of which may be requestedfrom the NSF Forms and Publication Unit.The Young Scholars Program Early Alert Initiative, FY 1990The Young Scholars Program is establishing in FY 1990 an Early Alert Initiative(EAI) component. While there is a continuing need for scientists, mathematiciansand engineers at all levels, there has developed a persistent shortfallin the number of college graduates earning degrees in these fields. Partof the problem is the decreasing number of students selecting careers inthese disciplines. In fact, there are indications that many students eliminatecareer in science, mathematics, and engineering as viable choices priorto high school.  To increase the supply of scientists, more attention needs to be givento students earlier than high school. Activities should focus on providingthose experiences and opportunities which introduce students to the excitementand challenge of science careers. Projects addressing these areas shouldinclude science and mathematics course work beyond that offered in school;expanded counseling regarding career opportunities in these disciplines;interaction with role models in these fields; activities which strengthenfamily and peer support for student interest in these areas; and the eliminationof social/cultural and financial barriers. Without these experiences, manystudents will continue to enter high school lacking interest in sciencecareers, or lacking key prerequisites for a college science major.  The EAI which will focus on mathematics and physics, is a response to thissituation. Mathematics and physics are targeted because of continuing personnelshortages in these fields. The goal of EAI is to support projects whichoffer activities to develop or sustain the interest of adolescent studentsin careers in these two disciplines.  This initiative differs from the regular Young Scholars competition inseveral ways:  <T3>Eligible Students</T3>_Unlike the regular Young Scholars program, projectsare restricted to students entering grades 7, 8 and/or 9, and may be designedexclusively for ethnic minorities and/or women. Other groups such as thedisabled, the economically disadvantaged, or rural residents, also couldbe the focus of recruitment efforts.  Consistent with the overall Young Scholars Program, the EAI is focusedon students of high ability or high potential. However, considering theyoung age of the target pool, and the focus on students who may have hadlimited exposure to mathematics and science, such high ability or highpotential in these areas may not necessarily have been demonstrated inthe classroom. Therefore academic performance should not be the sole selectioncriteria. A combination of alternative mechanisms should be utilized toidentify student ability or potential. Proposers should clearly outlinetheir strategies for selecting student participants on these factors. <T3>Discipline Focus</T3>_Proposals must focus on mathematics or physics.In order to allow students to explore their interests in more than onediscipline within the targeted fields, we encourage proposals which includeattention to both mathematics and physics and their applications.  Activities  Instructional Activities_The EAI is not intended for students who performbelow grade level in non-science and non-mathematics school courses. However,when limited course work in mathematics and/or science is a characteristicof the group as a whole, the teaching of additional basic science and mathconcepts may be necessary. Advanced course work may be proposed, whereappropriate for the selected population.  Research Methodology_EAI activities must enable students to experiencethe excitement of ``doing science'' in the discipline(s) chosen, as emphasizedin the regular Young Scholars competition. However, it should be notedthat because of the limited science background of the students to be involvedin this initiative, individual research projects may be inappropriate. Career Exploration_The EAI places a stronger emphasis than the regularYoung Scholars competition on career exploration. Thus activities shouldinclude interaction with scientists in a variety of potential work settings.Discussions of higher education options and costs, with particular attentionto options for financial assistance, are required. Integrated throughoutplanned activities should be given attention to cultural/social barriersto students entry into science and mathematics careers.  Mentoring_A variety of small group activities, which facilitate interactionbetween scientists and students are required and should be an integralpart of summer and academic year activities. Individual mentors includingundergraduate and graduate students are encouraged. Where appropriate,activities should include interaction with scientists in the work place,if these differ from the major site of project activities. <T3>Costs</T3>_There should be no charge to the student for participationin these activities, and minimum stipends for students may be requestedwhen they can be justified as a replacement for employment income. Proposersmay include the costs of materials and supplies for students use in followupactivities including science experiment kits, calculators, science magazinesubscriptions, etc.  <T3>Project Length</T3>_Proposers may request support for two 12-monthcycles for two separate groups of students, or one 24-month cycle for asingle group of students. Because of the age of these students, local,commuter projects are encouraged. Substantive activities during the schoolyear will be important to maintain the interest of students who attendschools with a limited focus on mathematics and science.  Except as explained above, proposals submitted under EAI should followguidelines for the regular Young Scholars Program.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Proposals must include all required forms which are availablein the printed program announcement. Copies of the program can be requestedfrom the address listed below: Young Scholar Program, Directorate for Scienceand Engineering Education, NSF, Room 630, Washington, DC 20550, 202-357-7538. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Elmima C. Johnson,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Program Director, Young Scholars.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="34">May 17, 1989.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-12271 Filed 5-23-89; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7555-01-M  </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>