<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891107-0052 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-07-89.f2.A1051</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of the Secretary</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Office of Inspector General; Statement of Organization, Functionsand Delegations of Authority</ITAG>This Notice amends part A (Office of the Secretary) of the Statement ofOrganization, Functions and Delegations of Authority for the Departmentof Health and Human Services (HHS) to reflect certain changes in chapterAF, Office of Inspector General (OIG). Chapter AF was published at 50 FR45488 and at 51 FR 9894, March 21, 1986.The revision flows from the transfer of the statutory basis for the Officeof Inspector General from Public Law 94-505 to Public Law 95-452. The transferwas made under the Inspector General Act Amendments of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-504)effective April 17, 1989. This functional statement conforms to and carriesout the statutory requirements for operating the Office of Inspector General.While the basic organizational structure of the Office of Inspector Generalis unchanged, certain units and positions are renamed, and there are minorshifts in reporting relationships. An additional program unit has beendelineated, and some small functional units have been transferred; <T3>e.g., </T3>the information resources management function formerly assignedto the Deputy Inspector General is now under the Deputy Inspector Generalfor Audit Services. The public affairs, congressional liaison and semiannualreport functions formerly assigned to the Office of Analysis and Inspectionsare now under the Assistant Inspector General for Management and Policy.While relatively minor, the changes have been made to assist the organizationto accomplish its mission more effectively.Delete Chapter AF in its entirety and replace with the following:<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AF.00 Office of Inspector General (OIG)_Mission</ITAG>This organization was established by law as an independent and objectiveoversight unit of the Department to carry out the mission of promotingeconomy, efficiency and effectiveness through the elimination of waste,abuse and fraud. In furtherance of this mission, the organization engagesin a number of activities:A. Conducting and supervising audits, investigations, inspections and evaluationsrelating to HHS programs and operations.B. Identifying systemic weaknesses giving rise to opportunities for fraudand abuse in HHS programs and operations and making recommendations toprevent their recurrence.C. Leading and coordinating activities to prevent and detect fraud andabuse in HHS programs and operations.D. Detecting wrongdoers and abusers of HHS programs and beneficiaries soappropriate remedies may be brought to bear.E. Keeping the Secretary and the Congress fully and currently informedabout problems and deficiencies in the administration of such programsand operations and about the need for and progress of corrective action,including imposing sanctions against providers of health care under Medicareand Medicaid who commit certain prohibited acts.In support of its mission, the Office of Inspector General carries outand maintains an internal quality assurance system, including periodicquality assessment studies and quality control reviews, to provide reasonableassurance that applicable laws, regulations, policies, procedures, standardsand other requirements are followed; are effective; and are functioningas intended in OIG operations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AF.10 Office of Inspector General_Organization</ITAG>There is at the head of the OIG a statutory Inspector General, appointedby the President and confirmed by the Senate. The Office of Inspector Generalconsists of five organizational units:<ITAG tagnum="16">A. Immediate Office of the Inspector General (AFA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">B. Office of the Principal Deputy Inspector General (AFA1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">C. Office of Audit Services (AFH).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">D. Office of Investigations and Enforcement (AFJ).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">E. Office of Evaluation and Inspections (AFE).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Section AF.20 Office of Inspector General_Functions</ITAG>The component sections which follow describe the specific functions ofthe organization.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFA.00 Immediate Office of the Inspector General (OIG)_Mission</ITAG>The Inspector General is directly responsible for meeting the statutorymission of the OIG as a whole and for promoting effective OIG internalquality assurance systems, including quality assessment studies and qualitycontrol reviews of OIG processes and products.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFA.10 Immediate Office of the Inspector General_Organization</ITAG>The Immediate Office comprises the Inspector General and an immediate staff.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFA.20 Immediate Office of the Inspector General_Functions</ITAG>As the senior official of the organization, the Inspector General supervisesthe Deputy Inspectors General who head the major OIG components. The InspectorGeneral is appointed by the President, with the advice and consent of theSenate, and reports to and is under the general supervision of the Secretaryor, to the extent such authority is delegated, the Under Secretary, butdoes not report to and is not subject to supervision by any other officerin the Department. In keeping with the independence intended in the statutorybasis for the OIG and its mission, the Inspector General assumes and exercises,through line management, all functional authorities related to the administrationand management of the OIG and all mission related authorities stated orimplied in the law or delegated directly from the Secretary.The Inspector General provides executive leadership to the organizationand exercises general supervision over the personnel and functions of itsmajor components. The Inspector General determines the budget needs ofthe OIG, sets OIG policies and priorities, oversees OIG operations andprovides reports to the Secretary and the Congress. In this capacity theInspector General is empowered under the law with general personnel authority,e.g., selection, promotion, assignment, etc., of employees, including membersof the senior executive service. The Inspector General delegates relatedauthorities as appropriate.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFA1.00 Office of the Principal Deputy Inspector General (OPDIG)_Mission</ITAG>This office is responsible for the reporting and legislative and regulatoryreview functions required in the law; for formulating and executing theOIG budget; for managing external affairs; and for establishing functionalpolicies for the general management of the OIG. In support of its mission,the office carries out and maintains an internal quality assurance system.The system includes quality assessment studies and quality control reviewsof OPDIG processes and products to ensure that policies and proceduresare effective; are followed; and are functioning as intended. <ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFA1.10 Office of the Principal Deputy Inspector General_Organization</ITAG>This office comprises the Principal Deputy Inspector General and the Officeof Management and Policy. <ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFA1.20 Office of the Principal Deputy Inspector General_Functions</ITAG>A. Principal Deputy Inspector General. This official assists the Inspector General in the management of the OIG,and during the absence of the Inspector General, acts as the InspectorGeneral. The Principal Deputy Inspector General carries out the missionstated in AFA1.00 through the Assistant Inspector General for Managementand Policy. B. Office of Management and Policy. This office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Managementand Policy. 1. The office conducts and coordinates OIG reviews of existing and proposedlegislation and regulations related to HHS programs and operations to identifytheir impact on economy and efficiency and their potential for fraud andabuse. It develops regulations for publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and legislative proposals for inclusion in theDepartment's legislative program. It serves as contact for the press andelectronic media and serves as OIG congressional liaison. The office preparescongressional testimony and confers with officials in the Office of theSecretary staff divisions on congressional relations, legislation and publicaffairs. It develops and publishes OIG newsletters, recruitment brochuresand other issuances to announce and promote OIG activities and accomplishments.2. The office coordinates the development of the OIG long-range strategicplan and the OIG annual work plan. It compiles the Semiannual Report tothe Congress and operates the Executive Secretariat. It formulates andoversees the execution of the OIG budget and confers with the Office ofthe Secretary, the Office of Management and Budget and the Congress onbudget issues. It issues quarterly grants to States for Medicaid fraudcontrol units. It conducts management studies and analyses and establishesand coordinates general management policies for the OIG and publishes thosepolicies in the OIG Administrative Manual. It serves as OIG liaison tothe Office of the Secretary for Freedom of Information and Privacy Actrequests, personnel issues and other administrative policies and practices,and on equal employment opportunity and other civil rights matters. Itcoordinates internal control reviews for the OIG. <ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFH.00 Office of Audit Services (OAS)_Mission</ITAG>The Office of Audit Services provides policy direction for and conductsand oversees comprehensive audits of HHS programs, operations, granteesand contractors, following generally accepted Government auditing standards(GAGAS), the Single Audit Act of 1984, applicable Office of Managementand Budget (OMB) circulars and other legal, regulatory and administrativerequirements. It maintains an internal quality assurance system, includingperiodic quality assessment studies and quality control reviews, to providereasonable assurance that applicable laws, regulations, policies, procedures,standards and other requirements are followed in all audit activities performedby, or on behalf of, the Department. In furtherance of this mission, theorganization engages in a number of activities: A. The office coordinates and confers with officials of the central Federalmanagement agencies (OMB, the General Accounting Office (GAO), the Officeof Personnel Management (OPM) and the Department of the Treasury) on auditmatters involving HHS programs and operations. It provides technical assistanceto Federal, State and local investigative offices on matters concerningthe operation of the Department's programs. It participates in interagencyefforts implementing OMB Circulars A-128 and A-110, which call for useof the single audit concept for most external audits. It performs auditsof activities administered by other Federal departments, following thesystem of audit cognizance administered by OMB. It participates in thePresident's Council on Integrity and Efficiency (PCIE) initiatives andother Governmentwide projects. It works with other OIG components on specialassignments and projects. It responds to congressional oversight interestsrelated to audit matters in the Department. B. The Office of Audit Services helps HHS operating divisions and the Officeof the Secretary staff divisions to develop policies to manage grants andprocurements and policies to establish indirect cost rates. It performspreaward audits of grant or contract proposals to determine the financialcapability of the grantees or contractors and conducts postaward audits.C. The office reviews legislative, regulatory and policy proposals foraudit implications. It recommends improvements in the accountability andintegrity features of legislation, regulations and policy. It preparesreports on audits and special studies for the Secretary, heads HHS operatingdivisions, Regional Directors and others. It gathers data on unresolvedaudit findings for the statutorily required Semiannual Reports to the Congressand for the Under Secretary as Chairman of the Audit Resolution Council.It conducts follow-up examinations and special analyses of actions takenon previously reported audit findings and recommendations to ensure completenessand propriety. D. The office decides when audits can or may be performed by audit organizationsoutside the Department, including those by other Federal or nonfederalgovernmental agencies, contractors, or public accounting firms. It assuresthat any audit performed by non-OIG auditors complies with the Governmentauditing standards established by the Comptroller General of the UnitedStates. It evaluates audits performed for the Department by outside organizations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFH.10 Office of Audit Services_Organization</ITAG>The Office of Audit Services comprises the following components:<ITAG tagnum="16">A. Immediate Office. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">B. Audit Policy and Oversight. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">C. Health Care Financing Audits. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">D. Social Security Audits.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">E. Human, Family, and Departmental Services Audits. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">F. Public Health Service Audits. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFH.20 Office of Audit Services_Functions</ITAG>A. Immediate Office of the Deputy Inspector General for Audit ServicesThis office is directed by the Deputy Inspector General for Audit Serviceswho carries out the functions designated in the law for the position, AssistantInspector General for Auditing. The Deputy Inspector General for AuditServices is responsible to the Inspector General for carrying out OIG'saudit mission and also serves as Audit Director for the Department. Thisofficial supervises the Assistant Inspectors General heading OAS officesdescribed below.The Immediate Office manages the human and financial resources of the Officeof Audit Services including developing staffing allocation plans and issuingpolicy for, coordinating and monitoring all staffing, recruiting and trainingactivities of the office. It maintains a professional development programfor Office of Audit Services staff which meets the requirements of Governmentauditing standards. The office provides liaison with the General AccountingOffice. It reviews all replies to GAO reports to ensure they are responsive,properly coordinated and representative of HHS policy and advises the Secretaryand other officials about significant findings.B. Audit Policy and OversightThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Audit Policyand Oversight who is the principal assistant to the Deputy Inspector Generalfor Audit Services. This official supervises the Regional Inspectors Generalfor Audit Services who carry out audit activities in their assigned geographicareas.1. The office develops audit policy, procedures, standards, criteria andinstructions for all audit activities performed by, on behalf of, or conformingwith departmental programs, grants, contracts, or operations, complyingwith general accepted Government auditing standards and other legal, regulatoryand administrative requirements. It develops policy and procedures foran internal quality assurance system to provide reasonable assurance thatapplicable laws, regulations, policies, procedures, standards and otherrequirements are followed in all audit activities performed by, or on behalfof, the Department, and conducts quality assurance studies to ensure thatthe policies and procedures are implemented by each Office of Audit Servicescomponent and are functioning as intended. It evaluates audit work, includingperforming quality control reviews of audit reports. It develops and monitorsaudit work plans. It tracks, monitors, and report on audit resolution,including follow up per OMB Circular A-50.2. It plans, develops, and coordinates advanced techniques to carry outthe functions of the Office of Audit Services. It coordinates the OIG informationresources management function including computer software and hardwareacquisition and maintenance. It manages the Office of Audit Services informationsystem.C. Health Care Financing Audits.This office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Health CareFinancing Audits who also serves as the Audit Director for the Health CareFinancing Administration (HCFA). The office conducts audits of HCFA programoperations and oversees nationwide the audits of the Medicare and Medicaidprograms, their contracts, and providers of services and products. It maintainsan internal quality assurance system, including periodic quality controlreviews, to provide reasonable assurance that applicable laws, regulations,policies, procedures, standards and other requirements are followed inall HCFA audit activities performed by, or on behalf of, the Department.D. Social Security AuditsThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Social SecurityAudits who also serves as Audit Director for the Social Security Administration.The office conducts as well as oversees nationwide the audits of the SocialSecurity Administration's Retirement, Survivors and Disability Insuranceprograms; the Supplemental Security Income program; the Black Lung program;as well as the operation and administration of the entire agency. It maintainsan internal quality assurance system, including periodic quality controlreviews, to provide reasonable assurance that applicable laws, regulations,policies, procedures, standards and other requirements are followed inall Social Security audit activities performed by, or on behalf of, theDepartment.E. Human, Family, and Departmental Services AuditsThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Human, Family,and Departmental Services Audits who also serves as the Audit Directorfor the Family Support Administration (FSA), the Office of Human DevelopmentServices (HDS) and the Office of the Secretary (OS). The office conductsand oversees audits of the operations and programs of the FSA, the HDSand the OS, including statewide cost allocation plans. It maintains aninternal quality assurance system, including periodic quality control reviews,to provide reasonable assurance that applicable laws, regulations, policies,procedures, standards and other requirements are followed in all FSA, HDSand OS audit activities performed by, or on behalf of, the Department.F. Public Health Service AuditsThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Public HealthService Audits who also serves as the Audit Director for the Public HealthService. The office conducts and oversees audits of the programs and activitiesof the Public Health Service, including the Food and Drug Administration,the National Institutes of Health, the Health Resources and Services Administration,the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration, the Centersfor Disease Control, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry,the Indian Health Service, and the Surgeon General as well as those colleges,universities and non-profit organizations that receive research grantsfrom the Federal Government. It maintains an internal quality assurancesystem, including periodic quality control review, to provide reasonableassurance that applicable laws, regulations, policies, procedures, standardsand other requirements are followed in all Public Health Service auditactivities performed by, or on behalf of, the Department.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFJ.00 Office of Investigations and Enforcement (OIE)_Mission</ITAG>The Office of Investigations and Enforcement is responsible for conductingand coordinating investigative activities related to fraud, waste, abuseand mismanagement in HHS programs and operations, including wrongdoingby applicants, grantees, or contractors, or by HHS employees in the performanceof their official duties. It serves as OIG liaison to the Department ofJustice on all matters relating to investigations of HHS programs and personnel,and reports to the Attorney General when the OIG has reasonable groundsto believe Federal criminal law has been violated. It works with otherinvestigative agencies and organizations on special projects and assignments.In support of its mission, the office carries out and maintains an internalquality assurance system. The system includes quality assessment studiesand quality control reviews of OIE processes and products to ensure thatpolicies and procedures are effective; are followed; and are functioningas intended.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFJ.10 Office of Investigations and Enforcement_Organization</ITAG>The Office of Investigations and Enforcement comprises the following components:<ITAG tagnum="16">A. Immediate Office.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">B. Criminal Investigations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">C. Civil and Administrative Remedies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">D. Investigations Policy and Oversight.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFJ.20 Office of Investigations and Enforcement_Functions</ITAG>A. Immediate Office of the Deputy Inspector General for Investigationsand EnforcementThis office is directed by the Deputy Inspector General for Investigationsand Enforcement who is responsible for the functions designated in thelaw for the position, Assistant Inspector General for Investigations. TheDeputy Inspector General for Investigations and Enforcement supervisesthe Assistant Inspectors General who head the OIE offices described below.The Deputy Inspector General for Investigations and Enforcement is responsibleto the Inspector General for carrying out the investigative mission ofthe OIG and for leading and providing general supervision to the OIG investigativecomponent. The Immediate Office coordinates quality assurance studies toensure that applicable laws, regulations, policies, procedures, standardsand other requirements are followed in all investigative activities performedby, or on behalf of, the Department.B. Criminal InvestigationsThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for CriminalInvestigations who supervises a headquarters policy and review staff andthe Regional Inspectors General for Investigations who carry out investigativeactivities in their assigned geographic areas.1. The headquarters staff assists the Deputy Inspector General for Investigationsand Enforcement to establish investigative priorities, to evaluate theprogress of investigations, and to report to the Inspector General on theeffectiveness of investigative efforts. It develops and implements investigativetechniques, programs, guidelines and policies. It provides programmaticexpertise and issues information on new programs, procedures, regulationsand statutes. It directs and coordinates the investigative field offices.2. The headquarters staff reviews completed reports of investigations toensure accuracy and compliance with guidelines. It issues the reports topertinent agencies, management officials and the Secretary and recommendsappropriate debarment actions, administrative sanctions, civil money penaltiesand other civil actions, or prosecution under criminal law. It identifiessystemic and programmatic vulnerabilities in the Department's operationsand makes recommendations for change to the appropriate mangers.3. The field offices conduct investigations of allegations of fraud, waste,abuse, mismanagement and violations of standards of conduct and other investigativematters within the jurisdiction of the OIG. They coordinate investigationsand confer with HHS operating divisions, staff divisions, OIG counterpartsand other investigative and law enforcement agencies. They prepare investigativeand management improvement reports.C. Civil and Administrative RemediesThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Civil andAdministrative Remedies.1. The office provides policy guidance and technical expertise to the Department,other Federal agencies, carriers, intermediaries, providers and privateorganizations on civil fraud laws and regulations, penalties, sanctionsand other remedies. It maintains liaison with the Department of Justiceon the civil fraud aspects of health care and other HHS investigations.2. The office coordinates and/or helps investigative matters arising underthe Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act, the Civil Monetary Penalties Law,and Public Law 100-93, including alleged misconduct by health care entitiesand others under Medicare, Medicaid, maternal and child health, and socialservices block grant laws. It assists the Department of Justice to investigateand evaluate civil fraud lawsuits brought under the qui tam provisionsof the Federal False Claims Act and related statutes.3. The office directs and coordinates medical reviews on civil money penaltyand exclusion cases to ensure that findings and conclusions are correctand supported by medical records. It evaluates and adjudicates proposalsto exclude individuals and/or entities from participation in health careprograms. It conducts administrative reviews on proposed exclusions andprovides written reports incident to the reviews. It negotiates, implementsand monitors settlement agreements and exclusion requirements and, in casesof default, implements penalty provisions. It assists in investigationsrelated to request for reinstatement by excluded individuals and entities,conducts administrative reviews in accordance with regulations, and adjudicatesthe requests for reinstatement. It maintains indices of sanctioned individualsand entitles and prepare reports of sanction and penalty activities fordistribution.D. Investigations Policy and OversightThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for InvestigationsPolicy and Oversight who leads outreach activities to State and local investigativeagencies, and the general management functions of the Office of Investigationsand Enforcement.1. The office oversees State Medicaid fraud control units and is responsiblefor certifying and recertifying these units and for auditing their Federalfunding. The office provides pertinent information from HHS records toassist Federal, State and local investigative agencies to detect, investigateand prosecute fraud. It manages the HHS Hotline to receive complaints andallegations of fraud, waste and abuse, and to refer the information forinvestigation, audit, program review, or other appropriate action. It coordinateswith the GAO hotline and hotlines from other agencies.2. The office maintains investigative files for OIE headquarters and anautomated data and management information system used by all OIE managersand investigators. It provides technical expertise on computer applicationsfor investigations and coordinates and approves investigative computermatches with other agencies.3. The office develops general management policy for the OIE. It developsand issues instructional media on detecting wrongdoing and on investigatingand processing cases. The office reviews proposed legislation, regulations,policies and procedures to identify vulnerabilities and recommends modificationwhere appropriate. It reviews investigative files in response to Privacyand Freedom of Information Act requests. It plans, develops, implementsand evaluates all levels of employee training for investigations, management,support skills and other functions. It coordinates general management processes;e.g., compiles reports on the budget, on awards and on other personnelmatters for OIE as a whole; implements policies and procedures publishedin the OIG Administrative Manual; and processes procurement requests andother service related actions.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFE.00 Office of Evaluation and Inspections (OEI)_Mission</ITAG>The Office of Evaluation and Inspections is responsible for conductinginspections of HHS programs, operations and processes to identify vulnerabilities,to prevent and detect misconduct, and to promote economy, efficiency andeffectiveness in HHS programs and operations. In support of its mission,the office carries out and maintains an internal quality assurance system.The system includes quality assessment studies and quality control reviewsof OEI processes and products to ensure that policies and procedures areeffective; are followed; and are functioning as intended.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFE.10 Office of Evaluation and Inspections_Organization</ITAG>The Office of Evaluation and Inspections comprises the Immediate Officeand the Analysis and Inspections component.<ITAG tagnum="84">Section AFE.20 Office of Evaluation and Inspections_Functions</ITAG>A. Immediate Office of the Deputy Inspector Gerneral for Evaluation andInspectionsThe office is directed by the Deputy Inspector General for Evaluation andInspections who is responsible to the Inspector General for Analysis andInspections. The Immediate Office carries out OEI's mission in headquarters.1. The office develops OEI's evaluation and inspections policies, proceduresand standards. It assesses the quality of inspections to ensure compliancewith policies and procedures. It manages OEI's human and financial resources.It develops and monitors OEI's management information systems.2. The office manages OEI's work planning process and reviews legislative,regulatory and program proposals for vulnerabilities to fraud, waste andmismanagement. It develops evaluative techniques and coordinates projectswith other OIG and departmental components. It conducts inspection of HHSprograms and recommends changes to improve efficiency and effectiveness.It provides programmatic expertise and issues information on new programs,procedures, regulations and statutes to OEI regional offices. It maintainsliaison with other components in the Department; follows up on implementationof corrective action recommendations; evaluates the actions taken to resolveproblems and vulnerabilities identified; and provides additional data orcorrective action options, where appropriate.B. Analysis and InspectionsThis office is directed by the Assistant Inspector General for Analysisand Inspections who supervises the Regional Inspectors General for Evaluationand Inspections who carry out OEI's mission and activities in assignedgeographic areas. The office evaluates HHS programs and produces the resultsin inspection reprots. It conducts data and trend analyses of major HHSinitiatives to determine the effects of current policies and practice onprogram efficiency and effectiveness. It recommends changes in programpolicies, regulations and law to improve efficiency and effectiveness,and to prevent fraud, abuse, waste and mismanagement. It analyzes existingpolicies to evaluate options for future policy, regulatory and legislativeimprovements.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: October 27, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis W. Sullivan, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-26156 Filed 11-6-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4150-04-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>