<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89508-0025 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-08-89.f2.A1024</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 87 / Monday, May 8, 1989 / ProposedRules<ITAG tagnum="52"> DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">42 CFR Part 412 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[BERC-630-P] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 0938-AE02 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Medicare Program;  Changes to the Inpatient Hospital Prospective PaymentSystem and Fiscal Year 1990 Rates </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Proposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> We are proposing to revise the Medicare inpatient hospitalprospective payment system to implement necessary changes arising fromlegislation and our continuing experience with the system. In addition,in the addendum to this proposed rule, we are proposing changes in theamounts and factors necessary to determine prospective payment rates forMedicare inpatient hospital services. These changes would be applicableto discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1989. We are also settingforth proposed rate-of-increase limits for hospitals and hospital unitsexcluded from the prospective payment system.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE:</T2> Comments will be considered if we receive them at the appropriateaddress, as provided below, no later than 5:00 p.m. on July 7, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> Mail comments to the following address: Health Care FinancingAdministration, Department of Health and Human Services, Attention: BERC-630-P,P.O. Box 26676, Baltimore, Maryland 21207.If you prefer, you may deliver your comments to one of the following addresses:<ITAG tagnum="15">Room 309-G, Hubert H. Humphrey Building, 200 Independence Ave., SW.,Washington, DC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Room 132, East High Rise Building, 6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore,Maryland</ITAG>Due to staffing and resource limitations, we cannot accept facsimile (FAX)copies of comments. In commenting, please refer to file code BERC-630-P. Comments receivedtimely will be available for public inspection as they are received, generallybeginning approximately three weeks after publication of a document, inRoom 309-G of the Department's offices at 200 Independence Ave. SW., Washington,DC, on Monday through Friday of each week from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (phone:202-245-7890). For individual copies of this proposed rule, contact the following: Superintendentof Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402,  (202)783-3238. The charge for individual copies is $1.50 for each issue or for each groupof pages as actually bound, payable by check or money order to the Superintendentof Documents.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2><ITAG tagnum="15">John Eppinger_Cancer Hospitals, (301) 966-4516 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Barbara Wynn_All Other Issues, (301) 966-4529</ITAG>To obtain copies of this document, see the ``<T2>Address</T2>'' section, above. To obtain data used in deriving thestandardized amounts and DRG relative weights, see section VI.B., PublicRequests for Data.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background </ITAG>A. Summary Under section 1886(d) of the Social Security Act (the Act), a system ofpayment for acute inpatient hospital stays under Medicare Part A (HospitalInsurance) based on prospectively-set rates was established effective withhospital cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1983.Under this system, Medicare payment is made at a predetermined, specificrate for each hospital discharge. All discharges are classified accordingto a list of diagnosis-related groups (DRGs). The regulations governingthe inpatient hospital prospective payment system are located in 42 CFRPart 412. On September 30, 1988, we published a final rule with comment period (53FR 38476) to implement the sixth year of the prospective payment system.In addition to the many changes made by that rule that were final, we requestedpublic comment on the revisions we made to the regulations to implementtwo provisions of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 (Pub.L. 100-360 enacted on July 1, 1988) that affect payment to hospitals inFederal fiscal year (FY) 1989. Those revisions concern_ andbullet; The commuting criteria used to determine if hospitals locatedin a rural county adjacent to one or more urban areas may be deemed tobe located in one of those urban areas (section 1886(d)(8)(B) of the Act,as amended by section 411(b)(4) of Pub. L. 100-360); and andbullet; Adjustments made to the prospective payment system and the rate-of-increaseceiling (for hospitals and units excluded from the prospective paymentsystem)  to take into consideration the reductions in payments to hospitalsby Medicare beneficiaries resulting from the elimination of a day limitationon Medicare inpatient hospital services (section 101 of Pub. L. 100-360).The comment period for the September 30, 1988 final rule ended on November29, 1988. We are developing a final rule to respond to the comments receivedfrom the public. B. Major Contents of this Proposed Rule This proposed rule would be effective for the seventh year of operationof the prospective payment system, beginning October 1, 1989. Followingis a summary of the major changes that we are proposing to make to thesystem: <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Changes to the DRG Classification and Weighting Factors </ITAG>As required by section 1886(d)(4)(C) of the Act, we must adjust the DRGclassifications and weighting factors at least annually. Our proposed changesfor FY 1989 are set forth in section II of this preamble. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Changes in the Wage Index </ITAG>We are proposing to update the wage index by basing it entirely on 1984wage data. In addition, we would make adjustments to the wage data to reflectthe provisions of section 8403(a) of the Technical and Miscellaneous RevenueAct of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-647). These proposed changes are set forth insection III of this preamble <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Other Decisions and Regulations Changes </ITAG>In section IV of this preamble, we discuss several current provisions ofthe regulations in 42 CFR Part 412 and set forth certain proposed changesconcerning_ andbullet; Annual publication of prospective payment rates; andbullet; Payment for burn outlier cases; andbullet; Payments to sole community hospitals; andbullet; Beneficiary access to care in rural areas; andbullet; Payments to cancer hospitals; andbullet; Rural referral center criteria; andbullet; Payment for disproportionate share hospitals; and andbullet; Payment for the indirect costs of medical education. <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Determining Prospective Payment Rates and Rate of-Increase Limits</ITAG>In the addendum to this proposed rule, we set forth proposed changes tothe amounts and factors for determining the FY 1990 prospective paymentrates. We are also proposing new target rate percentages for determiningthe rate-of-increase limits for FY 1990 for hospitals and hospital unitsexcluded from the prospective payment system. <ITAG tagnum="81">5. Impact Analysis </ITAG>In Appendix A, we set forth an analysis of the impact that the proposedchanges described in this rule would have on affected entities. <ITAG tagnum="81">6. Report to Congress on the Update Factor </ITAG>Section 1886(e)(3)(B) of the Act requires the Secretary report to Congressno later than March 1, I989 on our initial estimate of an update factorfor FY 1990 for both prospective payment hospitals and hospitals excludedfrom the prospective payment system. This report is included as AppendixB of this proposed rule. <ITAG tagnum="81">7. Proposed Recommendation of Update Factor </ITAG>As required by sections 1886(e)(4) and (e)(5) of the Act, Appendix C providesour recommendation of the appropriate percentage change for FY 1990 inthe_ andbullet; Large urban, other urban, and rural average standardized amountsfor inpatient hospital services paid for under the prospective paymentsystem; and andbullet; Target rate-of-increase limits to the allowable operating costsof inpatient hospital services furnished by hospitals and hospital unitsexcluded from the prospective payment system. <ITAG tagnum="81">8. Discussion of Prospective Payment Assessment Commission Recommendations</ITAG>The Prospective Payment Assessment Commission (ProPAC) is directed by section1886(d)(4)(D) of the Act to make recommendations to the Secretary withrespect to adjustments to the DRG classifications and weighting factorsand to report to Congress with respect to its evaluation of any adjustmentsmade by the Secretary. ProPAC is also directed, by the provisions of sections1886(e)(2) and (e)(3) of the Act, to make recommendations to the Secretaryon the appropriate percentage change factor to be used in updating theaverage standardized amounts beginning with FY 1986 and thereafter. Theserecommendations for FY 1990 were submitted to the Secretary on March 1,1989. We are printing ProPAC s report, which includes its recommendations, asAppendix D of this document. The recommendations, and the actions we areproposing to take with regard to them (when an action is recommended),are discussed in detail in the appropriate sections of this preamble orthe appendixes of this proposed rule. Those recommendations that are notspecifically relevant to matters presented below are discussed in sectionV of this preamble. For a brief summary of the ProPAC recommendations,we refer the reader to pages 5 through 7 of the ProPAC report as set forthin Appendix D of this proposed rule. ProPAC also produced technical appendixesin its March 1, 1989 report that provide background material and detailedanalyses used in preparation of the ProPAC recommendations. For furtherinformation relating specifically to the ProPAC report or to obtain a copyof the technical appendixes, contact ProPAC at (202) 453-3986.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Changes to DRG Classifications and Weighting Factors </ITAG>A. Background Under the prospective payment system, we pay for inpatient hospital serviceson the basis of a rate per discharge that varies by the DRG to which abeneficiary's stay is assigned. The formula used to calculate payment fora specific case takes an individual hospital's payment rate per case andmultiplies it by the weight of the DRG to which the case is assigned. EachDRG weight represents the average resources required to care for casesin that particular DRG relative to the national average of resources usedto treat all Medicare cases. Thus, cases in a DRG with a weight of 2.0would, on average, require twice as many resources as the average Medicarecase. Congress recognized that it would be necessary to recalculate the DRG relativeweights periodically to account for changes in resource consumption. Accordingly,section 1886(d)(4)(C) of the Act requires that the Secretary adjust theDRG classifications and weighting factors annually beginning with dischargesoccurring in FY 1988. These adjustments are made to reflect changes intreatment patterns, technology, and any other factors that may change therelative use of hospital resources. The proposed changes to the DRG classificationsystem and the proposed recalibration of the DRG weights for dischargesoccurring on or after October 1, 1989 are discussed below. B. Reclassification of DRGs <ITAG tagnum="81">1. General </ITAG>Cases are classified into DRGs for payment under the prospective paymentsystem based on the principal diagnosis, up to four additional diagnoses,and any procedures performed during the stay, as well as age, sex, anddischarge status of the patient. The diagnostic and procedure informationis expressed by the hospital using codes from the International Classificationof Diseases, Ninth Edition, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM). The intermediaryenters the information into its claims system and subjects it to a seriesof automated screens called the Medicare Code Editor (MCE). These screensare designed to identify cases that require further review before classificationinto a DRG can be accomplished. After screening through the MCE and any further development of the claims,cases are classified by the GROUPER software program into the appropriateDRG. The GROUPER program was developed as a means of classifying each caseinto a DRG on the basis of the diagnosis and procedure codes and demographicinformation (that is, sex, age, and discharge status). It is used to classifypast cases in order to measure relative hospital resource consumption toestablish the DRG weights and to classify current cases for purposes ofdetermining payment. Currently, there are 477 DRGs in 23 major diagnostic categories (MDCs).Most MDCs are based on a particular organ system of the body (for example,MDC 6, Diseases and Disorders of the Digestive System); however, some MDCsare not constructed on this basis since they involve multiple organ systems(for example, MDC 22, Burns). Principal diagnosis determines MDC assignment. Within most MDCs, casesare then divided into surgical DRGs (based on a surgical hierarchy thatorders individual procedures or groups of procedures by resource intensity)and medical DRGs. Medical DRGs generally are differentiated on the basisof diagnosis, age, and presence or absence of complications or comorbidities(hereafter CC) only. Generally, GROUPER does not consider other procedures;that is, nonsurgical procedures or minor surgical procedures generallynot done in an operating room are not listed as operating room (OR) proceduresin the GROUPER decision tables. However, there are a few non-OR proceduresthat do affect DRG assignment for certain principal diagnoses, such asextracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for patients with a principal diagnosisof urinary stones. We are proposing to make some changes to the DRG classification systemon the basis of problems identified over the past year. These proposedchanges are set forth below. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. MDC 4: Diseases and Disorders of the Respiratory System </ITAG>We have received a number of requests from hospitals and other organizationsfor the expansion of DRG 474 (Respiratory System Diagnosis with Tracheostomy)and DRG 475 (Respiratory System Diagnosis with Ventilator Support) to includeprincipal diagnoses from any MDC when ventilator support is used. In addition,we have received reports of problems experienced by hospitals in the codingand billing of those cases in MDC 4 involving ventilator support. Beginning with discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1987, caseswith a principal diagnosis in MDC 4 and one of the tracheostomy procedurecodes (31.1 (Temporary tracheostomy), 31.21 (Mediastinal tracheostomy),or 31.29 (Other permanent tracheostomy)) were assigned to the new DRG 474.Cases involving mechanical ventilation through endotracheal intubationwere assigned to the medical DRG 475. DRG 475 includes cases presentinga principal diagnosis assigned to MDC 4 and showing both non-OR procedurecodes 93.92 (Other mechanical assistance to respiration) and 96.04 (Insertionof endotracheal tube). Beginning with discharges occurring on or afterOctober 1, 1988, the title for procedure code 93.92 was revised to ``Othermechanical ventilation''. We will discuss the change in the definitionof this code as part of our proposed GROUPER change, below. DRG 475 is assigned to cases with a respiratory system principal diagnosiswhen neither a temporary tracheostomy nor any operating room procedureis performed and both procedure code 96.04 and 93.92 are performed. Themajority of cases involving surgery for respiratory diagnoses are routinelyintubated endotracheally, if only on a prophylactic basis. This procedureis considered a part of the surgery and is not normally coded. Assumingthat the hospital charges for the procedure, even when it is not coded,the weighting factors for surgical DRGS already account for the resourcesinvolved in intubating patients. Thus, DRG 475 was intended to accountonly for those cases for which there is no surgical procedure and the intubationwill be likely to be of longer duration.Before presenting our proposals in this area, we would like to review thecircumstances surrounding the development of these DRGs. In reviewing theFY 1985 Medicare provider analysis and review (MEDPAR) data, we found thatcases involving mechanical ventilation had average charges that were 2to 10 times the average charge for other patients in the same DRG for eachDRG of MDC 4. In further evaluating the cases requiring ventilation, wenoted a significant difference in use of resources between patients forwhom ventilator access was achieved through endotracheal intubation asopposed to tracheostomy. The average charge for cases involving tracheostomieswas three  times the average charge for other ventilator cases. Our medicalconsultants speculated that this related primarily to ventilator time asopposed to actual resource difference associated with the method used increating access. That is, in patients expected to be ventilated for extendedperiods of time, tracheostomy is the preferred access due to irritationsof the larynx and other complications frequently associated with prolongedendotracheal intubation. There were two factors in the ICD-9-CM coding applicable to the proceduresinvolved when these DRGs became effective in October 1987 that governedour decision to base the two new DRGs on procedures performed. First, theICD-9-CM codes provide no means of representing the amount of time spenton the ventilator. This distinction would have eliminated the need to knowwhere the patient had been ventilated and by what means. In order to recognizethe significant difference in use of resources in ventilator cases relatedto time on the ventilator, we chose to use the procedures involved in thedifferent means of access as proxies for these data that were not availablethrough the entries on the Medicare claim form. Second, at that time, procedurecode 93.92 (Other mechanical assistance to respiration) was defined inthe ICD-9-CM as including the Bennett respirator, the Byrd respirator,endotracheal respiratory assistance, and mechanical ventilation. The codealso included, by indexing, continuous positive airway pressure, whichis achieved through a mask or nasal cannula as opposed to the endotrachealtube or tracheostomy required for use of the other respirators. Since 93.92then included at least one form of respiratory assistance that could beused without an endotracheal tube, DRG 475 was initially defined as requiringboth the ventilator code (93.92) and the code for endotracheal intubation(96.04) in order to exclude those less invasive forms of respiratory assistance.The American Association for Respiratory Care, the American College ofChest Physicians, the National Association of Medical Directors of RespiratoryCare (NAMDRC), ProPAC, and numerous other commenters have expressed generalsupport for the creation of DRGs 474 and 475. In addition, many commentersat that time encouraged the expansion of the DRGs to include patients withother than respiratory diagnoses. We stated that we would continue ourresearch in this area, including analysis of superior means of identifyingventilator cases and ways to address this issue in postsurgical cases orfor patients with nonrespiratory diagnoses. NAMDRC, however, questionedthe use of the procedure codes to define discrete DRGs. To quote part ofits comment:<ITAG tagnum="21">* * * the decision to perform a tracheostomy versus continuing treatmentwith an endotracheal tube is not as simple as inferred by the proposednotice [May 19, 1987; 52 FR 18880]. Recent advances in technology havevastly improved the high volume, low pressure cuff endotracheal tube and,therefore, it is not uncommon to leave a patient intubated endotracheallyfor extended periods of time, perhaps as long as three weeks. There isno question that there are many cases where the long term prognosis indicatesthe appropriateness of a tracheostomy, but we are not confident that thenew system would appropriately reimburse a lengthy and costly stay simplybecause a physician made a judgement to keep a patient intubated with anoral or nasal endotracheal tube and spare the patient the inconvenienceand possible complications associated with a tracheostomy.</ITAG>Both NAMDRC and ProPAC shared our concern that the new DRGs would createfinancial incentives for hospitals to pressure physicians to intubate patientsor perform tracheostomies. Although several commenters did not believethat any physician would perform a procedure that was not needed by thepatient, we believe that our caution was justified. As the basis for theirrecommendations for DRG classification changes, many commenters routinelyclaim that the DRG definitions and weighting factors affect medical practicepatterns, limit Medicare beneficiary access to the most up-to-date andsophisticated technologies, and subject physicians to financially-motivatedpressure by hospital managers. If we are to believe that failure of theDRGs to provide higher payment for cases involving certain technologiesmay discourage their use, we may reasonably anticipate that the recognitionof procedures and technologies such as tracheostomies and mechanical ventilationin relatively high-weighted DRGs may encourage their use. We advised the medical community of our intent to target DRGs 474 and 475for medical review by the Peer Review Organizations (PROs) to ensure thatuse of the diagnoses and procedures that result in assignment of casesto these DRGs was reasonable and appropriate. In fact, we were not awareof the extent of the problems experienced by hospitals until they wererevealed by PRO review. In retrospect, we believe that we should have describedin greater detail the situations in which these two new procedure-basedDRGs would be assigned. In originally describing these DRGs, we did notreiterate that the necessary procedures had to be performed when the patientwas an inpatient of the hospital submitting the bill.Some hospital staffs believe that the GROUPER logic for DRGs 474 and 475should be applied whenever prolonged ventilation is involved, regardlessof where the intubation or tracheostomy was performed. This is a logicalargument, since a hospital will very likely use as many resources in treatinga ventilator patient who was intubated or received a tracheostomy in anambulance or in another hospital's emergency room. Many hospitals requesteda waiver of the rules governing billing and payment for inpatient and outpatientservices under both Parts A and B of Medicare. In the current situation,the stay in a second hospital will not be assigned DRG 474 or 475, respectively,since the procedures necessary for this assignment are not performed onan inpatient of that hospital and, thus, cannot be coded on the hospital'sbill. At least one of the situations that governed the development of these DRGshas changed since October 1987, and we believe that we can revise DRG 475 to address the problems that hospitals have experienced with transferand emergency room patients. As we stated earlier, procedure code 93.92was revised beginning with discharges occurring on or after October 1,1988 to ``Other mechanical ventilation''. More significant is the factthat continuous positive airway pressure was reclassified to its own code,93.90, at that time. Since procedure code 93.92 now only refers to mechanicalventilation achieved by insertion of an endotracheal tube, we propose torevise DRG 475 to remove the requirement of the coding of the insertionof an endotracheal tube. This would mean that cases would be assigned toDRG 475 when a ventilator patient with a principal diagnosis in MDC 4 isintubated elsewhere. When a patient is transported with an establishedtracheostomy, the receiving hospital would be paid under DRG 475 if theprincipal diagnosis is still classified in MDC 4, the patient receivesmechanical ventilation, and no operating room procedures were performedduring the stay in that hospital. We recognize that ventilator cases in other MDCs tend to be more resourceintensive than other cases within the same DRG. There is, however, no agreementas to the mechanism to be used in classifying them. After its review ofthe many decisions involved in choosing an endotracheal intubation overa tracheostomy, NAMDRC has recommended that there be one ventilator DRGfor all MDCs with a weight somewhere between that of DRGs 474 and 475.This DRG would apply to patients requiring mechanical ventilation for atotal of 5 or more days during a hospitalization. As NAMDRC stated in itscomment to the May 19, 1987 proposed notice (see quoted material, above),it believes that the use of the tracheostomy procedure in our definitionsincorrectly assigns short-term ventilation to DRG 474 and long-term ventilationby intubation to DRG 475. We are concerned that a single ventilator DRG for all MDCs may not be appropriateunless it is based upon an objective measure of the ventilator time involved,independent of the procedures performed. NAMDRC recommended that we conductresearch to determine which ``medical record identifier'' would best identifypatients to be assigned to this DRG. In this regard, the ICD-9-CM Coordinationand Maintenance Committee received a recommendation for a duration indicatorin cases with mechanical ventilation from the National Association of ChildrensHospitals and Related Institutions (NACHRI) in 1987. This was includedin the NACHRI recommendations for newborn birthweight categories and separateprocedure codes for continuous positive airway pressure and extracorporealmembrane oxygenation. NACHRI's recommendation for a duration indicatorwas not adopted by the Committee, in part because it could not reach aconsensus on the best way for coders to assign the time increments. Wewill revisit this subject with the Committee and urge interested partiesto provide suggestions to it. Studies by the Yale DRG Refinement Project and by Health Systems International(HSI) under its contract with HCFA have both constructed models with aDRG for tracheostomies. The HSI model would designate two separate DRGsfor tracheostomies: One for tracheostomies with a principal diagnosis relatedto the mouth, larynx or pharynx and the other for tracheostomies in allother MDCs. The Yale model would group all cases involving procedure code31.1 (Temporary tracheostomy) within a given MDC to a separate DRG; thatis, there is a DRG for temporary tracheostomies within each DRG. The othermanifestations of respiratory failure are represented in the Yale modelby the ranking of that diagnosis code in the severity categories establishedfor the medical and surgical DRGs in each MDC. Respiratory failure is rankedin the most severe category for every DRG. We intend to analyze the impact these alternative models would have onthe DRG classification system. However, this analysis will not be completedin time to consider changes in the classification of tracheostomy casesin FY 1990. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Surgical Hierarchies </ITAG>Some inpatient stays entail multiple surgical procedures, each one of which,occurring by itself, could result in assignment of the case to a differentDRG within the MDC to which the particular principal diagnosis is assigned.It is therefore necessary to have a decision rule by which these casesare assigned to a single DRG. The surgical hierarchy, an ordering of groupsof procedures from most to least resource intensive, performs that function.Its application ensures that cases involving multiple surgical proceduresare assigned to the DRG associated with the most resource-intensive proceduregroup.Because the relative resource intensity of procedure groups can shift asa function of DRG reclassification and recalibration, we reviewed the surgicalhierarchy of each MDC, as we have for previous reclassifications, to determineif the ordering of procedures coincided with the intensity of resourceutilization, as measured by the same billing data used to compute the DRGrelative weights. The surgical hierarchy is based upon procedure groups. Consequently, inmany cases, hierarchy has an impact on more than one DRG. The methodologyfor determining the most resource-intensive procedure groups, therefore,involves weighting each DRG for frequency to determine the average resourcesfor each procedure group. For example, assume procedure group A includesDRGs 1 and 2 and procedure group B includes DRGs 3, 4, and 5, and thatthe weighting factor for DRG 1 is higher than that for DRG 3, but the weightsfor DRGs 4 and 5 are higher than the weight for DRG 2. To determine thesurgical hierarchy, we would weight the weighting factor of each DRG byfrequency to determine average resource consumption for the group of proceduresand order the procedure groups from that with the highest to that withthe lowest average resource utilization, with the exception of ``other(OR) procedures'' as discussed below. This methodology may occasionally result in a case involving multiple proceduresbeing assigned to the lower weighted DRG of the available alternatives.However, given that the logic underlying the surgical hierarchy providesthat the GROUPER searches for procedures that sometimes occur in casesinvolving multiple procedures, this result is unavoidable. We would like to point out, notwithstanding the foregoing discussion, thatthere are a few instances where a procedure group with a smaller averagerelative weight is ordered above a procedure group with a higher averagerelative weight. First, the ``other OR procedures'' group is uniformlyordered last in the surgical hierarchy of each MDC in which it occurs regardlessof the fact that the weighting factor for the DRG or DRGs in that proceduregroup may be higher than that for other procedure groups in the MDC. The``other OR procedures'' group is a group of procedures that are least likelyto be related to the diagnoses in the MDC but are occasionally performedon patients with these diagnoses. Therefore, these procedures should onlybe considered if no other procedure more closely related to the diagnosesin the MDC has been performed. The second type of situation occurs when the difference between the twoaverage weights for two procedure groups is very small. We have found thatsmall differences generally do not warrant reordering the hierarchy since,by virtue of the hierarchy change, the weighting factors are likely toshift such that the higher-ordered procedure group has a lower averageweight than the group ordered below it.  Based on the preliminary recalibration of the DRGs, we are proposing tomodify the surgical hierarchy as set forth below. As discussed below insection II.C. of this preamble, we anticipate that the final recalibratedweights will be somewhat different from those proposed since they willbe based on more complete data. Consequently, further revision of the hierarchy,using the above principles, may be necessary in the final rule. At this time, we would revise the surgical hierarchy for MDC 5 (Diseasesand Disorders of the Circulatory System) and MDC 8 (Diseases and Disordersof the Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue) as follows: a. In MDC 5, we would reorder Cardiac Pacemaker Replacement and/or Revision(DRGs 117 and 118) \1\<NOTE/> above Vascular Procedures Except Major Reconstruction WithoutPump (DRG 112). <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ A single title combined with two DRG numbers is used tosignify pairs, the first DRG of which is cases with CC and the second ofwhich is cases without CC. If a third number is included, it representscases of patients who are age 0-17.b. In MDC 8, we would reorder Biopsies (DRG 216) above Back and Neck Procedures(DRGs 214 and 215); and we would reorder Arthroscopy (DRG 232) above MajorShoulder/Elbow Procedures or Other Upper Extremity Procedures With CC (DRG223). <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Refinement of Complications and Comorbidities List </ITAG>There is a standard list of diagnoses that are considered complicationsand comorbidities (CCs). This list was developed by physician panels toinclude those diagnoses that, when present as a secondary condition, wouldbe considered a substantial complication or comorbidity. A substantialCC, in turn, is defined as a condition that, because of its presence witha specific principal diagnosis, would cause an increase in length of stayby at least one day for at least 75 percent of the patients. Based upon analysis by our medical consultants, we propose to eliminatethe following minor cardiac block and dysrhythmia diagnoses from the CClist:<ITAG tagnum="15">426.10 Atrioventrical block, not otherwise specified (NOS) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.11 Atrioventrical block, lst degree </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.12 Atrioventrical block_Mobitz (type) II </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.13 Atrioventrical block, 2nd degree, Not elsewhere classified(NEC) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.2 Left bundle branch hemiblock </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.3 Left bundle branch block NEC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.4 Right bundle branch block </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.50 Right bundle branch block NOS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.51 Right bundle branch block and left posterior fascicular block</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.52 Right bundle branch block and left anterior fascicular block</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">426.53 Bilateral bundle branch block NEC</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Each of these procedures would no longer be considered a CC for anyprincipal diagnosis. In the September 1, 1987 final notice concerning changes to the DRG classificationsystem (52 FR 33143), we modified the GROUPER logic so that certain diagnosesincluded on the standard list of complications and comorbidities wouldnot be considered a valid CC in combination with a particular principaldiagnosis. (Thus, we created the CC Exclusions List.) We made these changesto preclude coding of closely related conditions, to preclude duplicativecoding or inconsistent coding from being treated as complications or comorbidities,and to ensure that cases are appropriately classified between the complicatedand uncomplicated DRGs in a pair. In the May 19, 1987 proposed notice concerning changes to the DRG classificationsystem (52 FR 33143), we explained that the excluded secondary diagnoseswere established using the following five principles: andbullet; Chronic and acute manifestations of the same condition shouldnot be considered CCs for one another (as subsequently corrected in theSeptember l, 1987 final notice (52 FR 33154)). andbullet; Specific and nonspecific (that is, not otherwise specified (NOS))diagnosis codes for a condition should not be considered CCs for one another.andbullet; Conditions that may not co-exist, such as partial/total, unilateral/bilateral,obstructed/unobstructed, and benign/malignant, should not be consideredCCs for one another. andbullet; The same condition in anatomically proximal sites should not beconsidered as CCs for one another. andbullet; Closely related conditions should not be considered as CCs forone another. andbullet; We indicated in the September l, 1987 final notice (52 FR 33154)that the creation of the CC Exclusions List was a major project involvinghundreds of thousands of codes and that the FY 1988 revisions were intendedto be only a first step toward refinement of the CC list in that the criteriaused for eliminating certain diagnoses from consideration as CCs were intendedto identify only the most obvious diagnoses that should not be consideredcomplications of another diagnosis. For that reason and in light of commentsand questions on the CC list, we have continued to review the remainingCCs to identify additional exclusions and to remove diagnoses from themaster list that have been shown not to meet the definition of a CC, statedabove, as appropriate. See the September 30, 1988 final rule for the revisionmade for the discharges occurring in FY 1989 (53 FR 38485). We are proposing a limited revision of the CC Exclusions List, which includescorrections of errors in the existing list, addition of a number of excludedCCs, and the deletion of a number of excluded CCs. These proposed changesare being made in accordance with the principles established when we createdthe Exclusions List in 1987. Table 6f in section IV of the addendum to this proposed rule contains theproposed additions to the CC Exclusions List that would be effective fordischarges occurring on or after October l, 1989. The table shows the principaldiagnoses with proposed changes to the excluded CCs. Each of these principaldiagnoses is shown with an asterisk and the additions to the CC ExclusionsList are provided in an indented column immediately following the affectedprincipal diagnosis. The indented diagnosis would not be recognized bythe GROUPER as a valid CC for the asterisked principal diagnosis beginningwith discharges on or after October 1, 1989. This year, many four digit diagnosis codes on the master CC list are includedon Table 6d, since they have been replaced by two or more new five-digitdiagnosis codes. Since the five-digit definitions provide greater specificityin classifying the diagnoses, some of the new codes will no longer describea CC or will describe a CC in a four-digit category that was not previouslyon the CC list.<ITAG tagnum="20"/><T3>Example </T3><ITAG tagnum="21">*25060 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">34501 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">34510 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">34511</ITAG>The four-digit diagnosis code 3450 (Generalized nonconvulsive epilepsy)was not on the master CC list while 3451 (Generalized convulsive epilepsy)was on the list. Code 3451 was excluded as a CC for the principal diagnosis25060 (Diabetes with neurological manifestations, adult or unspecifiedonset) for discharges occurring on or after October l, 1988. Beginningwith discharges on or after October 1, 1989, the ICD 9-CM adds a fifthdigit designating whether or not intractable epilepsy is involved. Thefour-digit diagnosis codes are eliminated wherever they occurred on theExclusion List. Both of the five-digit codes 34510 and 34511 are addedto the Exclusion List in place of 3451. Even though the code 3450 was notconsidered a CC, 34501 (Generalized nonconvulsive epilepsy with intractibleepilepsy) is considered a CC and is added to the master list. Code 34501will be excluded as a CC for the principal diagnosis 25060. The only CCs that would be deleted from the CC Exclusions List are thosedeleted diagnosis codes in Table 6d that are currently on the CC list andthose diagnoses listed above that we are proposing to delete from the mainCC list. The following diagnoses codes from Table 6d should be deletedfrom the CC list and wherever they appear on the CC Exclusions List: 345.1;403.0; 404.0; 410.0-410.9; 411.8; 996.6; and 996.7. Copies of the original CC Exclusions List applicable to FY 1988 can beobtained from the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) of theDepartment of Commerce. It is available in hard copy for $64.95 and onmicrofiche for $18.50. These prices include $3.00 for shipping and handling.A request for the FY 1988 CC Exclusions List (which should include theidentification accession number, ((PB) 88-133970), should be made to thefollowing address: National Technical Information Service, United StatesDepartment of Commerce, Springfield, Virginia 22161, or by calling (703)487-4650. Users should be aware of the fact that both the revisions in Tables 6dand 6e of the September 30, 1988 final rule and those in Table 6f of thisdocument must be incorporated into the list purchased from NTIS in orderto obtain the CC Exclusions List applicable for discharges occurring onor after October l, 1989. (We do not intend to update the listing availablefrom NTIS to reflect these or any future revisions.) Alternatively, the complete documentation of the GROUPER logic, includingthe current CC Exclusions List is available from Health Systems International(HSI). HSI, under contract with HCFA, is responsible for updating and maintainingthe GROUPER program. The current DRG Definitions Manual, Fifth Revisionis available for $165.00, which includes $15.00 for shipping and handling.The Sixth Revision of this manual, which will include the changes proposedon this document as finalized in response to public comment, will be availablein September 1989 for $195.00. These manuals may be obtained by writingHSI at: 100 Broadway, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, or by calling (203)562-2101. Please specify the revisions requested.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Review of Procedure Codes in DRGs 468 and 477 </ITAG>Each year, we review cases assigned to DRG 468 (Unrelated Operating RoomProcedures) in order to determine whether, in conjunction with certainprincipal diagnoses, there were certain procedures performed that are notcurrently included in the surgical hierarchy for the MDC in which the diagnosisfalls. In FY 1989, this review resulted in the addition of DRG 476 (ProstaticOR Procedure Unrelated to Principal Diagnosis) and DRG 477 (Non-ExtensiveOR Procedure Unrelated to Principal Diagnosis). For a detailed discussionof the changes, see the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38487). Since DRG 468 is reserved for those cases in which none of the OR proceduresis related to the principal diagnosis, it is intended to capture atypicalmedical cases, that is, those cases not occurring with sufficient frequencyto represent a distinct recognizable clinical group. DRGs 476 and 477 areassigned to specific subsets of these codes. DRG 476 is assigned to thosedischarges in which one of the following prostatic procedures is performedthat is unrelated to the principal diagnosis:<ITAG tagnum="15">60.2_Transurethral prostatectomy </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">60.61_Local excision of lesion of prostate </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">60.69_Prostatectomy NEC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">60.94_Control of postoperative hemorrhage of prostate</ITAG>DRG 477 is assigned to those discharges in which the only procedure performedis a nonextensive procedure that is unrelated to the principal diagnosis.In Table 6c in section IV of the addendum to the September 30, 1988 finalrule, we listed the ICD-9-CM procedure codes for all of the procedureswe consider nonextensive procedures if performed with an unrelated principaldiagnosis. These cases are grouped in DRG 477. Because of the addition of DRG 477, we conducted this year's review ofprocedures producing DRG 468 or 477 assignments on the basis of volumeof cases with each procedure. Our medical consultants then identified thoseprocedures occurring in conjunction with certain diagnoses with sufficientfrequency to justify adding them to one of the surgical DRGs for the MDCin which the diagnosis falls. On the basis of this review, we are proposingtwo DRG classification changes in order to reduce unnecessary assignmentof cases to DRG 477. In MDC 14 (Pregnancy, Childbirth and Puerperium), we are proposing to addtwo procedure codes to the operating room procedures in DRG 374 (VaginalDelivery With Sterilization and/or Dandamp;C). Currently these procedures,when combined with a principal diagnosis in MDC 14 such as 665.41 (Highvaginal laceration), group to DRG 477. The two procedure codes to be addedto DRG 374 are procedure codes 69.09 (Other dilation and curettage) and69.52 (Aspiration curettage following delivery or abortion). <ITAG tagnum="81">6. Changes to the ICD-9-CM Coding System. </ITAG>As discussed above in section II.B.1. of this preamble, ICD-9-CM is a codingsystem for the reporting of diagnostic information and procedures performedon a patient. In September 1985, the ICD-9-CM Coordination and MaintenanceCommittee was formed. This is a Federal interdepartmental committee chargedwith the mission of maintaining and updating the ICD-9-CM. This includesapproving new coding changes, developing errata, addenda, and other modificationsto the ICD-9-CM to reflect newly developed procedures and technologiesand newly identified diseases. The Committee is also responsible for promotingthe use of Federal and non-Federal educational programs and other communicationtechniques with a view toward standardizing coding applications and upgradingthe quality of the classification system. The Committee is co-chaired by the National Center for Health Statistics(NCHS) and HCFA. The NCHS has responsibility for the ICD-9-CM diagnosescodes included in Volumes l and 2_Diseases: Tabular List and Diseases:Alphabetic Index, while HCFA has responsibility for the ICD-9-CM procedurecodes included in Volume 3_Procedures: Tabular List and Alphabetic Index.The Committee encourages participation in the above process by major health-relatedorganizations. In this regard, the Committee holds public meetings fordiscussion of educational issues and proposed coding changes. These meetingsprovide an opportunity for input into coding matters from representativesof recognized organizations in the coding fields, such as the AmericanMedical Record Association, the American Hospital Association, and theCommission on Professional and Hospital Activities, as well as physicians,medical record administrators, and other members of the public. Consideringthe opinions expressed at the public meetings, the Committee formulatesrecommendations, which then must be approved by the agencies. The Committee presented proposals for coding changes at public meetingsheld on April 14, 1988, July 21-22, 1988, and December 1, 1988 and finalizedthe coding changes after consideration of comments received at the meetingsand in writing in the 30 days following the December l, 1988 meeting. Theinitial meeting for consideration of coding issues for resolution in FY1990 was held on April 4, 1989. Copies of the minutes of these meetingsmay be obtained by writing to the co-chairpersons representing NCHS andHCFA. We encourage commenters to address suggestions on coding issues involvingdiagnosis codes to: Ms. Sue Meads, R.R.A, Co-Chairperson, ICD-9-CM Coordinationand Maintenance Committee, NCHS, Rm 2-19, Center Building, 3700 East-WestHighway, Hyattsville, Maryland 20782.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Questions and comments concerning the procedure codes should be addressedto: Ms. Patricia E. Brooks, Co-Chairperson, ICD-9-CM Coordination and MaintenanceCommittee, HCFA, Office of Coverage Policy, Rm 1-J-2 East Low Rise Building,6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 21207. The additional new ICD-9-CM codes that have been approved will become effectiveOctober 1, 1989. The new ICD-9-CM codes are listed, along with their proposedDRG classifications, in Tables 6a, 6b, and 6c in section IV of the addendumto this proposed rule. As we stated above, the code numbers and their titleswere presented for public comment in the ICD-9-CM Coordination and MaintenanceCommittee meetings. Both oral and written comments were considered beforethe codes were approved. Therefore, we are soliciting comments on the proposedDRG classification only.Further, the Committee has recommended the expansion of the ICD-9-CM diagnosiscodes shown on Table 6d to categories requiring a fifth digit for validdiagnosis code assignment. Thus, these diagnosis codes would not be recognisedby GROUPER 7 beginning with discharges occurring on or after October 1,1989. The corresponding five digit codes are shown in Table 6a. Finally,the Committee has recommended the deletion of the ICD-9-CM procedure codesshown in Table 6e. These codes were vacated because of the new and revisedcodes established by the Committee and will be reserved for future refinementsof the ICD-9-CM. <ITAG tagnum="81">7. Other Issues </ITAG>a. <T3>Cochlear Implants. </T3>In the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR38476), we agreed to reevaluate the placement of cochlear implant dischargesin DRG 49 (Major Head and Neck Procedures) based upon billing data fromFY 1988. While cochlear implant cases may not be clinically coherent withother discharges assigned to DRG 49, the FY 1988 Medicare data still donot indicate there would be a material difference in the weighting factorsif a separate DRG were created for cochlear implants. We examined the mean standardized charge for all cochlear implants andseparately examined the mean standardized charges for single channel andmultichannel implants. The mean standardized charge for all cochlear implantswas approximately 17 percent less than the mean standardized charge forall other procedures in DRG 49. Although the number of cochlear implantcases in FY 1988 has almost doubled (113), these discharges only representtwo percent of the total discharges in DRG 49. In the event that the number of cases involving the cochlear implant continuesto rise, we will, of course, consider classifying them in a separate DRG.However, if we were to remove cochlear implants from DRG 49 to create aseparate DRG based upon the FY 1988 data, payment for cochlear implantswould be less since the lower mean standardized charge in cases involvingthese procedures would result in a lower relative weighting factor. Thus,we find no compelling reason to create a new DRG at this time. We recognize that hospitals may be experiencing some problems with thecoding of cochlear implants. For a discussion of these problems, see theSeptember 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38490). We have notified interestedorganizations of the importance of educating hospital coders and hospitalmanagement of the need to use the device-specific code. In addition, wehave provided materials on coding changes through the intermediaries. b. <T3>Partitioned by Expansion of the List of DRGs Complications and Comorbidities(CCs). </T3>In the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38491), we agreedto reevaluate the importance of CCs in DRGs not currently partitioned bythe presence or absence of CCs. We have funded a number of studies in recentyears designed to evaluate and improve the measurement of hospital casemix. In one recently completed study, Yale University has developed a refinedDRG system that differentiates patients within each DRG based on whetherthey had a catastrophic, major, moderate, or minor or no CCs. The DRG refinement model produces significant improvements in predictingresource use and does not represent a radical departure from the currentstructure of the DRGs nor does it require the collection of any additionaldata. Although the results of this study appear promising, we are unableto implement the refined DRG system at this time. We believe that moreanalyses are needed to confirm the appropriateness of the expanded DRGsand to determine whether adoption of the refined DRG system would requireother conforming changes to the payment system (that is, reestimation ofthe indirect medical education adjustment factor and the disproportionateshare adjustment factor and reevaluation of the need for separate urbanand rural rates) in order to mitigate a potentially large redistributionof Medicare payments across different categories of hospitals. We intendto reevaluate over the next year the importance of CCs in the nonpairedDRGs as part of our analysis of the Yale study results.c. <T3>Limb Salvage Surgery. </T3>In the September 30, 1988 final rule (53FR 38483), we stated that we had become involved in a broad analysis ofthe classification of certain major cardiovascular procedures that couldpotentially result in the restructuring of DRG 108 (Other Cardiothoracicor Vascular Procedures With Pump), DRG 109 (Other Cardiothoracic ProceduresWithout Pump), DRGs 110 and 111 (Major Reconstructive Vascular ProceduresWithout Pump), and DRG 112 (Vascular Procedures Except Major ReconstructionWithout Pump). This analysis evolved from our ongoing DRG refinement analysis.We were contacted in January 1988 by the co-chairmen of an ad hoc committeeof the joint councils of the combined vascular societies in the UnitedStates (The Society for Vascular Surgery and The North American Chapterof the International Cardiovascular Society). The ad hoc committee hadbeen appointed at a June 1987 meeting after its membership agreed thatthere was a need to change the existing DRG structure for vascular surgery.The problem that the committee had observed is that the DRG system providesthe same payment to hospitals for patients who require an arterial reconstructionfor intermittent claudication (rest pain) as it does for those patientswho require the same kind of operation for limb threatening ischemia (thatis, for gangrene, a nonhealing ischemic ulcer, or severe ischemic restpain). The committee had been referred to HCFA by ProPAC staff memberswho had been communicating with the committee on this subject since July1987. From their own experience and that of six other hospitals. these vascularsurgeons believe that it would be possible to identify two distinct groupsof cases in the Medicare data base. Both groups are found in DRGs 110,111, and 112 and involve bypass surgery of the lower limbs. The committeesubmitted data from their own hospitals identifying one group of cases,referred to as ``limb salvage'', in the high range of average standardizedcharges and length of stay, and another group of cases, referred to as``claudicants'', that is considerably lower in charges and length of stay.The committee believes that it is inappropriate to include the lower-costbypasses for intermittent claudication or rest pain in the same DRG withthe limb salvage cases. We have shared information with ProPAC on this problem and tried to expandon the analysis, using the FY 1988 MEDPAR data. ProPAC's staff has alsoused case examples from a hospital with a relatively high volume of limbsalvage surgery. A high percentage of the hospital's Medicare patientshave a principal or secondary diagnosis of diabetes mellitis. Many of thesepatients require limb salvage surgery as an alternative to amputation ofgangrenous tissue of the lower limbs. At this point, we have not determined if this problem can be solved througha change in the GROUPER logic. Since the same surgical procedure is performedfor each group, it is impossible to differentiate on that basis alone.However, we have tried to identify the separate groups using the specificdescriptions given by the hospitals. First, we searched for the principaldiagnosis code 443.9 (Intermittent claudication) without the secondarydiagnosis codes 785.4 (Gangrene) or 707 (Decubitus ulcers). We selectedonly those cases with procedure code 39.29 (Femoral-popliteal bypass) andno debridement or bone surgery. We found that about six percent of the59,499 cases in DRG 110 and about six percent of the 20,300 cases in DRG111 fell into this basic group. When we expanded the principal diagnosisto include any of several peripheral vascular disease diagnosis codes,we found 42 percent of the cases in DRG 110 ad 41.8 percent of the casesin DRG 111. In an effort to capture the data for other cases that do not exhibit theCCs or multiple procedures that typify the limb salvage case, we expandedthe procedure codes to find cases where the surgery performed was 39.29or 38.38 (Resection of lower limb arteries with anastomosis), or 39.25(Aorta-iliac femoral bypass). This description includes 46.5 percent ofthe cases in DRG 110 and 45.5 percent of the cases in DRG 111.At the other extreme, we searched under the same criteria with a secondarydiagnosis of either gangrene or decubitus ulcers. We found that 8.1 percentof the cases in DRG 110 and less than 0.01 percent of the cases in DRG111 met these criteria. Although we will continue to examine this issue,it appears from all the data we have analyzed thus far that we are dealingwith different quantities that legitimately fall under virtually identicalcategories in the ICD 9-CM. Different surgeons are performing the samebasic procedures on patients who fall at the opposite ends of the rangein severity of the manifestations of peripheral vascular disease. The GROUPERprogram can assign only the codes listed on the billing record, and thedistinguishing secondary diagnoses of gangrene and decubitus ulcers areperhaps not shown as often as they actually occur. As long as the proceduresinvolved are found to be medically appropriate, it would be contrary toone of the basic premises of the prospective payment system to create expensiveand inexpensive subcategories of cases exhibiting similar ICD-9-CM coding.We reviewed some of the secondary diagnoses involved here under the principlesof the Yale DRG Refinement model (see discussion in section II.B.7.b. ofthis preamble, above) and found that many of the CCs that are describedas being unique to the more expensive cases fall into the same generalseverity categories as those shared by the claudication cases. However,a number of the secondary diagnoses for bone and necrotic tissue involvementfall into the catastrophic and major surgical categories. d. <T3>Reassignment of Patents with Guillain-Barre Syndrome. </T3>Guillain-Barresyndrome is a postinfectious polyneuropathy in which patients may requireplasmapheresis, ventilation assistance, and long intensive-care stays.Guillain-Barre syndrome discharges have been assigned to DRGs 18 and 19(Cranial and Peripheral Nerve Disorders). ProPAC believes that the classificationof Guillain-Barre syndrome cases into DRGs 18 and 19 is inappropriate interms of resource use; that is, the average resource use associated withGuillain-Barre syndrome cases is higher than the resource use for averagecases in DRGs 18 and 19. In its recommendation 13, PROPAC recommends thatthe Secretary reassign patients with Guillain-Barre syndrome from DRGs18 and 19 to DRG 20 (Nervous System Infection Except Viral Meningitis)and DRG 34 (Other Disorders of Nervous System With CC); alternatively,a new DRG could be established. We are unable to evaluate appropriateness of a classification change forGuillain-Barre syndrome patients without further analysis of the FY 1988MEDPAR data. Moreover, the issue of whether reclassification to DRGs 20and 34 would be clinically consistent warrants further examination. Wewill examine this issue as part of our ongoing DRG refinement analyses.C. Recalibration of DRG Weights One of the basic issues in recalibration is the choice of a data base thatallows us to construct relative DRG weights that most accurately reflectcurrent relative resource use. Since FY 1986, the DRG weights have beenbased on charge data. The latest recalibration, which was published asa part of the FY 1989 prospective payment final rule, used hospital chargeinformation from the FY 1987 MEDPAR file. For a discussion of the optionswe considered and the reasons we chose to use charge data beginning inFY 1986, we refer the reader to the rules published on June 10, 1985 (50FR 24372) and September 3, 1985 (50 FR 35652).We are proposing to use the same basic methodology for the FY 1990 recalibrationas we did for FY 1989. That is, we would recalibrate the weights basedon charge data for Medicare discharges. However, we would use the mostcurrent charge information available, the FY 1988 MEDPAR file, rather thanthe FY 1987 MEDPAR file. The MEDPAR file is based on fully-coded diagnosticand surgical procedure data for all Medicare inpatient hospital bills.The proposed recalibrated DRG relative weights are constructed from FY1988 MEDPAR data, received by HCFA through December 1988, from all hospitalssubject to the prospective payment system and short-term acute care hospitalsin waiver States. The FY 1988 MEDPAR file includes data for approximately9.5 million Medicare discharges. The methodology used to calculate the proposed DRG weights from the FY1988 MEDPAR file is as follows: andbullet; All the claims were regrouped using the revised DRG classificationsdiscussed above in section II.B. of this preamble. andbullet; Charges were standardized to remove the effects of differencesin area wage levels, indirect medical education costs, disproportionateshare payments, and, for hospitals in Alaska and Hawaii, the applicablecost-of-living adjustment. andbullet; The average standardized charge per DRG was calculated by summingthe standardized charges for all cases in the DRG and dividing that amountby the number of cases classified in the DRG. andbullet; We then eliminated statistical outliers using the same criterionas was used in computing the current weights. That is, all cases outsideof 3.0 standard deviations from the mean of the log distribution of chargesper case for each DRG were eliminated. andbullet; The average charge for each DRG was then recomputed excludingthe statistical outliers and divided by the national average standardizedcharge per case to determine the weighting factor. andbullet; We established the weighting factor for heart transplants (DRG103) in a manner consistent with the methodology for all other DRGs exceptthat the heart transplant cases that were used to establish the weightwere limited to those Medicare-approved heart transplant centers that havecases in the FY 1988 MEDPAR file. andbullet; Kidney acquisition costs continue to be paid on a reasonable costbasis but, unlike other excluded costs, kidney acquisition costs are concentratedin a single DRG (DRG 302, Kidney Transplant). For this reason, it was necessaryto make an adjustment to prevent the relative weight for DRG 302 from includingthe effect of kidney acquisition costs, since these costs are paid separatelyfrom the prospective payment rate. For purposes of this proposed rule,we used estimated kidney acquisition charges since actual FY 1988 kidneyacquisition charges were not available. Therefore, estimated kidney acquisitioncharges were subtracted from the total charges for each case involvinga kidney transplant prior to computing the average charge for the DRG andprior to eliminating statistical outliers. In the recalibration for thefinal FY 1990 weights, we plan to use actual kidney acquisition charges.andbullet; Heart acquisition costs, like kidney acquisition costs, continueto be paid on a reasonable cost basis and are similarly concentrated ina single DRG (DRG 103, Heart Transplant). Accordingly, for the heart transplantcases in the updated MEDPAR file used for recalibration, we subtractedfrom the total charges of each case an estimate of heart acquisition chargesprior to computing the average charge for the DRG and prior to eliminatingstatistical outliers, identical to the adjustment we make for removingkidney acquisition charges from cases in DRG 302. For additional informationabout the methodology for estimating heart acquisition costs, see the September1, 1987 final rule at 52 FR 33037. Although actual heart acquisition chargeswere not available for purposes of developing the proposed FY 1990 DRGweights, some heart acquisition charge data may be available from the billsused to determine the final DRG weights. If our analysis of the actualheart acquisition charges indicate the data are adequate, we plan to usethe actual acquisition charges in the recalibration of the final FY 1990weight for DRG 103. When we recalibrated the DRG weights for FY 1986, FY 1988, and FY 1989,we set a threshold of 10 cases as the minimum number of cases requiredto compute a reasonable weight. In the FY 1987 MEDPAR data used to establishthe FY 1989 weights, there were 35 DRGs that contained fewer than 10 cases.We propose to use that same case threshold in recalibrating the DRG weightsfor FY 1990. In the FY 1989 recalibration, we computed the weight for the35 low-volume DRGs by adjusting the original weights of these DRGs by thepercent change in the weight of the average case in the remaining DRGs.We propose to use this same methodology for the FY 1990 recalibration.Using the FY 1988 MEDPAR data set, there are 37 DRGs that contain fewerthan 10 cases. ProPAC, in its March 1, 1988 report, had recommended that the DRG weightsbe recalibrated annually on the basis of costs rather than charges. However,ProPAC indicated concern about the Medicare cost-finding methods for estimatingcosts because the limitations of the Medicare cost report data may in somecases produce imprecise DRG weights. In the May 27, 1988 proposed rule,we indicated that we would examine the feasibility of adopting cost-basedDRG weights (53 FR 19507). Accordingly, we contracted with the Rand Corporation to evaluate both methodologiesto determine which provided the better measure of resource consumptionacross DRGs. While there were noted differences in the recalibration resultsusing each methodology (that is, charge-based weights resulted in higherweights for surgical DRGs and lower weights for medical DRGs, on average,relative to cost-based weights), Rand found no conclusive evidence favoringone methodology over the other. We continue to believe that the disadvantagesassociated with charge-based weights are compensated for by the fact that,for purposes of recalibration, charge data are available on a more timelybasis than cost data. For example, for the proposed recalibrated weightsfor FY 1990, we are using FY 1988 Medicare billing data from the MEDPARfile. However, we have yet to obtain a full file of FY 1987 Medicare costreports. Thus, any cost data we were to use for recalibration would beat least one year and perhaps as much as two years older than the mostrecent available charge data.In addition, since costs are not accumulated on an individual case basis,DRG by DRG, it is necessary even in developing cost-based weights to linkancillary charge data from the claims file to cost report data as partof the process of estimating the average costs of cases in each DRG. Inan attempt to make more timely estimates of costs, ProPAC also proposedin its March 1, 1988 report that the latest cost report data be used inconjunction with the most recent patient bills. However, as noted in theRand study, this mismatch of data causes distortions in estimating costsbecause it assumes that per diem costs rise uniformly across hospitalsand that cost-to-charge ratios remain constant over time. In order to maintainconsistency and to accurately determine relative resource use, we believethat charge data for the same period as the cost-data should be used incost based recalibration. Therefore, if we were to recalibrate on the basisof costs, both the charge and cost data that would be used would be significantlyolder than the most recently available charge data. We believe that using old data is inappropriate, particularly given therapid advances in medical technology and resulting changes in treatmentpatterns. We further believe that it is in the best interest of the hospitalsand Medicare beneficiaries that the resource use associated with thesemajor new medical advances be reflected in the DRG weights as soon as possible.This can be accomplished by the use of charge based-weights computed onan annual recalibration schedule. We are concerned that use of cost-basedweights would significantly delay recognition of new technologies or greatlycomplicate the recalibration process by necessitating a number of specialadjustments to take such new technologies into account. Therefore, absentconclusive evidence that cost-based DRG weights provide a better measureof resource consumption across DRGs, we propose to continue using chargesas the basis for recalibrating the DRG relative weights. The purpose of making changes in the DRG classifications and weights isto reflect changes in the relative resource costs across DRGs. Thus, thechanges are intended to affect the relative distribution of payments acrossDRGs and should not affect aggregate payments to hospitals under the prospectivepayment system. Each time we have recalibrated (beginning with the firstrecalibration in FY 1986), we have normalized the new weights by an adjustmentfactor intended to ensure that recalibration by itself neither increasesnor decreases projected total payments under the prospective payment system.With normalization, the average case weight after recalibration equalsthe average case weight prior to normalization for the same set of cases.The case-mix index is a measurement of the average DRG weight for a givenset of cases. In theory, any changes in the average case-mix index valuefor Medicare cases after recalibration and implementation of the new GROUPERand corresponding DRG weights should be  attributable to an increase inthe complexity of cases that are treated or to coding changes. However,our analysis indicates that the case-mix index value for FY 1988 casesis higher when those cases are processed with the FY 1988 GROUPER thanwhen the same cases are processed with the FY 1986 GROUPER. This demonstratesthat changes we made to the GROUPER program between FY1986 and FY 1988,coupled with changes in hospital diagnostic and reporting practices madein response to those GROUPER changes, inflated the case-mix index and,therefore, program expenditures. Several changes were introduced into the GROUPER 4 program used to payfor discharges in FY 1987. These changes, which are discussed in detailin a June 3, 1986 final notice on changes to the DRG classification system(51 FR 20192) and the September 3, 1986 final rule (51 FR 31476), includedthe following: andbullet; Creation of a new DRG for extensive burns with a burn-relatedoperating procedure. andbullet; Elimination of age considerations from the criteria for classificationof two pairs of DRGs in MDC 8 (Diseases and Disorders of the MusculoskeletalSystem and Connective Tissue).Changes that were made in the GROUPER 5 program used to pay for dischargesin FY 1988 are discussed in detail in a September l, 1987 final noticeon changes to the DRG classification system (52 FR 33143). The most significantof these changes were_ andbullet; Creation within MDC 4 (Diseases and Disorders of the RespiratorySystem) of two new DRGs for tracheostomy and mechanical ventilator cases;andbullet; Reconfiguration of the alcohol and drug DRGs; andbullet; Elimination of age over 69 as a criterion for classification inall of the pairs of DRGs in which age over 69 and/or CC was a factor; andandbullet; Changes to the CC list. We have analyzed the changes in the case-mix index between FY 1986 andFY 1988 because the FY 1986 cases were used to recalibrate the DRG weightsin the GROUPER 5 program, which, in turn, was used to pay the FY 1988 casesthat are being used to recalibrate the proposed FY 1990 weights that willbe used in GROUPER 7. To the extent that the average case weight for FY1988 was higher when processed through the FY 1988 GROUPER than the averagecase weight of the same cases processed through the FY 1986 GROUPER, anadjustment should be made to the FY 1990 weights in order not to buildthe inflated FY 1988 case weights permanently into the average case weightvalues. Our analysis indicates that there has been a total increase in the case-mixindex of 6.4 percent between FY 1986 and FY 1988, as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>5,L2,s25,10,10,10,8 </C><T4>Case-Mix Index Change_FYs 1986-1988</T4><H1>FY</H1><H1>No. of discharges </H1><H1>GROUPER version </H1><H1>Case-mix index \1\ </H1><H1>Percent increase over FY 1986</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">1986<D>8,842,953</D><D>3</D><D>1.2045</D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1987<D>9,501,374</D><D>4</D><D>1.2367</D><D>2.7 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1988<D>9,142,064</D><D>5</D><D>1.2824</D><D>6.4 </D><F>\1\ Index values reflect GROUPER version and MEDPAR data set appropriateto each year.</F></ITAG></ITAG> We analyzed the case-mix change in order to determine what portion of theincrease was attributable to changes made in the GROUPER program from FY1986 to FY 1988. To evaluate this question, we used each of the three GROUPER programs toprocess and classify the bills from the FY 1988 MEDPAR. In order to processthe FY 1988 cases through the earlier GROUPER versions, FY 1988 diagnosticand surgical codes were remapped into their FY 1987 equivalents prior tobeing processed with GROUPER 4, and then remapped into their FY 1986 equivalentsprior to being processed with GROUPER 3. Since the same FY 1988 cases wereprocessed through each of the GROUPER versions, any differences in theaverage case-mix index values between the three GROUPER versions cannotbe  attributable to increases in case complexity, rather, they are attributableto recalibration and the changes in the GROUPER program. We found that the FY 1988 case-mix index value was 1.35 percent greaterwhen the cases were processed using GROUPER 5 than when using GROUPER 3,as shown below:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>4,L2,i1,s15,8,8,9 </C><T4>Effect of GROUPER Version on FY 1988 Case-Mix Index </T4><H1>  </H1><H1>FY 1988 discharges </H1><H1>Case-mix index \1\ </H1><H1>Percent difference from GROUPER 3</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">GROUPER 3<D>9,142,064</D><D>1.2653</D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">GROUPER 4<D>9,142,064</D><D>1.2696</D><D>.34 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">GROUPER 5<D>9,142,061</D><D>1.2824</D><D>1.35 </D><F>\1\ Represents FY 1988 MEDPAR run through each GROUPER version.</F></ITAG></ITAG> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Based on this analysis, we have concluded that, of the total increasein the case-mix index value from FY 1986 to FY 1988 (that is, 6.4 percent),1.35 percent is the result of recalibration and changes made to the GROUPERprogram. In normalization, we compare the average case weight before recalibration(for FY 1990, this is determined by mapping the FY 1988 claims into theirFY 1989 equivalents and processing them through GROUPER 6) to the averagecase weight after recalibration. Based on the above analysis, we are proposingto reduce the average GROUPER 6 case weight before recalibration by 1.35percent prior to normalization. Without this adjustment, we would buildinto the FY 1990 weights an inflated average case-weight value. We arenot proposing to recover the excess payments that have already been madebased on the inflated weights; however, it would be inappropriate to continueto pay based on these weights. Therefore, we are proposing to normalizethe FY 1990 weights by an adjustment factor so that the average GROUPER7 case weight after recalibration is equal to the average GROUPER 6 caseweight prior to recalibration reduced by 1.35 percent.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Proposed Changes to the Hospital Wage Index</ITAG> A. Background Section 1886(d)(2)(C)(ii) of the Act required, as a part of the processof developing separate urban and rural standardized amounts for FY 1984,that we standardize the average cost per case of each hospital for differencesin area wage levels. Section 1886(d)(2)(H) of the Act required that thestandardized urban and rural amounts be adjusted for area variations inhospital wage levels as part of the methodology for determining prospectivepayments to hospitals for FY 1984. To fulfill both requirements, we constructedan index that reflects average hospital wages in each urban or rural areaas a percentage of the national average hospital wage. For purposes of determining the prospective payments to hospitals in FY1984 and 1985, we constructed the wage index using calendar year 1981 hospitalwage and employment data obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics'(BLS) ES 202 Employment, Wages and Contributions file for hospital workers.Beginning with discharges occurring on or after May 1, 1986, we have beenusing a hospital wage index based on HCFA surveys of hospital wage andsalary data as well as data on paid hours in hospitals. The methodologyused to compute the first HCFA wage index was set forth in detail in theSeptember 3, 1985 final rule (50 FR 35661). For discharges occurring on or after May 1, 1986 and before September30, 1987, the wage index was based on wage data from calendar year 1982.For discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1987 and before September30, 1988, the wage index was based on an equal blend of calendar year 1982and 1984 wage data. In the September 1, 1987 final rule, we made a change in the methodologyfor computing the national average hourly wage, which serves as the basisfor indexing the area wage levels (52 FR 33039). To minimize the impacton the national average hourly wage when the wage data for hospitals inan area are adjusted or when hospitals are reclassified from one area toanother, we moved from an area-weighted national average hourly wage indexto an hour-weighted wage index. That is, we now compute the national averagehourly wage by dividing the total wages for all hospitals in the data baseby the total paid hours for all hospitals in the data base. In the September 30, 1988 final rule, we continued to use the blendedwage index based on 1982 and 1984 data for determining prospective paymentsto hospitals in FY 1989. However, we did make some changes to the indexbecause of the enactment of section 4005(a) of the Omnibus ReconciliationAct of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-203), which added a new section 1886(d)(8)(B)to the Act, as discussed below in section III.C. of this preamble. B. Updating the Wage Index Data Although we are not proposing to change the methodology for computingthe wage. For FY 1990, we are proposing to base the wage index solely on1984 wage data. In the May 27, 1988 proposed rule, we proposed to basethe wage index for FY 1989 solely on 1984 wage data (53 FR 19508). However,as a result of a number of revisions to the 1984 wage data that were madebetween the proposed and final rule, the national average hourly wage increasedslightly, thereby reducing the wage index values for areas not affectedby the changes. Therefore, given our concern about the negative impacton aggregate payments to hospitals, we decided to postpone adoption ofa wage index based solely on the 1984 wage data. Our current analysis indicatesthat moving from a blended wage index to one based solely on 1984 datadoes not significantly impact aggregate prospective payments.The method used to compute the proposed wage index is as follows:Step 1_Each of the non-Federal acute care hospitals subject to the prospectivepayment system for which 1984 data have been received was classified intoits appropriate urban or rural area based on the urban area definitionsto be used in the prospective payment system in FY 1990.Step 2_For each hospital, the total gross hospital salaries as reportedfor hospital fiscal years that began in FY 1984 were inflated from theend of the hospital's cost reporting year through August 31, 1985 usingthe percentage change in average hourly earnings of hospital industry workers(S.I.C. 806) in BLS Employment and Earnings Bulletin. This was done toeliminate any distortion in the data caused by differing hospital costreporting years. (August 31, 1985 was the latest end date for hospitalcost reporting years in the data collection.)Step 3_For each hospital, the inflated gross hospital salaries computedin step 2 were divided by the reported number of total paid hours to yieldan average hourly wage. Hospitals with an aberrant average hourly wage,which was defined as an average hourly wage either less than $3.35 (theminimum wage in l984) or greater than $23.61 (2\1/2\ times the nationalaverage hourly wage as computed from the data collection at the time the1984 data were first used in computing a wage index), were excluded.Step 4_Within each urban or rural area, the result computed in step 2 wassummed for all remaining hospitals to yield the total gross hospital salariesin each area. Step 5_The total gross hospital salary result computed in step 4 was dividedby the corresponding total number of paid hours in the area to yield anaverage hourly wage for each urban or rural area. Step 6_The inflated gross hospital salaries computed in Step 2 for allhospitals not eliminated due to aberrant wage data were divided by thereported number of total paid hours in these hospitals to obtain the nationalaverage hourly hospital wage based on gross salaries. This national averageis $9.82. Step 7_For each urban or rural area, the hospital wage index value wascalculated by dividing the average hourly wage computed in step 5 by thenational average hourly wage. C. Revisions to Wage Index for Rural Counties Whose Hospitals Are DeemedUrban Under section 1886(d)(8)(B) of the Act, for discharges occurring on orafter October 1, 1988, hospitals in certain rural counties adjacent toone or more Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) are considered to belocated in one of the adjacent MSAs if certain standards are met. Becauseof this provision, as a part of the September 30, 1988 final rule, we reclassifiedthe wage data for those rural areas as if the hospitals in those areaswere located in the adjacent MSAs and recomputed the wage index valuesfor the affected MSAs and rural areas. Because inclusion of the wage data from rural hospitals that are consideredto be located in an adjacent MSA under section 1886(d)(8)(B) of the Actresulted in the reduction of the wage index values of several MSAs andrural areas, Congress enacted section 8403(a) of Pub. L. 100-647. Underthat provision, which added a new section 1886(d)(8)(C) to the Act, ifthe inclusion of wage data from rural hospitals now considered to be locatedin an urban area results in a reduction of the wage index value for theaffected MSA or rural area, then the wage index values for those affectedareas must be recomputed as if section 1886(d)(8)(B) of the Act had notbeen enacted. The wage index value for those rural counties with hospitalsthat were deemed urban and that are affected by this recomputation mustbe calculated separately. This provision is effective for discharges occurringon or after October 1, 1989 and before October 1, 1991. Therefore, we propose to calculate the wage index for FY 1990 in the followingmanner with respect to the geographic classification of hospitals: andbullet; MSAs whose wage index values are reduced because of the inclusionof wage data from hospitals in adjacent rural counties that have been deemedto be located in the MSAs would have their wage index values recalculatedas if section 1886(d)(8)(B) of the Act had never been enacted; that is,data from the rural hospitals would be excluded in calculating these MSAs'wage index values.andbullet; Each county whose hospitals have been deemed to be located insuch an MSA would have its own unique wage index value, that is, a wageindex value calculated on a county-specific basis. andbullet; Rural areas whose wage index values are reduced by the exclusionof wage data from hospitals that have been deemed to be located in adjacentMSAs would have their wage index recalculated as if those hospitals werenot deemed to be urban. In this case, the wage data for hospitals locatedin the rural counties that have been deemed urban would be included intwo wage areas, that is, both the affected rural area and the county-specificwage area for the deemed hospitals. Those rural areas whose wage indexvalues are increased by the exclusion of the wage data for those hospitalsthat have been deemed urban would retain the increased wage index value.In addition to this change, we are proposing to compute the wage indexfor FY 1990 based solely on 1984 wage data. Using 1984 data, the wage indexvalue for every MSA in which rural hospitals have been deemed to be locatedis lower than it would have been if those hospitals had not been included.Therefore, the wage index value for the MSA would be computed without includingdata from the deemed rural hospitals and the wage index value would becomputed on a county-specific basis for every rural county whose hospitalshave been deemed to be urban. There are seven rural areas that would havetheir wage index recalculated to include the hospitals that have been deemedurban. Since we have traditionally designated the urban and rural wageindex as Tables 4a and 4b, we have designated this new county-specificset of wage index values as Table 4c (see section IV of the addendum tothis proposed rule). D. Future Updates to the Hospital Wage Index Section 1886(d)(3)(E) of the Act (as amended by section 4004(a) of Pub.L. 100-203) requires that wage indexes that are applied to the labor-relatedportion of the national average standardized amounts of the prospectivepayment system be updated not later than October 1, 1990 and at least every36 months thereafter. This section further provides that the Secretarybase the update on a survey of the wages and wage-related costs of hospitalsin the United States that participate in the prospective payment system.The survey must measure, to the extent feasible, the earnings and paidhours of employment by occupational category and must exclude data withrespect to the wages and wage-related costs incurred in furnishing skillednursing facility services. To accomplish this task, we developed two wage index survey forms. Thefirst form (Form A) requested data similar to past surveys, with a fewnoted exceptions. In addition to the total wages and hours collected inpast surveys, Form A also asked for data relative to the salary and hoursassociated with direct patient-care contracted labor, home office, andfringe benefits. Form A excluded salary and hours associated with the skillednursing facilities and other related cost centers. The second form (FormB), in addition to the data requested on Form A, requested data relativeto several occupational categories. Before initiating the new hospital wage survey, the proposed forms (A andamp;B) were submitted for prior consultation to various hospital industry representatives,including the major hospital associations, as well as to the fiscal intermediaries.We solicited comments on both forms, including the feasibility of obtainingaccurate data. The comments we received suggested that most hospitals wouldbe unable to accurately provide data by occupational categories at thistime. As a result of the comments on these two forms, we have modifiedForm A, now referred to as HCFA-2561. The HCFA 2561 is currently being used to collect data for the FY 1991 updateto the wage index as required by section 1886(d)(3)(E) of the Act. However,before implementing this updated wage index or reaching decisions in thefuture on the collection of data by occupational categories and incorporatingfuture wage survey forms into the hospital cost report, we are solicitingcomments on the following issues: andbullet; Should the wage index include data on contracted labor? For purposesof the wage index survey, contracted labor has been defined as direct patient-carecontract labor such as registry nurses. Should the definition be expandedto include contracted services indirectly related to patient-care, suchas billing or housekeeping services? andbullet; What portion, if any, of home-office salaries and hours shouldbe added to the wages and hours incurred solely by the hospital? andbullet; Which fringe benefits, if any, should be included in computingthe wage index? How should they be valued? andbullet; Would hospitals be capable of providing and identifying verifiablesalaries and hours by occupational categories? What occupational groupingswould be appropriate? andbullet; If occupational data were collected, what formula or methodologyshould be used in calculating an occupational-mix index? How would themethodology reflect the varying personnel and hiring decisions made byhospitals, that is, one hospital may hire registered nurses for patient-carewhereas another hospital in the same geographic area may employ licensedpractical nurses instead? andbullet; Should the HCFA-2561 be incorporated into the hospital cost reportin order. to obtain wage data on a regular basis? What level of hospital-specificwage data should be available to the public, including other hospitals?Can the occupational category data be retrieved by adding new schedulesto the hospital cost report? In order to give the public ample time to thoroughly evaluate the six issueslisted above, we will accept comments on these issues up to September 30,1989. Because of the extended time for public comment, we will not respondto these comments in the final prospective payment rule applicable to FY1990, but we will respond to them in the proposed rule concerning the FY1991 changes to the prospective payment system. Comments on these six issuesshould be submitted separately from comments addressing the other issuesof this proposed rule to the following address: Health Care Financing Administration,Office of Reimbursement Policy, Division of Hospital Payment Policy, Attn:Wage Index Issues, 1-H-1 East Low Rise, 6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore,Maryland 21207.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Other Decisions and Proposed Changes to the Regulations </ITAG>A. Annual Publication of Prospective Payment Rates (andSection; 412.8) The September 1, 1983 final rule (47 FR 39819) added a provision to theregulations stating that when prospective payment rates are not publishedby September 1 before the beginning of the Federal fiscal year in whichthe rates would apply, the rates in effect on September 1 of the year inquestion will apply unchanged for the following Federal fiscal year. Thisprovision in andSection; 412.8(b)(4) has been superseded by changes to thestatute. Specifically, section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the Act, as amended bysection 9109(b) of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of1985 (Pub. L. 99-272), and section 4002 of Pub. L. 100-203, specifies theupdate factors for prospective payment hospitals beginning in FY 1986 andeach year thereafter. Because the law sets the rates for each Federal fiscalyear, which are effective October 1 of each year, the provisions of andSection;412.8(b)(4) no longer conform to the law. Therefore, we are proposing todelete this section. B. Burn Outliers (andSection; 412.84) Section 4008(d)(1)(A) of Pub. L. 100-203 changed the marginal cost factorto 90 percent for day and cost outliers in DRGs related to burn cases.This provision was effective for discharges occurring on or after April1, 1988 and expires as of October 1, 1989. We are proposing to retain themarginal cost factor for cost outliers at 90 percent; however, we wouldreduce the marginal cost factor for day outlier cases to 60 percent effectivefor discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1989 (that is, the samemarginal cost factor as other DRGs). Therefore, we would amend andSection;412.84 accordingly. In the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38505), we indicated that ProPAChad issued a report that addressed outlier payments for burn cases andthat we would review ProPAC's findings and recommendations to determineif changes in the burn outlier policy may be appropriate for FY 1990. ProPAC's report indicated that increased outlier payments may only be appropriatefor those cases treated in specialized burn centers and units. However,recognizing that no clear criteria currently exist to classify such centers,ProPAC postponed making specific recommendations pending further evaluation.While we recognize ProPAC's concern that outlier cases result in a moreserious impact on specialized burn centers and units than to general hospitalstreating burn cases, we generally do not believe it appropriate to createa new class of hospital (that is, burn hospitals and burn units) simplyfor purposes of targeting outlier payments. As an interim measure ProPAC recommended that burn cases be paid cost outliersonly based on a 90 percent marginal cost factor. In addition, ProPAC believesthat the outlier payment pool for burn cases should be maintained at 19percent of total payment for burn cases. This 19 percent figure representsthe impact on burn outlier payments of increasing the marginal cost factorfrom 60 percent to 90 percent. ProPAC also recommended separate outlierthresholds for burn cases be established in order to maintain the 19 percentoutlier payment pool. While ProPAC's recommendation may target more burn outlier payments tospecialized burn treatment centers, there is currently no statutory authorityto eliminate day outlier payments. However, we agree that the 90 percentmarginal cost factor may not be appropriate for less severe burn cases.Therefore, we believe it would be appropriate to reduce the marginal costfactor from 90 percent to 6 percent for day only outliers associated withburn cases since these generally represent less resource-intensive cases.Exceptionally costly day outliers, that is, those that meet both the dayand cost outlier thresholds, would be paid the greater of 60 percent ofthe per diem Federal rate for each day beyond the length of stay thresholdor 90 percent of the difference between adjusted charges and the cost thresholds.Under the proposed policy for burn outlier cases and the outlier thresholdswe are proposing for FY 1990, we estimate that approximately 20 percentof total payments for burn cases would represent outlier payments. About69 percent of those outlier payments would be made using the cost outliermethodology. We considered retaining the current 90 percent marginal cost factor forboth day and cost outliers. We rejected this approach because it wouldresult in outlier payments of approximately 23 percent of total paymentsfor burn cases. Only 57 percent of those payments would be made using thecost outlier methodology. We also examined the impact using a 60 percentmarginal cost factor for day outliers and 75 percent marginal cost factorfor cost outliers would have on payments for burn outlier cases. If wewere to adopt this policy, which would treat burn outliers the same asother outlier cases, outlier payments would constitute 18 percent of totalpayments for burn cases. Only 64 percent of those payments would be madeusing the cost outlier, methodology. We believe our proposed policy most closely achieves the policy goals oftargeting outlier payments for the most costly, burn cases and maintainingoutlier payments approximately the same percentage of total payments forburn cases. The distribution of burn outlier cases under the proposed policyis shown in the chart below.  <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L2,i1,s25,8,8</C><T4> Distribution of Burn Outlier Cases Using </T4>60 <T4>Percent Marginal Cost Factor for Day Outliers and </T4>90 <T4>Percent Marginal Cost Factor for Cost Outliers and Proposed FY </T4>1990<T4>Thresholds</T4><H1>Type of outlier</H1><H1>Percent of cases </H1><H1>Percent of payments</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">Day only<D>42.6</D><D>13.8 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Day and cost-paid day<D>10.9</D><D>16.8 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Day and cost-paid cost<D>29.0</D><D>59.1 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cost only<D>17.5</D><D>10.3</D><R/></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="3">Total</ITAG><D>100.0</D><D>100.0</D></ITAG>C. Payments to Sole Community Hospitals (andSection; 412.92) Section 1886(d)(5)(C)(ii) of the Act provides special payment protectionsunder the prospective payment system to sole community hospitals (SCHs).The statute defines an SCH as a hospital that, by reason of factors suchas isolated location, weather conditions, travel conditions, or absenceof other hospitals (as determined by the Secretary), is the sole sourceof inpatient hospital services reasonably available to Medicare beneficiaries.The regulations that set forth the criteria that a hospital must meet tobe classified as an SCH are at andSection; 412.92(a). To be classified asan SCH, a hospital must either have been designated as an SCH prior tothe beginning of the prospective payment system or meet one of the followingrequirements: andbullet; It must be located more than 50 miles from other like hospitals.andbullet; It must be located between 25 and 50 miles from other hospitals,and it must_<ITAG tagnum="15">_Serve at least 75 percent of inpatients in its market area; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Be isolated by local topography or extreme weather conditions forone month of each year; or </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Have fewer than 50 beds and would qualify on the basis of marketshare except that some patients seek specialized care unavailable at thehospital.</ITAG>andbullet; It must be located between 15 and 25 miles from other hospitalsand isolated by local topography or extreme weather for one month of eachyear.  SCHs are paid a blended rate based on 75 percent of the hospital-specificrate and 25 percent of the Federal regional rate. An SCH is eligible fora payment adjustment if, for reasons beyond its control, it experiencesa yearly decline in volume of greater than five percent compared to itspreceding cost reporting period. (This adjustment is also available toa hospital that could qualify as an SCH but chooses not to be paid as anSCH.) In addition, an SCH is eligible for an adjustment to its hospital-specificrate if it adds new services or facilities. SCHs are also exempt from thepercentage reductions in reasonable cost payments for capital-related costs,as provided in section 1886(g)(3) of the Act. In the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38513), we noted, in responseto several ProPAC recommendations concerning SCHs, that our analysis ofthe SCH provisions is an on-going process. We also noted that we wouldcontinue to study whether our criteria are appropriate for determiningwhich hospitals are the sole source of care for Medicare beneficiariesand whether sufficient protections are in place to assure beneficiary accessto inpatient hospital services in rural areas. Our analysis indicates that some SCHs would receive higher Medicare paymentsif they were to forego SCH status and be paid at the national rate. Webelieve these SHCs may be reluctant to give up their status because theymay have difficulty requalifying if circumstances change to make SCH statusmore favorable in the future. With this concern in mind, we are proposing a revision to andSection; 412.92(b)(4)(iii).That section currently states that if a hospital cancels its classificationas an SCH, the hospital may not apply for reclassification as an SCH unlessall hospitals within 50 miles of it have closed. Because we believe thisprovision is restrictive and may prevent some existing SCHs from relinquishingtheir status even though it might be financially advantageous for themto do so, we are proposing elimination of the hospital-closure-within-50miles provision in $412.92(b)(4)(iii). Instead, we propose that, if a hospitalcancels its status as an SCH, it may requalify for classification as anSCH only after one full year has passed since the cancellation was effectiveand only if the hospital meets the criteria for qualification that arein effect at the time it reapplies. Section 1886(d)(5)(C)(ii) of the Act provides for reasonable compensationfor significant increases in operating costs resulting from the additionof new services or facilities. Although a similar provision was originallyproposed by regulation, Congress explicitly provided for the payment adjustmentfor new inpatient facilities or services in section 9111(a) of Pub. L.99-272, which amended section 1886(d)(5)(C)(ii) of the Act. The paymentadjustment was established effective with cost reporting periods beginningon or after October 1, 1983 and before October 1, 1989 as a temporary measureuntil a permanent payment methodology could be developed to recognize significantdistortions in operating costs resulting from the addition of new servicesor facilities. The regulations implementing the payment adjustment areat andSection; 412.92(g). To date, there has been no legislative change to establish a differentpayment methodology to provide reasonable compensation for significantcost increases resulting from the addition of new services or facilities.In view of the expiration of the statutory provision explicitly providingfor this payment adjustment, we are proposing to extend indefinitely byregulation the provisions at andSection; 412.92(g) In order not to disadvantageany SCH that experiences a significant increase in operating costs resultingfrom new inpatient services or facilities.Currently, if a hospital wishes to receive a payment adjustment becauseit experienced a significant volume decrease, it must submit a requestfor the adjustment to its intermediary along with documentation demonstratingthe size of the decrease in discharges and explaining the circumstancesgiving rise to the decline in discharges and how they were beyond the hospital'scontrol. The hospital must also furnish evidence of the actions it tookto control costs in the face of the circumstances cited and the resultingdecline in discharges. The intermediary reviews and analyzes the documentationand then forwards the documentation along with its analysis and recommendationon approval to HCFA. HCFA determines the volume adjustment within 180 daysfrom the date HCFA receives the hospital's request and all other necessaryinformation from the intermediary. In an effort to streamline and expedite this process, we are proposingthat this determination process be decentralized and handled entirely bythe intermediaries. We believe that there is now sufficient experiencereviewing hospitals' applications for volume adjustments for intermediariesto make these determinations. We would revise andSection; 412.92(e)(3) tomake this change. We also propose that the intermediaries use the samecriteria for review that are currently in place in andSection; 412.92(e).For further discussion of this process, see the September 1, 1983 finalrule (48 FR 39786), the June 10, 1987 proposed rule (52 FR 22090), andthe September 30, 1987 final rule (53 FR 38510). We are preparing manual instructions for the intermediaries concerningthe determinations of volume adjustments. We propose that any requestsfor a volume adjustments that intermediaries have not submitted to HCFAby September 30, 1989 be processed for a final determination by the intermediaries.With the deterioration in the financial condition of many rural hospitals,our ability to define appropriately those hospitals that represent thesole source of care reasonably available to Medicare beneficiaries hasbecome increasingly important. In this regard, our criteria for SCH designationhave remained largely unchanged since the beginning of the prospectivepayment system. The regulations reflect an assumption that any hospitallocated more than 50 miles from the nearest like hospital is the sole sourceof care reasonably available; conversely, it is assumed that a hospitallocated within 25 miles of a like hospital would not be the sole sourceof care reasonably available unless weather conditions make other hospitalsinaccessible at least one month per year. For hospitals located between 25 and 50 miles of another hospital, a markettest or a measure of extremes in topography or weather conditions is usedto determine whether the hospital qualifies for SCH designation. As clarifiedin the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38510), a hospital locatedbetween 25 and 50 miles of a like hospital may qualify as an SCH if, duringthe cost reporting period ending before it applies for SCH status, it admittedat least 75 percent of all the hospitalized residents or 75 percent ofall the Medicare beneficiaries who were admitted to any like hospital locatedwithin the larger of the requesting hospital's service area or a 50 mileradius. A hospital's service area is the area from which a hospital drawsat least 75 percent of its inpatients or a service area defined by a healthsystems agency. Thus, while a hospital located between 25 and 50 milesof the nearest like hospital cannot be presumed to be or not to be an SCH,it can demonstrate by the size of its market share that it serves as thesole source of inpatient services reasonably available. Also, if a hospitallocated between 25 and 50 miles of the nearest like hospital has fewerthan 50 beds, it can be deemed to meet the market share criterion if itsintermediary certifies that the hospital would have met this criterionwere it not for the fact that some Medicare beneficiaries or residentsof the hospital's service area were forced to seek care outside the servicearea due to the unavailability of certain specialty services at the hospitalwith fewer than 50 beds. In assessing whether the SCH market share criteria should be improved,we have studied ProPAC's recommendations from last year and the analysisperformed by Systemetrics under contract with ProPAC. The Systemetricsstudy attempted to identify all rural hospitals eligible for SCH designationand to simulate the impact of altering criteria. Systemetrics found thatmost rural hospitals are closely spaced. Ninety percent are within 35 milesof their nearest neighbor hospital and only three percent are more than50 miles from another hospital. With regard to the market share test, Systemetrics found that there isan interrelationship between the definition of market area and market share.Generally speaking, the more broadly a hospital's market area is defined,the lower the hospital's market share percentage will be. Further, thegreater the distance to the nearest neighbor hospital, the more broadlythe market area is defined. One result of the relationship between marketshare and distance to the nearest hospital is that only a small percentageof the hospitals located more than 50 miles from another hospital wouldmeet the market test. Moreover, the proportion of facilities meeting the75 percent market test is smaller for those 35 to 39 miles from their nearestneighbor than for those isolated by 25 to 34 miles. We have concluded from our analysis of the Systemetrics data that the currentmarket share test is inappropriate for hospitals that are located morethan 35 miles from a like hospital. The market area for these hospitals,as currently defined, is sufficiently broad to make the 75 percent marketshare standard unreasonable. The Systemetrics data show only nine percentof hospitals between 35 to 49 miles from another hospital had a marketshare greater than 75 percent even though the estimated travel time betweentwo hospitals located 35 miles apart would be 45 minutes on the average.We considered modifying the SCH criteria for hospitals located 35 to 50miles from a like hospital by narrowing the definition of market area orrelaxing the 75 percent market share standard for these hospitals, or implementingboth of these changes. We rejected this approach for several reasons. First,we believe that the SCH criteria are already too complicated and that increasingthe complexity by adding unique criteria for hospitals located between35 to 50 miles would be undesirable. Second, given the worsening financialcondition of many rural hospitals, we do not believe it would be appropriateto delay changing the criteria until the analyses that would be neededto develop appropriate modifications in the market share test are completed.Finally, considering that the average travel time between two hospitals35 miles apart is 45 minutes, we believe it is reasonable to assume thata hospital more than 35 miles from a like hospital is the sole source ofcare reasonably available to Medicare beneficiaries. Therefore, effectiveOctober 1, 1989, we are proposing to modify our SCH criteria as set forthat andSection; 412.92(a) (1) and (2) by eliminating the market share testfor hospitals located more than 35 miles from a like hospital.We invite comment on how the SCH criteria might be improved or simplified.In this regard, we are continuing to analyze whether modifications shouldbe made in the market share test for hospitals located between 25 to 35miles from a like hospital. In particular, we are interested in commentsconcerning whether the market share test should be simplified by removingthe special consideration for hospitals with less than 50 beds whose residentswere forced to seek care outside the service area due to the unavailabilityof certain specialty services. We have found this provision to be problematicand burdensome to implement. One alternative to the provision would beto relax the market share standard from 75 percent to a lower percentagethat would be applicable to all inpatient services received by residentsof the hospital's service area. Another alternative would be to apply themarket share test only to those residents that receive inpatient servicesfor the DRGs that are most commonly treated by small rural hospitals. Finally,we are considering whether any modifications in this regard should be limitedto hospitals with fewer than 50 beds or whether it would be more appropriateto modify the market share test for all hospitals regardless of bed sizein recognition that a portion of residents will seek specialized care outsidethe service area of most rural hospitals. We believe the Systemetrics data confirm the appropriateness of our standardthat a hospital located within 25 miles of a like hospital would not bethe sole source of care reasonably available unless topography or weatherconditions make other hospitals inaccessible at least 1 month per year.The data show that only one percent of hospitals within 25 miles of anotherhospital provide at least 75 percent of the inpatient services receivedby Medicare beneficiaries residing within their service area. However,concern has been expressed regarding our criteria in andSection; 412.92(a)(2) and (3), which define isolation of hospitals due to local topographyor periods of prolonged severe weather. Under current policy, we requirethat a hospital must document its inaccessibility for 30 consecutive daysin each of the past 3 years in order to qualify as an SCH on this basis(see 48 FR 39781, September 1, 1983). The documentation must be substantiatedby an outside source, for example, the State Highway Department or a localpublic safety official. We are considering modifying this policy to require the hospital to documentits inaccessibility for 30 nonconsecutive days in 2 out of the last 3 years.We are soliciting comments at this time regarding whether this standardwould be appropriate. If commenters believe the standard should be revisedand do not believe our proposed modification would be appropriate, we wouldlike to know what they consider to be a reasonable alternative and whatdocumentation should be required to support a hospital's application underthe standard. Commenters should keep in mind that any standard proposedmust be designed so that it can be implemented on a nationwide basis. D. Beneficiary Access to Care in Rural Areas The nation's rural health care system is undergoing a difficult periodof transition in response to several complex factors including changingpractice patterns evolving delivery systems, regional economic change,facility conversion, declining admissions, patient mobility, and demographicchange. These factors, coupled with the incentives for efficiency offeredby Medicare's prospective payment system, present increasing pressureson the rural health care delivery system. The challenge facing rural providers, State and local governments, Medicare,and other third-party insurers is to adopt policies that acknowledge thevariety of factors affecting the long-term financial viability of ruralproviders and assure essential access to health care for rural residents.In light of this, we are proposing several changes in this proposed rulethat would improve our policies for sole community hospitals (SCHs). Theseadministrative proposals would accomplish the following:andbullet; Ease the requirements for qualifying for SCH status by eliminatingthe market share test for hospitals that are more than 35 miles from anotherhospital. In addition, we solicit public comment on how our criteria forSCH status could be improved. andbullet; Extend indefinitely the payment adjustment for significant costincreases resulting from the addition of new services or facilities. andbullet; Streamline the review and approval process for payment adjustmentsfor SCHs that experience significant declines in volume by delegating theresponsibility for making these adjustments to the fiscal intermediaries.andbullet; Allow a hospital that gives up SCH status to regain its statusafter 1 year; our current regulations allow a hospital to regain SCH statusonly if any other hospital within 50 miles has closed. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">As indicated in Appendix C, we are also recommending that rural hospitalsreceive a higher annual update than urban hospitals for FY 1990. As a longer term initiative, we are evaluating whether further refinementsto the prospective payment system would be appropriate to improve our paymentpolicy for rural hospitals. This evaluation includes_ andbullet; An assessment of whether the special payment protections for SHCsare adequate to provide beneficiaries with continued access to qualitycare; andbullet; Examination of whether it would be appropriate to establish separateoutlier thresholds for cases in urban and rural hospitals; and andbullet; Research to replace the separate urban and rural rates with asingle rate adjusted for severity and other factors that explain differentialhospital cost experience. Although we believe that it is important to implement appropriate Medicarepayment policies for rural hospitals, we note that the critical issue facingthe nation is assuring continued access to health care for all rural residents.Medicare payments account for 34 percent of rural hospitals' total revenues.Other revenue sources, such as Medicaid, private insurance, and self pay,make up the remaining 66 percent of revenues. A policy involving changesto the Medicare program alone would not be sufficient to assure essentialaccess to rural health care. A viable and effective rural health care policymust involve Federal, State and local governments, and private insurers.To assist the Department in examining the many important issues affectingthis principle of assuring ``essential access'', we request comments onthe following:  andbullet; How should the existing SCH policy be reformed and targeted toprotect beneficiaries in' rural areas with ``essential access'' problems?andbullet; What are an appropriate operational definitions of ``essentialaccess'' (for example, distance, market share, patient mobility, transportation,weather, or types of essential services provided)? andbullet; What roles should Federal and State government play in identifying``essential access'' facilities?andbullet; Should the Federal government and States ensure that Medicaidpayment policies acknowledge the need to assure ``essential access'' tocare for beneficiaries in rural areas and, if so, how? andbullet; Should States take actions to encourage third-party payors toacknowledge the need to assure ``essential access'' to care for rural residents?andbullet; How can the rural transition grant program (authorized by section4005(e) of Pub. L. 100-203) be targeted to specifically assist ``essentialaccess'' facilities in planning, coordination, service delivery modification,and conversion efforts? andbullet; How can the Federal government best coordinate rural health policywith those of the State governments? In order to give the public ample time to respond to the issues raisedregarding ``essential access'' to health care by rural residents, we willaccept comments on these issues up to September 30, 1989. Because the issuesare not directly related to the Medicare prospective payment system, wewill not respond to these comments in the final prospective payment ruleapplicable to FY 1990, but we will take them into consideration as we developa Departmental rural health policy designed to assure essential accessto health care in rural areas. Comments on these issues should be submittedseparately from comments addressing the other issues of this proposed ruleto the following address:<ITAG tagnum="15">Health Care Financing Administration, Office of Reimbursement Policy,Division of Hospital Payment Policy, Attn: Rural Access Issues, 1-H-l EastLow Rise, 6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 21207. </ITAG>E.Cancer Hospitals (andSection; 412.94) Section 1886(d)(5)(C)(iii) of the Act authorizes special treatment forhospitals involved extensively in treatment for and research on cancer.In our regulations at andSection; 412.94(a), we set forth the criteria ahospital must meet to be considered a cancer hospital. In andSection; 412.94(b),we provide that, during its first cost reporting period subject to theprospective payment system, a qualifying cancer hospital may elect to bereimbursed on a reasonable cost basis, subject to the rate of increaselimit. We have received inquiries concerning whether the provisions ofsections 1815(e)(1) and 1886(g)(3) of the Act, which apply generally toprospective payment hospitals and not to hospitals excluded from the prospectivepayment system that receive payment on a reasonable cost basis, apply tothese cancer hospitals since they are paid on a reasonable cost basis ratherthan on the basis of a prospective payment rate. Section 1815(e)(1) of the Act provides that, effective with claims receivedon or after July l, 1987, certain requesting prospective payment hospitalswill receive payment for Medicare services on a periodic interim payment(PIP) basis. Under PIP, payment is based on the estimated annual paymentsfor care provided to Medicare patients, and equal biweekly payments aremade to hospitals without regard to the submission of individual bills.However, an end-of-year settlement is made once all bills for that yearhave been submitted and processed. Generally, under the provisions of section.1815(e)(1) of the Act and the regulations that implement it, andSection;412.116, an otherwise qualifying prospective payment hospital receivesPIP only if its intermediary fails to make prompt payment of the hospital'sbills, or if the hospital previously qualified as a hospital serving adisproportionate share of low-income patients or as a small rural hospital.Hospitals that are not ``subsection (d) hospitals,'' as well as other providerssuch as skilled nursing facilities and home health agencies, continue tobe eligible for PIP if they meet the other qualifying conditions. Section 1886(g)(3) of the Act requires, effective October 1, 1986, specifiedreductions in the amount of payment for capital-related costs of inpatienthospital services of all prospective payment hospitals except sole communityhospitals. This provision is set forth in regulation at andSection; 412.113.Except for sole community hospitals as provided in section 1886 (g)(3)(B)of the Act, sections 1815(e)(1) and 1886(g)(3) of the Act apply to allsubsection (d) hospitals and subsection (d) Puerto Rico hospitals (as definedin sections 1886(d)(1)(B) and (9)(A) of the Act, respectively). The authorityin section 1886(d)(5)(C)(iii) of the Act that permits special treatmentunder the prospective payment system for a cancer hospital does not alterthat hospital's status as a subsection (d) hospital (that is, a prospectivepayment hospital). Therefore, there is no legislative authority for exemptingcancer hospitals from the provisions of sections 1815(e)(1) and 1886(g)(3)of the Act merely because they are paid on the same basis as hospitalsexcluded from the prospective payment system (that is, on a reasonablecost basis). We have recently advised the HCFA regional offices to direct fiscal intermediariesthat have not already done so to begin applying the provisions of andSection;andSection;412.113 and 412.116 to cancer hospitals receiving payments under andSection;412.94. The intermediaries were directed to apply the provisions of andSection;412.113 retroactively, beginning with portions of cost reporting periodsoccurring during FY 1987 as required by section 1886(g)(3) of the Act.However, the provisions of andSection; 412.116 can not be applied retroactivelydue to the nature of PIP. Therefore, we directed the intermediaries toterminate current PIP payments to cancer hospitals that do not qualifyto receive PIP under the provisions of andSection; 412.116(b)(1)(i), (ii),or (iii). As with other prospective payment hospitals that no longer receivePIP, these cancer hospitals that have their PIP payments terminated willreceive payments for inpatient operating costs related to care of Medicarepatients on the basis of submitted bills rather than receiving equal biweeklypayments. Accordingly, we are proposing to revise andSection; 412.94(b) to clarifythat cancer hospitals receiving payment on a reasonable cost basis retaintheir status as subsection (d) hospitals and are subject to all other regulationsgoverning hospitals subject to the prospective payment system. Specifically,we would add a new paragraph (b)(4) to state specifically that the provisionof andSection;andSection; 412.113 and 412.116 are applicable to cancer hospitals.F. Rural Referral Centers (andSection; 412.96) Under the authority of section 1886(d)(5)(C)(i) of the Act, andSection; 412.96sets forth the criteria a hospital must meet in order to receive specialtreatment under the prospective payment system as a referral center (thatis, payment is based on the other urban payment rate rather than the ruralpayment rate). One of the criteria under which a rural hospital may qualifyas a referral center is to have 275 or more beds available for use. A rural hospital that does not meet the bed size criterion can qualifyas a rural referral center if the hospital meets two mandatory criteria(number of discharges and case-mix index) and at least one of three optionalcriteria (medical staff, source of inpatients, or volume of referrals).With respect to the two mandatory criteria, currently a hospital is classifiedas a rural referral center if its_  andbullet; Case-mix index is equal to the lower of the median case-mix indexfor urban hospitals in its census region, excluding hospitals with approvedteaching programs, or the median case-mix index for all urban hospitalsnationally; and andbullet; Number of discharges is at least 5,000 discharges per year or,if fewer, the median number of discharges for urban hospitals in the censusregion in which the hospital is located. (We note that the number of dischargescriterion for an osteopathic hospital is at least 3,000 discharges peryear.) <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Case-Mix Index </ITAG>Section 412.96(c)(1) provides that HCFA will establish updated nationaland regional case-mix index values in each year's annual notice of prospectivepayment rates for purposes of determining referral center status. In determiningthe proposed national and regional case-mix index values, we would followthe same methodology we used in the November 24, 1986, final rule, as setforth in regulations at andSection; 412.96(c)(1)(ii). Therefore, the proposednational case-mix index value would include all urban hospitals nationwideand the proposed regional values are the median values of urban hospitalswithin each census region, excluding those with approved teaching programs(that is, those hospitals receiving indirect medical education paymentsas provided in andSection; 412.118). These values are based on discharges occurring during FY 1988 (October1, 1987, through September 30, 1988) and include bills posted to HCFA'srecords through December 1988. Therefore, in addition to meeting othercriteria, we are proposing that to qualify for or to retain rural referralcenter status for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October1, 1989, a hospital's case-mix index value for FY 1988 would have to beat least_ andbullet; 1.2187; or andbullet; Equal to the median case-mix index value for urban hospitals (excludinghospitals with approved teaching programs as identified in andSection; 412.118)calculated by HCFA for the census region in which the hospital is locatedas indicated in the table below.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/> <H1>Region</H1><H1>Case-mix index value</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">1. New England (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT)<D>1.1598 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2. Middle Atlantic (PA, NJ, NY)<D>1.1595 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3. South Atlantic (DE, DC, FL, GA, MD, NC, SC, VA, WV)<D>1.2107 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4. East North Central (IL, IN, MI, OH, WI)<D>1.1644 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5. East South Central (AL, KY, MS, TN)<D>1.1598 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6. West North Central (IA, KS, MN, MO, NB, ND, SD)<D>1.1742 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">7. West South Central (AR, LA, OK, TX)<D>1.2082 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8. Mountain (AZ, CO, ID, MT, NV, NM, UT, WY)<D>1.2379 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">9. Pacific (AK, CA, HI, OR, WA)<D>1.2272</D></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The above numbers will be revised in the final rule to the extentthat additional bills are received for discharges through September 30,1988. For the benefit of hospitals seeking to qualify as referral centers orthose wishing to know how their case-mix index value compares to the criteria,we are publishing the FY 1988 case mix index values in Table 3c in sectionIV of the addendum to this proposed rule. In keeping with our policy ondischarges, these case-mix index values are computed based on all Medicarepatient discharges subject to DRG based payment. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Discharges </ITAG>Section 412.96(c)(2)(i) provides that HCFA will set forth the nationaland regional numbers of discharges in each year's annual notice of prospectivepayment rates for purposes of determining referral center status. As specifiedin section 1886(d)(5)(C)(i)(II) of the Act, the national standard is setat 5,000 discharges. However, we are proposing to update the regional standards,which are based on discharges for urban hospitals during the fourth yearof the prospective payment system (that is, October 1, 1986 through September30, 1987), which is the latest year for which we have complete dischargedata available. Therefore, in addition to meeting other criteria, we are proposing thatto qualify for or to retain rural referral center status for cost reportingperiods beginning on or after October 1, 1989, a hospital's number of dischargesfor its cost reporting period that began during FY 1988 would have to beat least_ andbullet; 5,000; or andbullet; Equal to the median number of discharges for urban hospitals inthe census region in which the hospital is located as indicated in thetable below. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">We again note that to qualify for or to retain rural referral centerstatus for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1989,an osteopathic hospital's number of discharges for its cost reporting periodthat began during FY 1988 would have to be at least 3,000.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/> <H1>Region</H1><H1>Number of discharges</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">1. New England (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT)<D>6749 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2. Middle Atlantic (PA, NJ, NY)<D>8138 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3. South Atlantic (DE, DC, FL, GA, MD, NC, SC, VA, WV)<D>6451 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4. East North Central (IL, IN, MI, OH, WI)<D>7850 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5. East South Central (AL, KY, MS, TN)<D>6113  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6. West North Central (IA, KS, MN, MO, NB, ND, SD)<D>5832  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">7. West South Central (AR, LA, OK, TX)<D>4528 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8. Mountain (AZ, CO, ID, MT, NV, NM, UT, WY)<D>7403 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">9. Pacific (AK, CA, HI, OR, WA)<D>4927</D></ITAG></ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Retention of Referral Center Status </ITAG>In the August 31, 1984 final rule, we announced that we were institutinga periodic review of the status of hospitals that qualified for a paymentadjustment as referral centers (49 FR 34746). That final rule stated thatthis review would allow us to determine if these hospitals continued tomeet the criteria for referral center status. The final rule stated thatwe would grant referral center status to a hospital for a 3-year period.At the end of the 3 years, we would evaluate a hospital's performance inmeeting the criteria for qualifying as a referral center. A hospital wouldhave been required to meet the criteria for at least 2 of those 3 years.If it did, the hospital would retain its referral center status for another3-year period. If the hospital did not meet the criteria for at least 2of the 3 years, the hospital's status as a referral center would end withthe last day of the third cost reporting period for which it received thereferral center payment adjustment. Before we were able to implement this review, the Omnibus Budget ReconciliationAct of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-509) was enacted on October 21, 1986. Section 9302(d)(2)of Pub. L. 99-509 stated that any hospital that was classified as a ruralreferral center on the date of the enactment of that law will continueto be classified as a referral center for cost reporting periods beginningon or after October 1, 1986 and before October 1, 1989. Thus, any hospitalthat was classified as a referral center as of October 21, 1986 (the dateof enactment of Pub. L. 99-509) is guaranteed this status through its costreporting period beginning before October 1, 1989.  We believe it is important that the rural referral center benefit be availableonly to those hospitals that continue to be in compliance with the statutorycriteria for designation. Therefore, with the expiration of the requirementof section 9302(d)(2) of Pub. L. 99-509 on October 1, 1989, we are proposingto implement essentially the same retention criteria and methodology specifiedin andSection; 412.96(f) that we had developed prior to the enactment ofPub. L. 99-509. These criteria and methodology were discussed in the June10, 1985 proposed rule (50 FR 24380) and the September 3, 1985 final rule(50 FR 35676). Basically, to retain status as a referral center, a hospital must meetthe criteria for classification as a referral center specified in andSection;412.96(b) or (c) for at least 2 of the 3 years after it qualifies as areferral center or it must qualify on the basis of the requirements forthe current year. A hospital may meet the specific criteria in either paragraphfor individual years during the 3-year period or the current year. Forexample, a hospital may meet the two mandatory requirements in andSection;412.96(c)(1) (case mix index) and (c)(2) (number of discharges) and theoptional criterion in paragraph (c)(3) (medical staff) during  the firstyear. During the second and third year, the hospital may meet the criteriaunder andSection; 412.96(b)(1) (rural location and appropriate bed size).A hospital must meet all of the criteria within any section of the regulationsin order to meet the retention criteria for a given year. That is, it mustmeet all of the criteria of andSection; 412.96(b)(1) or andSection; 412.96(b)(2)or andSection; 412.96(c). For example, if a hospital meets the case mix indexstandards in andSection; 412.96(b)(2) in years 1 and 3 and the number ofdischarge standards in years 2 and 3, it would not meet the retention criteria.All of the standards must be met in the same year. When we begin implementation of the provisions of andSection; 412.96(f),some hospitals will have been classified as referral centers for more than3 years without having been reviewed for continuing compliance with thereferral center criteria. We are proposing that the review process be limitedto the hospital's compliance during the last 3 years. Thus, if a hospitalmeets the criteria for at least 2 of the last 3 years or for the currentyear, it would retain its status for another 3 years. No hospital wouldbe subject to a review until the end  of its third full cost reportingperiod as a referral center. Therefore, those hospitals that first qualifiedas referral centers as of April 1, 1988 by virtue of having at least 275beds would not be subject to review until the end of their third full costreporting period as a referral center. In the past few years, there have been several changes in the methodologyused to set the case-mix index and the number of discharges criteria. Wehave constructed the following chart and example to aid hospitals thatqualify as referral centers under the criteria in andSection; 412.96(c) inprojecting whether they would retain their status as a referral center.Under andSection; 412.96(f), to qualify for a 3-year extension effectivewith cost reporting periods beginning in FY 1990, a hospital must meetthe mandatory criteria in andSection; 412.96(c) for FY 1990 or it must meetthe criteria for 2 of the last 3 years as follows.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/> <H1>For the cost reporting period beginning during FY</H1><H1>Use hospital's case-mix index for FY </H1><H1>Use the discharges for the hospital's cost reporting period beginningduring FY</H1><H1>Use numerical standards as published in the </H1><T2>Federal Register </T2>on <ITAG tagnum="1">1989<D>1987</D><D>1987</D><D>September 30, 1988. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1988<D>1986</D><D>1986</D><D>September 1, 1987. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1987<D>1985</D><D>1985</D><D>November 24, 1986 and August 24, 1987.</D></ITAG></ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Example: </T4>A hospital with a cost reporting period beginning July1 qualified as a referral center effective July 1, 1985. The hospital hasfewer than 275 beds. Its status as a referral center is protected throughthe end of its cost reporting period beginning July 1, 1989. To determineif the hospital should retain its status as a referral center for an additional3-year period, we would review its compliance with the applicable criteriafor its cost reporting periods beginning July 1, 1987, July 1, 1988, July1, 1989, and July 1, 1990. The hospital must meet the criteria either forits cost reporting beginning July 1, 1990 or for two out of the three pastperiods. For example, to be found to have met the criteria, at andSection;412.96(c)(2) for its cost reporting period beginning July 1, 1988, thehospital's case-mix index value during FY 1986 must have equaled or exceededthe lower of the national or the appropriate regional standard as publishedin the September 1, 1987 final rule. The hospital's total number of dischargesduring its cost reporting year beginning July 1, 1986 must have equaledor exceeded 5,000 or the regional standard as published in the September1, 1987 final rule.</ITAG>For those hospitals that seek to retain referral center status by meetingthe criteria of andSection; 412.96 (b)(i) and (b)(1)(ii) (that is, rurallocation and appropriate bed size (500 or more beds for discharges occurringbefore April l, 1988 and 275 or more beds thereafter)), we would look atthe number of beds shown for indirect medical education purposes (as definedat andSection; 412.118(b)) on the hospital's cost report for the appropriateyear. As discussed above, we would consider only full cost reporting periodsbeginning on or after April 1, 1988 when determining a hospital's statusunder andSection; 412.96(b)(1)(ii). This definition varies from the bed sizecriterion used to determine a hospital's initial status as a referral centerbecause we believe it is important for a hospital to demonstrate that ithas maintained at least 275 beds throughout its entire cost reporting period,not just for a particular portion of the year. We project that 25 percent of hospitals currently designated as rural referralcenters will not meet the retention criteria. Approximately three-quartersof these hospitals do not meet the proposed case-mix index criterion forqualifying as a rural referral center in FY 1990; based on MEDPAR dataprocessed through December 31, 1988, the average case-mix index value forthe hospitals not meeting the case-mix index criterion is six percent lowerthan the applicable criterion and is comparable to the FY 1988 case-mixindex for other rural hospitals. Approximately 44 percent of the hospitalshad fewer than 5,000 discharges in FY 1987. Among these, the average numberof FY 1987 discharges was slightly more than 4,000. As a group, the averagehospital cost per case in FY 1987 was approximately 10 percent lower thanthe cost per case of the hospitals that we project will retain rural referralcenter status. G. Disproportionate Share Adjustment (andSection; 412.106) Section 8401 Pub. L. 100-647 amended section 1886(d)(5)(F)(i) of the Actto extend payment of the disproportionate share adjustment through dischargesthat occur before October 1, 1995. Prior to enactment of Pub.  L. 100-203,the payment adjustment for disproportionate share hospitals was to be madeonly through discharges occurring before October 1, 1990. We would reviseandSection; 412.106 (b)(1) and (b)(2) to conform our regulations with thisstatutory provision. H. Indirect Medical Education Costs (andSection; 412.118) Section 1886(d)(5)(B) of the Act provides that prospective payment hospitalsthat operate medical education programs receive an additional payment forthe indirect costs of medical education. The regulations governing thecalculation of this additional payment are set forth at andSection; 412.118.Each hospital's additional indirect medical education payment is determinedby multiplying the hospital's total DRG revenue by the applicable educationadjustment factor. Section 4003(a) of Pub. L. 100-203 revised section 1886(d)(5)(B)(ii) ofthe Act to reduce the education adjustment factor used to determine theindirect medical education payment from approximately 8.1 percent to approximately7.7 percent for discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1988 and beforeOctober 1, 1990. Section 8401 of Pub. L. 100-647 extended the applicabilityof this education adjustment factor through discharges occurring beforeOctober 1, 1995. We note that the education adjustment factor is an approximationbecause the adjustment factor is applied on a curvilinear or variable basis.An adjustment made on a curvilinear basis reflects a nonlinear cost relationship;that is, each absolute increment in a hospital's ratio of interns and residentsto beds does not result in an equal proportional increase in costs. For discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1988 and before October1, 1995, the indirect medical education factor equals the following:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L1(0,0,0),tp0,g1,t1,i1,aw,10,21,8</C>  <H1>1.89andmultiply;</H1><T4>[</T4><T4>A</T4>1+<H1>interns and residents</H1><H2>beds</H2><H1/><T4>B</T4>.405^1<T4>]</T4><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG></ITAG>   For discharges occurring on or after October l, 1995, the indirect medicaleducation factor equals the following:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L1(0,0,0),tp0,g1,t1,i1,aw,10,21,8</C>  <H1>1.43andmultiply;</H1><T4>[</T4><T4>A</T4>1+<H1>interns and residents</H1><H2>beds</H2><H1/><T4>B</T4>.5795^1<T4>]</T4><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG></ITAG> We would amend andSection; 412.118 (c) and (d) to implement the provisionsof amended section 1886(d)(5)(B)(ii) of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Other ProPAC Recommendations</ITAG>As required by law, we have reviewed the March 1, 1989 report submittedby ProPAC and have given its recommendations careful consideration in conjunctionwith the proposals set forth in this document. Recommendations 1 through7 concerning the update factors are discussed in Appendix C. Recommendation13 concerning reassignment of patients with Guillain-Barre syndrome isdiscussed in section II.B. of this preamble. The remainder of the recommendationsare discussed below.A. Adjustments to the Prospective Payment System Payment Formula<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Indirect Medical Education Adjustment (Recommendation 8)</ITAG><T3>Recommendation:</T3> The Secretary should seek legislation to reducethe indirect medical education adjustment from 7.7 percent to 6.6 percentfor FY 1990. This reduction should be implemented in a budget neutral fashionwith the savings returned to all hospitals through corresponding increasesin the standardized amounts. ProPAC estimates that the indirect medicaleducation adjustment should be 4.4 percent. However, concern about implementingsuch a large reduction led ProPAC to recommend that only one third of thetotal reduction be implemented this year. ProPAC also recommends that furtherreductions should be made only after review of costs and analysis of impact.<T3>Response:</T3> We agree that the current indirect medical educationadjustment paid to teaching hospitals is excessive and should be reduced.We believe that the adjustment should be reduced to 4.05 percent for each10 percent increment in the intern and resident-to-bed ratio applied ona curvilinear basis. That figure represents our estimate of the actualimpact of the indirect costs of teaching activity on hospital costs. Wenote that this figure does not differ significantly from the ProPAC estimate,which is 4.4 percent for each 10 percent increment in the ratio of internsand residents-to-beds.Our analyses indicate that teaching hospitals have had favorable Medicareoperating margins under the prospective payment system. Hospitals, on average,experienced operating margins of 5.3 percent during FY 1987. Teaching hospitals,on the average, experienced higher Medicare operating margins. Teachinghospitals with an intern and resident-to-bed ratio of less than 25 percenthad Medicare operating margins of 7.6 percent during FY 1987; teachinghospitals with greater than a 25 percent intern and resident-to-bed ratiohad Medicare operating margins of 13.6 percent on average during FY 1987.We believe that teaching hospitals have fared exceptionally well underthe prospective payment system and are able to absorb a reduction in theindirect medical education adjustment. Therefore, while we recognize thata change in the adjustment from 7.7 percent to 4.05 percent is sizeable,we do not believe that gradually reducing the adjustment, as ProPAC hasrecommended, is justified. Moreover, in view of the budgetary constraints,we believe it would be inappropriate to pay in excess of the estimate ofthe actual indirect costs of teaching activity. Further, because we believepayments to other hospitals are adequate, we believe that the change inthe indirect medical education adjustment formula should not be implementedin a budget neutral fashion.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Outlier Payment Policy (Recommendation 9)</ITAG><T3>Recommendation:</T3> ProPAC believes that the modifications in theoutlier payment methodology that were implemented during FY 1989 representan improvement in the payment system. The Secretary should continue toexamine methods for improving the effectiveness of outlier payment in accomplishingits two major objectives; that is, protecting hospitals from the risk ofextraordinarily costly cases and protecting those patients who are morelikely to be extraordinarily costly cases from a potential decrease inaccess to inpatient hospital services. This examination should includea review of the fundamental structure of outlier payment policy.<T3>Response: </T3>We are pleased that ProPAC comments favorably on thechanges in outlier payment policy that were made for FY 1989. We agreewith ProPAC that we should continue to study and evaluate this area, andwe are prepared to work with ProPAC on further studies. In particular,we are interested in developing policies to protect small rural hospitalsfrom the financial impact of extraordinarily costly cases. We are alsointerested in assessing the impact of our changes on those hospitals thatbelieve they have been harmed due to the greater emphasis on cost ratherthan length of stay as a criteria for paying for outliers. We believe thatany assessment of whether certain patients are denied access to healthcare is most appropriated performed as a part of the review conducted bythe Peer Review Organizations (PRO).B. Data Collection and Measurement <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Updating the Area Wage Index (Recommendation 10) </ITAG><T3>Recommendation: </T3>ProPAC believes that the availability of timelyand accurate hospital wage data is critical in maintaining the equity ofpayments to hospitals under the prospective payment system. However, thedata currently in use are six years old and are unlikely to provide anaccurate measure of current relative wage levels. Therefore, ProPAC urgesthe Secretary to replace these data with more current information and touse the more current data to update the wage index for FY 1990. The Secretaryalso should develop a permanent mechanism for obtaining accurate hospitalwage data on an annual basis. In addition, ProPAC urges the Secretary toupdate the wage index at least every other year. <T3>Response: </T3>We share ProPAC's concern that the wage index reflectas accurately as possible the current wage and salary trends experiencedby hospitals and we are taking steps to obtain more recent data. We had attempted to collect wage data from 1986 through HCFA Form 339,Exhibit 7, which involved categorizing wages according to occupationalmix. However, over 60 percent of the expected respondents failed to completea form, and those that did reply experienced numerous difficulties completingthe form. After consultation with hospital industry representatives, we have revisedthe survey format and have initiated a new hospital wage survey. This surveywill collect calendar year 1988 wage data from all prospective paymenthospitals. We carefully examined the feasibility of expediting the surveyprocess using an abbreviated format in an attempt to update the wage indexfor FY 1990. Unfortunately, time constraints preclude us from developinga reliable updated wage index prior to FY 1991. We examined the time required to complete each step in the process of obtaining,editing, analyzing, and correcting hospital wage data and found that, absentany delays, the earliest we could develop a wage index was September 1989.This process was an expedited one that did not include requesting, receiving,and considering comments on the methodology from the hospital industry.We have been advised by the hospital industry that it would want the opportunityto comment on any survey methodology. A complete wage survey that includedhospital industry input and took into account possible delays by fiscalintermediaries and hospitals, would result in a new proposed wage indexbeing developed no earlier than March 1990. Therefore, the hospital wagedata we are currently collecting will be used to update the wage indexfor discharges occurring in FY 1991. In addition, we are considering a process for gathering data on a continuingbasis as part of the hospital cost report. Such a system, once it is inplace, would enable us to update the wage index on an annual basis. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Improving the Cost Data Used for Decision Making (Recommendation11) </ITAG><T3>Recommendation: </T3>The Secretary should begin the development worknecessary to secure the future role of the Medicare cost report as a vitalsource for policy evaluation and decision making. Although the cost reportwas originally developed and continues to be used as a reimbursement tool,it is also increasingly used as a source of data. This trend will continueand should be encouraged. Efforts to improve the cost report should attemptto minimize the administrative burden on hospitals, fiscal intermediaries,and the Federal government. <T3>Response: </T3>The Secretary plans to conduct a demonstration projectin the States of California and Colorado to develop and determine the costand benefits of a uniform system of cost reporting for hospitals participatingin the Medicare program. The purpose of this demonstration is to collectthe additional uniform cost report data required by section 4007(c)(1)of Pub. L. 100-203. In addition, we have modified the Hospital and HospitalHealth Care Complex Cost Report (Form HCFA-2552) to enable it to be usedas a standardized electronic cost report format in accordance with section4007(b) of Pub. L. 100-203. We believe that these changes could resultin data that are received in a more uniform and timely fashion and thatare more accurate. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Improvements in Case-Mix Measurement (Recommendation 12) </ITAG><T3>Recommendation: </T3>The Secretary should begin immediately to thoroughlyevaluate the potential consequences of adopting the DRG refinements recentlydeveloped at Yale University. Preliminary results from this project appearto be very promising. Much work remains to be done, however, to understandfully all of the implications of applying these refinements in the prospectivepayment system. ProPAC will be pleased to cooperate fully with the Secretaryto further this effort.<T3>Response: </T3>We are studying the DRG refinements developed by Yaleand agree that they appear to be a promising improvement in measuring variationsin resource intensity within DRGs. We agree that it is critical that weundertake a full assessment of the implications of this system and willbe pleased to work with ProPAC in this regard. It is necessary to evaluatethe redistributional effects of the Yale refinements and the appropriatenessof current payment adjustments such as indirect medical education and disproportionateshare, which are designed to account for higher resource intensity withincertain classes of hospitals that is not recognized under the current DRGsystem. In addition, we are concerned with the potential impact the Yalerefinements may have on the relative levels of payment to urban and ruralhospitals. C. Quality of Care <ITAG tagnum="81">Evaluation of PRO Review of Quality of Care (Recommendation 14) </ITAG><T3>Recommendation: </T3>The Secretary should evaluate the impact of thePROs on quality of care. Intensified analysis of the PRO findings and validationof the PRO quality review process should be included in the evaluation.The validity, reliability, and efficiency of the PRO quality screens shouldreceive special emphasis in the evaluation. In addition, the Secretaryshould continue to develop, test, and implement more sophisticated methodsof inpatient and outpatient quality review. The Secretary should also developadditional mechanisms to identify and evaluate quality of care beyond theimmediate period of hospitalization, placing more emphasis on outcomesof care. <T3>Response: </T3>We agree with the recommendation for evaluation of theimpact of PROs on quality of care. We have the following two mechanismsin place that evaluate a PRO's application of quality screens: andbullet; An independent contractor, Systemetrics, Inc. (the so-called ``SuperPRO'')validates the determinations made by a PRO specifically to identify qualityissues that should have been addressed by the PRO using generic screeningcriteria. This review is a rereview of the medical records originally examinedby the PRO. Whenever discrepancies arise, the PRO is given an opportunityto rebut the SuperPRO's findings. The final SuperPRO decisions are usedas educational tools for PROs. HCFA also reviews these decisions to identifyareas in which corrective action is needed. During the PRO contract negotiations,SuperPRO findings, including those related to generic quality screens,will be considered in the PRO evaluation process. andbullet; The Peer Review Organization Monitoring Protocol and TrackingSystem (PROMPTS) monitors the PROs performance in the area of quality ofcare. PROMPTS involves regional office rereview of PRO clinical decisions,including generic screen failures. If the regional office disagreementswith a PRO's decisions exceeds a specific threshold, the PRO must submita corrective action plan. These corrective actions are then monitored byHCFA, and subsequent SuperPRO findings are closely examined to monitora PRO's performance. We routinely analyze those areas where the disagreementrate exceeds the threshold and require the PRO to take additional correctiveaction, if necessary. Additionally, the PRO's performance in this activityis considered in the PRO evaluation process. SuperPRO and PROMPTS are essential parts of the PRO evaluation processand are used to carefully monitor and evaluate the validity, reliability,and efficiency of PRO application of quality screens. HCFA agrees withProPAC's recommendation that the Secretary should continue to develop,test, and implement more sophisticated methods of inpatient and outpatientquality review. Additionally, we are developing methodology for the PROs to use in proposingpilot projects in each of these areas. For example, we will be lookingat proposals under which the PROs would review the quality of care in physicians'offices and in other outpatient settings. The pilot studies would be designedto track the patient across all settings in which care is received to assesshealth longitudinally. We also will be planning pilot projects under whichPRO review will be lessened in hospitals whose performance appears superior,as judged by such things as consistently lower than expected risk-adjustedmortality and rehospitalization rates. This will help us to determine whetherpatient outcomes in these hospitals differ significantly from those wherethe normal PRO review process is in place. D. Rural Hospitals <ITAG tagnum="81">Rural Hospitals (Recommendation 15) </ITAG><T3>Recommendation: </T3>ProPAC is concerned about the problems affectingrural hospitals and the rural health care system, as well as the implicationof these problems on access to needed health care. ProPAC recognizes thatthese problems extend beyond the prospective payment system and Medicare.ProPAC urges the Secretary to continue the Department's rural health careresearch and policy agenda. Meanwhile, ProPAC will continue its analysisof the effects of the prospective payment system on rural hospitals. <T3>Response: </T3>We recognize that rural hospitals have not fared aswell as urban hospitals under the prospective payment system. The originaldesign of the payment system initially underpaid rural hospitals relativeto urban hospitals. We believe the comparative disadvantages experiencedby rural hospitals in the early years of the prospective payment systemhave been largely addressed by numerous administrative and legislativechanges designed to improve payment equity for rural hospitals. However,changes in the prospective payment system cannot address the more fundamentalproblems affecting rural hospitals that arise from changing economic circumstancesin rural areas and from declining occupancy rates.As discussed in section IV.D. of this preamble, we are continuing to studythe problems facing rural hospitals and are examining whether further refinementsto the prospective payment system are needed. We are particularly concernedover the adequacy of the payments to sole community hospitals and are examiningwhether legislative changes in the payment methodology for these hospitalswould be appropriate. In section IV.C. of this preamble, we are proposingchanges in the criteria for designating sole community hospitals. In addition,we are placing priority on research related to replacing the separate paymentrates for urban and rural areas with a single payment rate adjusted forseverity and other factors that more closely capture differential hospitalcost experience. E. Ambulatory Surgery Payment <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Medicare Payment for Hospital Outpatient Surgery (Recommendation16) </ITAG><T3>Recommendation: </T3>Beginning in FY 1990, Medicare payment for thefacility component of hospital outpatient surgery including capital shouldbe entirely prospective. Separate rates should be established for eachof the six groups proposed for payment of services furnished in ambulatorysurgery centers (ASCs). The rate for FY 1990 should be based on a blendof hospital-specific costs, average hospital costs, and the rate paid tofreestanding ASCs. The rate should be updated annually. The level of the prospective rates should be the same in FY 1990 as theywould have been under current policy. Payments should be adjusted to reflectdifferences in area wages. These changes in hospital outpatient surgerypayment policy should apply to the list of ASC-approved procedures only;other Medicare payment provisions should continue for all other procedures.ProPAC does not recommend special treatment of eye and ear specialty hospitals.<T3>Response: </T3>We agree with ProPAC's objective to develop a prospectivepayment system for hospital outpatient ambulatory surgical services. However,we do not agree with the approach ProPAC has recommended. As we statedin our interim report to Congress last year on this subject, a prospectivepayment system for hospital outpatient ambulatory surgical services shouldbe based on two basic principles. First, Medicare program outlays shouldbe no greater under a hospital outpatient prospective payment system thanunder the current system. Second, the prospective payment system shouldcreate a level playing field between ASC and hospital outpatient departments;that is, any difference between hospital-based payments and ASC paymentsshould be based on justifiable differences in cost. We plan on continuing to study different approaches to incorporate hospitaloutpatient surgical services into a prospective payment system that isbased on the principles stated above. Thus, we recommend no further changesto the hospital outpatient ambulatory surgical payment system at this time.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Beneficiary Liability for Hospital Outpatient Surgery (Recommendation17) </ITAG><T3>Recommendation: </T3>The Secretary should modify the methodology usedto determine Medicare Part B coinsurance for certain ambulatory surgeryservices performed in hospital outpatient departments. Currently, beneficiarycoinsurance is based on hospital submitted charges. ProPAC believes thatbeneficiary coinsurance should be limited to 20 percent of the paymentamount allowed by Medicare. The Medicare program should bear the costsof the change. <T3>Response: </T3>As was stated in our response to Recommendation 16,we oppose making any changes to the present payment system for ambulatorysurgical services. Therefore, we would be unable to implement this ProPACrecommendation for the present time. In addition, the present system pays in the aggregate for surgery performedin a hospital outpatient setting based on the lesser of cost or chargesor a blend of a hospital specific amount and the ASC payment amount. Becausethe system is based on payments in the aggregate, calculated upon retroactivesettlement, it is not possible to determine the actual payment amount basedon individual bills, as would be necessary to implement ProPAC's proposal.Therefore, we believe that no changes should be made at this time.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Other Required lnformation </ITAG>A. Paperwork Reduction Act This proposed rule does not impose information collection requirements.Consequently, it need not be reviewed by the Office of Management and Budgetunder the authority of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3511).B. Public Requests for Data In order to respond promptly to public requests for data related to theprospective payment system, we have set up a process under which commenterscan gain access to the raw data on an expedited basis. Generally, the dataare available in computer tape format and are listed below with the costof each tape. Anyone wishing to purchase data tapes should submit a writtenrequest along with a check to cover the cost of the tapes to the followingaddress: HCFA Office of Statistics and Data Management, Bureau of DataManagement and Strategy, Room 1-F-2, Oak Meadows Building, 6325 SecurityBoulevard, Baltimore, MD 21207. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. MEDPAR Public Use File </ITAG>This file contains billing and medical data for Medicare beneficiariesusing short-stay hospital inpatient services for a 20 percent sample determinedby the terminal digits in the beneficiary's Health Insurance Claim Number.The file is stripped of most data elements that would identify either thebeneficiary or the hospital.<ITAG tagnum="15">Periods Available: Calendar Year (CY) 1980 through CY 1988 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $840.00 for each calendar year </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">2. Expanded Modified MEDPAR File </ITAG>The file contains records for 100 percent of Medicare beneficiaries usingshort-stay hospital inpatient services. The file is stripped of most dataelements that would identify beneficiaries. The hospitals are identified.The file is available to persons qualifying under the terms of the Noticeof Proposed New Routine Use for an Existing System of Records publishedin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on December 24, 1984 (49 FR 49941), which wasamended by the July 2, 1985 Notice of Proposed new Routine Use for an ExistingSystem of Records (50 FR 27361). Under the requirements of these notices,a data use agreement must be signed by the purchaser before release ofthese data.<ITAG tagnum="15">Periods Available: FY 1984 through FY 1988 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $2760.00 for each fiscal year </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">3. HCFA Hospital Wage Index Survey </ITAG>Wage indexes for acute care hospitals are used to adjust payments in theprospective payment system. Both the 1982 and 1984 wage index files includethe following data items for each hospital: provider number, intermediarynumber, beginning and ending dates of the cost reporting period, totalgross hospital salaries, total paid hours, and state and county codes.In addition, the 1982 wage index file includes the date the hospital becamesubject to the prospective payment system. These files are generated uponspecial request.<ITAG tagnum="15">Periods Available: Cost reporting periods ending in calendar year1982 and cost reporting periods ending September 30, 1984 through September29, 1985  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $390.00 each </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">4. H180 Extract, Cost Reporting Periods Ending January 1, 1981 ThroughDecember 31, 1981 </ITAG>This file contains selected data items from cost reports. These data wereused in computing the initial Federal prospective payment rate.<ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $560.00 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">5. H180 Extract, Cost Reporting Periods Ending January 1, 1982 ThroughSeptember 29, 1983</ITAG>This file contains the target amount computations that provide the basisfor the determination of the final prospective payment system hospital-specificrates and rate-of-increase limits hospital-specific target amounts percase. <ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $560.00 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">6. TEFRA Minimum Data Set, Cost Reporting Periods Ending September30, 1983 Through September 29, 1984 </ITAG>The TEFRA Minimum Data Set contains cost, statistical, financial, and otherinformation from the Medicare hospital cost report (Form HCFA 2552-83).There is a single record for each of 6,679 Medicare participating hospitals.This data set includes capital-related cost (fixed and moveable) informationused in the early analyses of prospective capital payment. Most of thesefiles are taken from cost reports that have been settled by the intermediaries.<ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $560.00 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">7. PPS-I Minimum Data Set, Cost Reporting Periods Ending September30, 1984 Through September 29, 1985 </ITAG>The PPS-I Minimum Data Set contains cost, statistical, financial, and otherinformation from the Medicare hospital cost report (Form HCFA 2552-84).There is a single record for each Medicare participating hospital. Thedata files include submitted, final settled, and reopened cost reportsreceived from the intermediary.<ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $560.00 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">8. PPS-II Minimum Data Set, Cost Reporting Periods Ending September30, 1985 through September 29, 1986 </ITAG>The PPS-II Minimum Data Set contains cost, statistical, financial, andother information from the Medicare hospital cost report (Form HCFA 255285). There is a single record for each Medicare participating hospital.The data set includes submitted, final settled, and reopened cost reportsreceived from the intermediaries.<ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $560.00 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">9. PPS-III Minimum Data Set, Cost Reporting Periods Ending September30, 1986 Through September 29, 1987 </ITAG>The PPS-III Minimum Data Set contains cost, statistical, financial, andother information from the Medicare hospital cost report (Form HCFA 2552-86).There is a single record for each Medicare participating hospital. Thedata set includes submitted, final settled, and reopened cost reports receivedfrom the intermediaries.<ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $560.00 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">10. PPS-IV Minimum Data Set, Cost Reporting Periods Ending September30, 1987 Through September 29, 1988 </ITAG>The PPS-IV Minimum Data Set, contains cost, statistical, financial, andother information from the Medicare hospital cost report (HCFA Form 2552-85).There is a single record for each Medicare participating hospital. Thedata set includes submitted, final settled, and reopened cost reports receivedfrom the intermediaries.<ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $560.00 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">11. Provider-Specific Variable File </ITAG>This file is a component of the PRICER program used in an intermediary'ssystem to compute individual DRG payments. The file contains records forall prospective payment system hospitals and short stay acute care hospitalsin waiver States, and data elements used in standardizing hospital chargesfor recalibration and in simulating payments to hospitals.<ITAG tagnum="15">Periods Available: 1984, 1986, 1987, and 1988 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Price: $390.00 </ITAG>For further information concerning these data tapes, contact Rose Connertonat (301) 966-5300.In addition, certain other data, such as area wage data and data used toconstruct the Puerto Rico standardized amounts, are available in hard copyformat. Commenters interested in examining hard copy data should contactLana Price at (301) 966-4534. We realize that commenters may be interested in obtaining data other thanthose we have discussed above. These commenters should direct their requeststo Lana Price at the number provided above.Finally, in lieu of obtaining data through the mail, certain data may alsobe available for inspection at the central office of the Health Care FinancingAdministration in Baltimore, Maryland. Commenters interested in obtainingmore information about this alternative for reviewing data should alsocontact Lana Price. C. Public Comments Because of the large number of items of correspondence we normally receiveon a proposed rule, we are not able to acknowledge or respond to them individually.However, in preparing the final rule, we will consider all comments concerningthe provisions of this proposed rule that we receive by the date and timespecified in the ``Dates'' section of this preamble and respond to thosecomments in the preamble to that rule. We emphasize that, given the statutoryrequirement under section 1886(e)(5) of the Act that our final rule forFY 1990 be published by September 1, 1989, we will consider only thosecomments that deal specifically with the matters discussed in this proposedrule. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 42 CFR Part 412 </ITAG>Health facilities, Medicare. 42 CFR Part 412 would be amended as set forth below: <ITAG tagnum="76">CHAPTER IV_HEALTH CARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTHAND HUMAN SERVICES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER B_MEDICARE PROGRAMS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 412_PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES</ITAG>A. The authority citation for Part 412 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1102, 1122, 1815(e), 1871, and 1886 of the Socia1Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1302, 1320a-l, 1395g(e), 1395hh, and l395ww).</ITAG>B. Subpart A is amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_General Provisions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 412.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>In andSection; 412.8, paragraph (b)(4) is removed. C. Subpart F is amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart F_Payment for Outliers </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 412.84 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>In andSection; 412.84(k), the phrase ``and before October 1, 1989'' is removed.D. Subpart G is amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart G_Special Treatment of Certain Facilities  </ITAG>1. In andSection; 412.92(a), in paragraphs (a)(1) and the introductory textof paragraph (a)(2), the number ``50'' is revised to read ``35''; paragraph(b)(4)(iii) is revised; in the introductory text of paragraph (e)(3) andparagraph (e)(3)(i), the term ``HCFA'' is replaced with the phrase ``theintermediary''; paragraph (e)(3)(ii) is revised; in paragraph (e)(3)(iii),the term ``HCFA'' is replaced with the phrase ``the intermediary''; and,in paragraph (g)(6), the phrase ``before October 1, 1989'' is deleted toread as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 412.92 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Special treatment: Sole community hospitals. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) <T3>Classification procedures. </T3>* * * (4) <T3>Cancellation of classification. </T3>* * * <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *  </ITAG>(iii) If a hospital requests that its sole community hospital classificationbe cancelled, it may not be reclassified as a sole community hospital unlessit meets the following conditions: (A) At least one full year has passed since the effective date of its cancellation.(B) The hospital meets the qualifying criteria set forth in paragraph (a)of this section in effect at the time it reapplies. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(e) <T3>Additional payments to sole community hospitals experiencing a significantvolume decrease.* * * </T3>(3) * * *  (ii) The intermediary makes its determination within 180 days from thedate it receives the hospital's request and all other necessary information.2. In andSection; 412.94, a new paragraph (b)(4) is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 412.94 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Special treatment: Cancer hospitals. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) <T3>Payment. * * * </T3>(4) A hospital that elects reasonable cost reimbursement continues to besubject to the prospective payment system with respect to hospital inpatientservices, as provided in andSection; 412.20. The provisions in andSection;andSection;412.113 and 412 116 concerning payment for capital-related costs and methodof payment for inpatient hospital services, respectively, are applicableto such a hospital. 3. In andSection; 412.96, paragraph (f) is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 412.96 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Special treatment: Referral centers. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *  </ITAG>(f) <T3>HCFA review of referral center status.</T3>_(1) <T3>General rule. </T3>The status of each hospital that is receiving areferral center adjustment is reviewed by the HCFA regional office every3 years to determine if the hospital continues to meet the applicable criteria(2) <T3>Retention criteria. </T3>To retain referral center status, a hospitalmust meet the applicable criteria_ (i) In at least 2 of the last 3 years; or (ii) For the current year. (3) <T3>Cancellation of referral center status. </T3>If a hospital does notmeet either of the retention criterion in paragraph (f)(2) of this sectionand no longer qualifies for a referral center adjustment, HCFA discontinuesthe adjustment beginning on the first day of the hospital's next cost reportingperiod. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 412.106 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>In andSection; 412.106, in paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2), the phrase ``October1, 1990'' is revised to read ``October 1, 1995''. E. Subpart H is amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart H_Payments to Hospitals Under the Prospective Payment System</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 412.118 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>In andSection; 412.118, in paragraphs (c)(1), (c)(2), (d)(1), and (d)(2),the phrase ``October 1, 1990'' is revised to read ``October 1, 1995''.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Program No. 13.773, Medicare_HospitalInsurance)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: April 25, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis B. Hays,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator, Health Care Financing Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Approved: May 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis W. Sullivan,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">[<T4>Editorial Note: </T4>The following addendum and appendixes will notappear in the Code of Federal Regulations.] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="85">Addendum_Proposed Schedule of Standardized Amounts Effective withDischarges On or After October 1, 1989 and Update Factors and Target RatePercentages Effective With Cost Reporting Periods Beginning On or AfterOctober 1, 1989</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Summary and Background </ITAG>In this addendum, we are proposing changes in the amounts and factors fordetermining prospective payment rates for Medicare inpatient hospital services.We are also proposing new target rate percentages for determining the rate-of-increaselimits (target amounts) for hospitals and hospital units excluded fromthe prospective payment system. For hospital cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1989,except for sole community hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico,each hospital's payment per discharge under the prospective payment systemwill be comprised of 100 percent of the Federal rate. Except for hospitalsaffected by the regional floor, the Federal portion of a hospital's prospectivepayment rate is based on 100 percent of the national rate. Sole community hospitals are to be paid on the basis of a rate per dischargecomposed of 75 percent of the hospital-specific rate and 25 percent ofthe applicable Federal regional rate (section 1886(d)(5)(C)(ii) of theAct). Hospitals in Puerto Rico are paid on the basis of a rate per dischargecomposed of 75 percent of a Puerto Rico rate and 25 percent of a nationalrate (section 1886(d)(9)(A) of the Act). Hospitals affected by the regionalfloor are paid on the basis of 85 percent of the Federal national rateand 15 percent of the Federal regional rate. As discussed below in section II, we are proposing to make changes in thedetermination of the prospective payment rates. The changes, to be appliedprospectively, would affect the calculation of the Federal rates. SectionIII sets forth our proposed changes for determining the rate-of-increaselimits for hospitals excluded from the prospective payment system. Thetables to which we refer in the preamble to the proposed rule are presentedat the end of this addendum in section IV. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Proposed Changes to Prospective Payment Rates for Hospitals forFY 1990 </ITAG>The basic methodology for determining prospective payment rates is setforth at andSection; 412.63 for hospitals located outside of Puerto Rico.The basic methodology for determining the prospective payment rates forhospitals located in Puerto  Rico is set forth at andSection;andSection; 412.210and 412.212. Below we discuss the manner in which we are proposing to changesome of the factors used for determining the prospective payment rates.The Federal and Puerto Rico rate changes, once issued as final, would beeffective with discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1989. As requiredby section 1886(d)(4)(C) of the Act, we must adjust the DRG classificationsand weighting factors for discharges in FY 1990. In summary, the standardized amounts set forth in Tables la, lb, and lcof section IV of this addendum were_andbullet; Adjusted to ensure budget neutrality as provided in section 1886(d)(8)(D)of the Act; andbullet; Adjusted by the revised urban and rural outlier offsets; and andbullet; Updated by 5.8 percent (that is, the market basket percentageincrease). A. Calculation of Adjusted Standardized Amounts <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Standardization of Base-Year Costs or Target Amounts </ITAG>Section 1886(d)(2)(A) of the Act required the establishment of base-yearcost data containing allowable operating costs per discharge of inpatienthospital services for each hospital. The preamble to the interim finalrule, published September 1, 1983 (48 FR 39763), contains a detailed explanationof how base-year cost data were established in the initial developmentof standard amounts for the prospective payment system and how they areused in computing the Federal rates. Section 1886(d)(9)(B)(i) of the Act required that Medicare target amountsbe determined for each hospital located in Puerto Rico for its cost reportingperiod beginning in FY 1987. The September 1, 1987 final rule containsa detailed explanation of how the target amounts were determined and howthey are used in computing the Puerto Rico rates (52 FR 33043, 33066).The standardized amounts are based on per discharge averages of adjustedhospital costs or, for Puerto Rico, adjusted target amounts, from a baseperiod, updated and otherwise adjusted in accordance with the provisionsof section 1886(d) of the Act. Sections 1886(d)(2)(C) and (d)(9)(B)(ii)of the Act required that the updated base-year per discharge costs and,for Puerto Rico, the updated target amounts, respectively, be standardizedin order to remove from the cost data the effects of certain sources ofvariation in cost among hospitals. These include case mix, differencesin area wage levels, cost of living adjustments for Alaska and Hawaii,indirect medical education costs, and payments to hospitals serving a disproportionateshare of low-income patients. Since all adjustments for variation in hospital operating costs or targetamounts have already been accounted for consistent with the constructionof the standardized amounts, no revision was made at the hospital levelfor those factors. That is, the adjustments for differences in case mix,wages, cost-of-living, indirect medical education costs, and payments tohospitals serving a disproportionate share of low-income patients reflectedin the FY 1990 proposed standardized amounts are identical to those reflectedin the current (FY 1989) standardized amounts. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Computing Urban and Rural Averages Within Geographic Areas </ITAG>In determining the prospective payment rates for FY 1984, section 1886(d)(2)(D)of the Act required that the average standardized amounts be determinedfor hospitals located in urban and rural areas of the nine census divisionsand the nation. Under section 1886(d)(9)(B)(iii) of the Act, the averagestandardized amount per discharge for FY 1988 must be determined for hospitalslocated in urban and rural areas in Puerto Rico.For FY 1990, except for hospitals in Puerto Rico and those hospitals thatare affected by the regional floor, the Federal rates will be comprisedof 100 percent of the national rate (section 1886(d)(1)(A)(iii) of theAct). The Federal rate for hospitals affected by the regional floor isbased on 85 percent of the national rate and 15 percent of the regionalrate. Section 1886(d)(5)(C)(ii) of the Act specifies that a sole communityhospital's Federal rate is based on 100 percent of the regional rate. Hospitalsin Puerto Rico are paid a blend of 75 percent of the applicable PuertoRico standardized amount and 25 percent of a national standardized paymentamount. Section 4002(c)(1) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (Pub.L. 100-203) amended section 1886(d)(3) of the Act to require the Secretaryto compute three average standardized amounts for discharges occurringin a fiscal year beginning on or after October 1, 1987: one for hospitalslocated in rural areas; one for hospitals located in large urban areas;and one for hospitals located in other urban areas. Section 4002(b) ofPub. L. 100-203 amended section 1886(d)(2)(D) of the Act to define a ``largeurban area'' as an urban area with a population of more than 1,000,000.In addition, section 4009(i) of Pub. L. 100-203 provides than a New EnglandCounty Metropolitan Area (NECMA) with a population of more than 970,000is classified as a large urban area. As required by section 1886(d)(2)(D)of the Act, population size is determined by the Secretary based on thelatest population data published by the Bureau of the Census. Under thatsection as now amended, urban areas are referred to as ``other urban areas.''Based on 1987 population estimates published by the Bureau of the Census,the current 46 large urban areas continue to meet the criteria to be definedas large urban areas for FY 1990. A list of those areas was set forth inthe April 5, 1988 notice at 53 FR 11138. In addition, these areas are identifiedby an asterisk in Tables 4a and 4c. No additional areas were identified.Therefore, we are proposing no change in these areas for purposes of thisproposed rule. If new population estimates are published by the Bureauof the Census before we publish the final rule, we would include any resultingadditions to and deletions from the list of large urban areas in that rule.Table 1a contains the three national standardized amounts that would beapplicable to most hospitals. Table 1b sets forth the 27 regional standardizedamounts that would be applicable to sole community hospitals and to hospitalssubject to the regional floor. Under section 1886(d)(9)(A)(ii) of the Act,the national standardized payment amount applicable to hospitals in PuertoRico consists of the discharge weighted average of the national rural standardizedamount, the national large urban standardized amount, and the nationalother urban standardized amount (as set forth in Table 1a). The nationalaverage standardized amount for Puerto Rico is set forth in Table 1c. Thistable also includes the three standardized amounts that would be applicableto most hospitals in Puerto Rico. The methodology for computing the national average standardized amountsis identical to the methodology for determining the regional amounts. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) may announce revised listingsof the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and NECMA designations thatare used in calculating the standardized amounts. If OMB makes the announcementbefore we issue the final rule, we will list the revised MSA/NECMA designationsin the addendum to the final rule. Consistent with Medicare policy andour regulations at andSection; 412.63(b)(4), the changes in designation willbe effective for discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1989. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Updating the Average Standardized Amounts </ITAG>In accordance with section 1886(d)(3)(A) of the Act, we are proposing toupdate the large urban, other urban, and rural average standardized amountsand the hospital-specific rate (which applies only to sole community hospitals)using the applicable percentage increase specified in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(i)of the Act. The percentage increase to be applied is mandated under thatsection of the law as the estimated percentage increase in the hospitalmarket basket for hospitals located in all areas. The percentage changein the market basket reflects the average change in the price of goodsand services purchased by hospitals to furnish inpatient care. The mostrecent forecasted hospital market basket increase and,  thus, the applicablepercentage increase for FY 1990 is 5.8 percent. Although the update factor for FY 1990 is set by law, we were requiredby section 1886(e)(3)(B) of the Act to report to Congress no later thanMarch 1, 1989 on our initial recommendation of update factors for FY 1990for both prospective payment hospitals and hospitals excluded from theprospective payment system. For general information purposes, we have includedthis report as Appendix B of this proposed rule. Our proposed recommendationon the update factors (which is required by sections 1886 (e)(4) and (e)(5)(A)of the Act), as well as our responses to ProPAC's recommendations concerningthe update factors, are set forth as Appendix C to this proposed rule.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Other Adjustments to the Average Standardized Amounts</ITAG>a. <T3>Indirect Medical Education. </T3>Section 1886(d)(3)(C)(ii)of the Actprovides that, effective for discharges occurring on or after October 1,1986, the average standardized amounts be further reduced, taking intoconsideration the effects of the standardization for indirect medical educationcosts as described in section II.A.1. of this addendum. The required adjustmentis to ensure that the program savings that would be achieved through standardizingfor indirect medical education on one basis and computing indirect medicaleducation payments on another basis are preserved.The first such adjustment was implemented for the standardized amountseffective October 1, 1986. (See the September 3, 1986 final rule (51 FR31521).) Since section 1886(d)(3)(C)(ii) of the Act, as amended by section4003(a)(2) of Pub. L. 100-203, required a revision of the adjustment dueto the reduction of the adjustment factor for computing indirect medicaleducation payments effective October 1, 1988, we made a further adjustmentto the standardized amounts effective October 1, 1988 to achieve the incrementalsavings that resulted from that reduction in indirect medical educationpayments. See the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38539) for the factorsused to make this adjustment. Since there has been no change in the indirectmedical education factor for FY 1990, we are not proposing to make anyfurther adjustment to the standardized amounts for FY 1990. b.<T3> Rural Hospitals Deemed to be Urban.</T3> Section 1886(d)(8)(B) ofthe Act provides that certain rural hospitals are deemed urban effectivewith discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1988. Section 1886(d)(8)(C)of the Act, as added by section 8403(a) of the Technical and MiscellaneousRevenue Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-647), specifies that if the wage indexvalues applicable to MSAs that are now deemed to include certain ruralhospitals and to the rural areas in which those hospitals are actuallylocated were reduced because of the provisions of section 1886(d)(8)(B)of the Act, those wage index values must be recalculated as if that sectionhad not been enacted. A separate wage index value is calculated for eachof the affected counties (that is, those rural counties whose hospitalsare deemed urban). Section 1886(d)(8)(D) of the Act specifies two payment conditions thatmust be met. First, the FY 1990 urban standardized amounts  are to be adjustedso as to ensure that total aggregate payments under the prospective paymentsystem after implementation of the provisions of sections 1886(d)(8) (B)and (C) of the Act are equal to the aggregate prospective payments thatwould have been made absent these provisions. Second, the rural standardizedamounts are to be adjusted to ensure that aggregate payments to rural hospitalsnot affected by these provisions neither increase nor decrease as a resultof implementation of these provisions. The following adjustment factors,necessary to achieve the requisite budget neutrality constraints, wereapplied to the proposed standardized amounts:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,s15,r15</C> <H1>Urban </H1><H1>Rural</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">.99943 <D>1.00030</D></ITAG></ITAG>c. <T3>Outliers</T3>. Section 1886(d)(5)(A) of the Act requires that, in additionto the basic prospective payment rates, payments must be made for dischargesinvolving day outliers and may be made for cost outliers. Section 1886(d)(3)(B)of the Act correspondingly requires that the urban and rural standardizedamounts, respectively, be separately reduced by the proportion of estimatedtotal DRG payments attributable to estimated outlier payments for hospitalslocated in urban areas and those located in rural areas. Section 1886(d)(9)(B)(iv)of the Act requires that the urban and rural standardized amounts be reducedby the proportion of estimated total payments made to hospitals in PuertoRico attributable to estimated outlier payments. Consequently, instead of a uniform reduction factor applying equally toall the standardized amounts, there are two separate reduction factors,one applicable to the urban national and regional standardized amountsand the other applicable to the rural national and regional standardizedamounts. Furthermore, sections 1886(d)(5)(A)(iv) and 1886(d)(9)(i) of theAct direct that outlier payments may not be less than five percent normore than six percent of total payments projected to be made based on theprospective payment rates in any year. In the September 30, 1988 final rule, we set the outlier thresholds soas to result in estimated outlier payments (prior to consideration of theadditional covered days that will result from the elimination of a daylimitation on Medicare inpatient hospital services under section 101 ofthe Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-360)) equalto 5.1 percent of total prospective payments. We also set the same outlierthresholds and offsets for the Puerto Rico prospective payment standardizedamounts as we had for hospitals located outside Puerto Rico. Because certainchanges we made to the outlier policy were not effective until November1, 1988, we had two sets of outlier thresholds for FY 1989. For dischargeson or after October 1, 1988 and before November 1, 1988, the day outlierthreshold is the geometric mean length of stay for each DRG plus the lesserof 22 days or 2.0 standard deviations and the cost outlier threshold isthe greater of 2.0 times the prospective payment rate for the DRG or $23,750.For discharges on or after November 1, 1988, the day outlier thresholdis the geometric mean length of stay for each DRG plus the lesser of 24days or 3.0 standard deviations and the cost outlier threshold is the greaterof 2.0 times the prospective payment rate for the DRG of $28,000. The outlieradjustments for FY 1989 were .9437 for the urban rates and .9777 for therural rates. We are proposing to continue to set the outlier thresholds so as to resultin estimated outlier payments equal to 5.1 percent of total prospectivepayments. Therefore, for FY 1990, we would set the day outlier thresholdat the geometric mean length of stay for each DRG plus the lesser of 27days or 3 standard deviations and the cost outlier threshold at the greaterof 2.0 times the prospective payment rate for the DRG or $32,000. The proposed thresholds would essentially maintain the current outlierpayment split with 33.5 percent of cases being paid using the cost outliermethodology and 66.5 percent using the day outlier methodology. However,17.5 percent of the cases meeting the day outlier threshold would be paidusing the cost outlier methodology because it yields the higher payment.Our simulation of FY 1990 outlier payments based on FY 1988 Medicare provideranalysis and review file (MEDPAR) data indicates that the percentage ofcases that qualify as day outliers is about 80.6 percent. The cases qualifyingas day outliers are expected to receive 84.4 percent of outlier paymentsin FY 1990. An estimated 19.4 percent of outlier cases would be cost onlyoutlier cases, which are expected to receive about 15.6 percent of outlierpayments. The following table illustrates this finding in greater detail:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/> <H1>Type of outlier</H1><H1>Percentage of outlier cases</H1><H1>Percentage of outlier payments</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">Meets day threshold only<D>56.1</D><D>28.5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Meets day and cost thresholds, paid using day methodology<D>10.4</D><D>18.7 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Meets day and cost thresholds, paid using cost methodology<D>14.1</D><D>37.2 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Subtotal_All cases meeting day threshold<D>80.6</D><D>84.4 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Meets cost threshold only<D>19.4</D><D>15.6 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Total<D>100.0</D><D>100.0</D></ITAG></ITAG> The proposed outlier adjustment factors for FY 1990 are as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,s15,r6</C> <H1>Urban</H1><H1>Rural</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">.943686<D>.977956</D></ITAG></ITAG> The 5.1 percent projection of outlier payments is based on covered daysin the FY 1988 MEDPAR file and does not reflect the increase in outlierpayments that will occur in FY 1990 as a result of the elimination of theday limitation on Medicare inpatient hospital services under section 101of Pub. L. 100-360. Based on FY 1988 data currently available regardingnoncovered days of hospital care furnished to Medicare beneficiaries underthe benefit structure in effect prior to the effective date of Pub. L.100-360, we estimate that outlier payment for the additional days of coveredcare will be about one percent of total DRG payments. By making an average5.1 percent offset to the standardized amounts in 1990 instead of the 6.1percent that will result from Pub. L. 100-360, we are ensuring that theadditional benefits are financed out of additional Federal monies ratherthan through the updated standardized amounts and outlier funds. For amore detailed explanation of this adjustment made to account for the effectof section 101 of Pub. L. 100-360, see the September 30, 1988 final rule(53 FR 38519). In that rule, we requested comments on the methodology wewere using to take the effects of section 101 of Pub. L. 100-360 into account.We are developing a final rule to respond to the comments received fromthe public; however, we are proposing to use the same methodology in FY1990 as was used to make the adjustment in FY 1989. Table 8 of section IV of this addendum updates the Statewide average cost-to-charge ratios for urban hospitals and for rural hospitals to be used in calculatingcost outlier payments for those hospitals for which the intermediary isunable to compute a reasonable hospital-specific cost-to-charge ratio.Effective October 1, 1989, these Statewide average ratios replace the ratiospublished in the September 30, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38628). We proposethat these average ratios would be used to calculate cost outlier paymentsfor those hospitals for which the intermediary computes cost-to-chargeratios lower than 0.36 or greater than 1.23. This range represents 3.0standard deviations (plus or minus) from the mean of the log distributionof cost-to-charge ratios for all hospitals. These revised parameters wouldbe applied to all updates to hospital-specific cost-to-charge ratios basedon cost report settlements occurring during FY 1990.B. Adjustments for Area Wage Levels and Cost-of-LivingThis section contains an explanation of the application of two types ofadjustments to the adjusted standardized amounts that will be made by theintermediaries in determining the prospective payment rates as describedin section II.D. of this addendum. For discussion purposes, it is necessaryto present the adjusted standardized amounts divided into labor and nonlaborportions. Tables 1a, 1b, and 1c, as we propose in this addendum, containthe actual labor related and nonlabor-related shares that would be usedto calculate the prospective payment rates for hospitals located in the50 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.<ITAG tagnum="81">Adjustment for Area Wage Levels</ITAG>Sections 1886(d)(2)(H) and 1886(d)(9)(C)(iv) of the Act require that anadjustment be made to the labor-related portion of the prospective paymentrates to account for area differences in hospital wage levels. This adjustmentis made by the intermediaries by multiplying the labor-related portionof the adjusted standardized amounts by the appropriate wage index forthe area in which the hospital is located. In section III of the preambleto this proposed rule, we discuss certain revisions we are making to thewage index. This index is set forth in Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c of this addendum.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Adjustment for Cost of Living in Alaska and Hawaii</ITAG>Section 1886(d)(5)(C)(iv) of the Act authorizes an adjustment to take intoaccount the unique circumstances of hospitals in Alaska and Hawaii. Higherlabor-related costs for these two States are taken account of in the adjustmentfor area wages above. For FY 1990, the adjustment necessary for nonlabor-relatedcosts for hospitals in Alaska and Hawaii would be made by the intermediariesby multiplying the nonlabor portion of the standardized amounts by theappropriate adjustment factor contained in the table below.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,i1,s60,6</C><T4>Table of Cost-of-Living Adjustment Factors, Alaska and Hawaii Hospitals</T4><H1>  </H1><H1>  </H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Alaska_All areas <D>1.25</D></ITAG>Hawaii:<ITAG tagnum="2">Oahu <D>1.225</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Kauai <D>1.175</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Maui <D>1.20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Molokai <D>1.20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Lanai <D>1.20</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Hawaii <D>1.15</D></ITAG></ITAG>(The above factors are based on data obtained from the U.S. Office of PersonnelManagement.)C. DRG Weighting FactorsAs discussed in section II of the preamble to this proposed rule, we havedeveloped a classification system for all hospital discharges, sortingthem into DRGs, and have developed weighting factors for each DRG thatare intended to reflect the resource utilization of cases in each DRG relativeto that of the average Medicare case.Table 5 of section IV of this addendum contains the weighting factors thatwe propose to use for discharges occurring in FY 1990. These factors havebeen recalibrated as explained in section II.C. of the preamble to thisproposed rule.D. Calculation of Prospective Payment Rates for FY 1990General Formula for Calculation of Prospective Payment Rates for FY 1990:<ITAG tagnum="15">Prospective Payment Rate for all hospitals located outside PuertoRico except sole community hospitals=Federal Portion</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Prospective Payment Rate for Sole Community Hospitals=75 percent ofthe hospital-specific portion+25 percent of the Federal portion </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Prospective Payment Rate for Puerto Rico Hospitals=75 percent of thePuerto Rico rate+25 percent of a discharge-weighted average of the largeurban, other urban, and rural national rates</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">1. Federal Portion </ITAG>For discharges on or after October 1, 1989 and before October 1, 1990,except for sole community hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico,the hospital's rate is comprised exclusively of the Federal rate. The Federalrate is comprised of 100 percent of the Federal national rate except forthose hospitals located in Census regions that have a regional rate thatis higher than the national rate. The Federal rate for these hospitalsequals 85 percent of the Federal national rate and 15 percent of the Federalregional rate. For discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1989 andbefore October l, 1990, rural hospitals in regions I, II, III, and IV andurban and large urban hospitals in regions I, IV, and VI are affected bythe regional floor. For sole community hospitals, the 25 percent Federalportion is based entirely on the Federal regional rate. The Federal ratesare determined as follows: Step 1_Select the appropriate regional or national adjusted standardizedamount considering the type of hospital and designation of the hospitalas large urban, other urban, or rural (see Tables 1a and 1b, section IVof this addendum). Step 2_Multiply the labor-related portion of the standardized amount bythe applicable wage index for the geographic area in which the hospitalis located (see Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c, section IV of this addendum). Step 3_For hospitals in Alaska and Hawaii, multiply the nonlabor-relatedportion of the standardized amount by the appropriate cost-of-living adjustmentfactor. Step 4_Sum the amount from step 2 and the nonlabor portion of the standardizedamount (adjusted if appropriate under step 3). Step 5_Multiply the final amount from step 4 by the weighting factor correspondingto the appropriate DRG (see Table 5, section IV of this addendum). Step 6_For sole community hospitals, multiply the result in step 5 by 25percent. The result is the Federal portion of the FY 1990 prospective paymentfor a given discharge for a sole community hospital. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Hospital-Specific Portion (Applicable Only to Sole Community Hospitals)</ITAG>The hospital-specific portion of the prospective payment rate is basedon a hospital's historical cost experience. For the first cost reportingperiod under prospective payment, a hospital-specific rate was calculatedfor each hospital, derived generally from the following formula:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>5,L1,b1,tp0,p8,8/9,g1,t1,aw,i1,17,1,12,1,21</C>  <H1>Base year costs per discharge</H1><H2>1981 case-mix index</H2><H1>andmultiply; </H1><H1>update factor </H1><H1>= </H1><H1>Hospital-specific rate</H1> <ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG></ITAG>For sole community hospitals, the hospital-specific portion equals 75 percentof the hospital-specific rate for all cost reporting periods beginningon or after October 1, 1983. For each subsequent cost reporting period,the hospital-specific portion is derived as follows: <ITAG tagnum="15">Hospital-Specific Rate x Update Factor x DRG Weight x .75 </ITAG>For a more detailed discussion of the hospital-specific portion, we referthe reader to the September l, 1983 interim final rule (48 FR 39772). a. <T3>Updating the Hospital-Specific Rates for FY 1990 Cost Reporting Periods.</T3>For cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1989,we are proposing to increase the hospital-specific rates by 5.8 percent(the market basket percentage increase) for hospitals located in all areas.As required by section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the Act, this is the same percentageincrease by which we are proposing to change the Federal rates for FY 1990.b. <T3>Calculation of Hospital-Specific Portion. </T3>For sole community hospitalcost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1989 and beforeOctober 1, 1990, the hospital-specific portion of a hospital's paymentfor a given discharge would be calculated by_Step 1_Mulltiplying the hospital's hospital-specific rate for the precedingcost reporting period by the applicable update factor (that is, 5.8 percent);Step 2_Multiplying the amount resulting from Step 1 by the specific DRGweighting factor applicable to the discharge; and Step 3_Multiplying the result in step 2 by 75 percent. (The result is thehospital-specific portion of the FY 1990 prospective payment for a givendischarge for a sole community hospital. The prospective payment rate isthe sum of this amount and the 25 percent Federal portion, which is basedentirely on the Federal regional rate.) <ITAG tagnum="81">3. General Formula for Calculation of Prospective Payment Rates forHospitals Located in Puerto Rico Beginning On or After October 1, 1989and Before October 1, 1990. </ITAG>a.<T3> Puerto Rico Rate.</T3> The Puerto Rico prospective payment rate isdetermined as follows: Step 1_Select the appropriate adjusted average standardized amount consideringthe large urban, other urban, or rural designation of the hospital (seeTable 1c, section IV of the addendum). Step 2_ Multiply the labor related portion of the standardized amount bythe appropriate wage index (see Tables 4a and 4b, section IV of the addendum).Step 3_Sum the amount from step 2 and the nonlabor portion of the standardizedamount. Step 4_Multiply the result in step 3 by 75 percent. Step 5_Multiply the amount from step 3 by the weighting factor correspondingto the appropriate DRG weight (see Table 5, section IV of the addendum).b.<T3> National Rate.</T3> The national prospective payment rate is determinedas follows: Step 1_Multiply the labor-related portion of the national average standardizedamount (see  Table 1c, section IV of the addendum) by the appropriate wageindex. Step 2_Sum the amount from step 1 and the nonlabor portion of the nationalaverage standardized amount. Step 3_Multiply the result in step 2 by 25 percent. Step 4_Multiply the amount from step 3 by the weighting factor correspondingto the appropriate DRG weight (see Table 5, section IV of the addendum).The sum of the Puerto Rico rate and the national rate computed above equalsthe prospective payment for a given discharge for a hospital located inPuerto Rico. <ITAG tagnum="85">III. Proposed Target Rate Percentages for Hospitals and Hospital UnitsExcluded From the Prospective Payment System </ITAG>The inpatient operating costs of hospitals and hospital units excludedfrom the prospective payment system are subject to rate-of-increase limitsestablished under the authority of section 1886(b) of the Act, which isimplemented in andSection; 413.40 of the regulations. Under these limits,an annual target amount (expressed in terms of the inpatient operatingcost per discharge) is set for each hospital, based on the hospital's ownhistorical cost experience, trended forward by the applicable update factors.This target amount is applied as a ceiling on the allowable costs per dischargefor the hospital's next cost reporting period. A hospital that has inpatient operating costs per discharge in excess ofits target amount would be paid no more than that amount. However, a hospitalthat has inpatient operating costs less than its target amount would bepaid its costs plus the lower of (1) 50 percent of the difference betweenthe inpatient operating cost per discharge and the target amount, or (2)5 percent of the target amount. Each hospital's target amount is adjusted annually, before the beginningof its cost reporting period, by an applicable target rate percentage.For cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1989 and beforeOctober 1, 1990, section 1886(b)(3)(B)(ii) of the Act provides that theapplicable percentage increase is the market basket percentage increase.In order to determine a hospital's target amount for its cost reportingperiod beginning in FY 1990, the hospital's target amount for its reportingperiod that began In FY 1989 is increased by the  market basket percentageincrease for FY 1990. The most recent forecasted hospital market basketincrease for FY 1990 is 5.8 percent. Therefore, the applicable percentageincrease is also 5.8 percent.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Tables </ITAG>This section contains the tables referred to throughout the preamble tothis proposed rule and in this addendum. For purposes of this proposedrule, and to avoid confusion, we have retained the designations of Tables1 through 5 that were first used in the September 1, 1983 initial prospectivepayment final rule (48 FR 39844). Tables 1a. 1b. 1c, 3c. 4a, 4b, 4c, 5,6a, 6b, 6c, 6d, 6e, 6f, 7a, 7b, and 8 are presented below. The tables areas follows: <ITAG tagnum="16">Table 1a_National Adjusted Standardized Amounts, Labor/Nonlabor </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 1b_Regional Adjusted Standardized Amounts, Labor/Nonlabor </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 1c_Adjusted Standardized Amounts for Puerto Rico, Labor/Nonlabor</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 3c_Hospital Case-Mix Indexes for Discharges Occurring in FY1988 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 4a_Wage Index for Urban Areas </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 4b_Wage Index for Rural Areas </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 4c_Wage Index for Rural Counties Whose Hospitals are DeemedUrban </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 5_Diagnosis-Related Groups </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 6a_New Diagnosis Codes </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 6b_New Procedure Codes </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 6c_Revised Procedure Code Titles and Inclusion Terms that AffectDRG Assignment </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 6d_Expanded Diagnosis Codes That Are No Longer Accepted in GROUPER</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 6e_Deleted Procedure Codes </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 6f_Additions to the CC Exclusions List</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 7a_Length-of-Stay Percentiles Using FY 1989 DRG Classification</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 7b_Length-of-Stay Percentiles Using Proposed FY 1990 DRG Classification</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Table 8_Statewide Average Cost-to-Charge Ratios for Urban and RuralHospitals</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>6,L2,s25,12,12,12,12,12 </C><T4>Table </T4>1a_<T4>National Adjusted Standardized Amounts, Labor/Nonlabor  </T4><H1>Large urban</H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2><H1> Other urban</H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2><H1> Rural</H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2>   <ITAG tagnum="1">2512.40<D> 889.89</D><D> 2487.94</D><D> 881.22 </D><D>2348.00 </D><D>650.30</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table </T4>1b_<T4>Regional Adjusted Standardized Amounts, Labor/Nnonlabor </T4><H1> </H1><H1>Large urban </H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2><H1>Other urban</H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2><H1>Rural</H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2>  <ITAG tagnum="1">1. New England (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT) <D>2637.84 </D><D>928.96 </D><D>2612.15 </D><D>919.92 </D><D>2601.62 </D><D>771.34 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">2. Middle Atlantic (PA, NJ, NY) <D>2369.78 </D><D>881.53</D><D> 2346.70 </D><D>872.95 </D><D>2494.61 </D><D>727.69 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">3. South Atlantic (DE, DC, FL, GA, MD, NC, SC, VA, WV) <D>2529.70 </D><D>812.22 </D><D>2505.07 </D><D>804.31 </D><D>2381.76 </D><D>632.30 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4. East North Central (IL, IN, MI, OH, WI) <D>2667.08 </D><D>960.61 </D><D>2641.11 </D><D>951.26 </D><D>2413.41 </D><D>702.48 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">5. East South Central (AL,  KY, MS, TN) <D>2427.84 </D><D>735.45 </D><D>2404.19 </D><D>728.29 </D><D>2360 58</D><D> 589.62 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6. West North Central (IA,  KS, MN, MO,  NB, ND, SD) <D>2530.39 </D><D>875.63 </D><D>2505.75 </D><D>867.10 </D><D>2294.38 </D><D>629.93 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">7. West South Central (AR,  LA, OK, TX) <D>2522.84 </D><D>806.72 </D><D>2498.28 </D><D>798.86 </D><D>2200.37 </D><D>579.31 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8. Mountain (AZ,  CO, ID, MT, NV, NM, UT, WY) <D>2426.03 </D><D>864.85 </D><D>2402.40 </D><D>856.43 </D><D>2237.04 </D><D>670.65 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">9. Pacific (AK, CA, HI, OR, WA) <D>2360.68 </D><D>987.06 </D><D>2337.69 </D><D>977.44 </D><D>2164.15 </D><D>750.62</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>7,L2,i1,s25,12,12,12,12,12,12 </C><T4>Table </T4>1c_<T4>Adjusted Standardized Amoumts for Puerto Rico, Labor/Nonlabor  </T4><H1>  </H1><H1>Large urban </H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2><H1>Other urban</H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2><H1>Rural</H1><H2>Labor-related</H2><H2>Nonlabor-related</H2> <ITAG tagnum="1">Puerto Rico <D>2231.78 </D><D>399.27 </D><D>2210.06 </D><D>395 38 </D><D>1569.17 </D><D>290.47  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">National  <D>2461.90 </D><D>826.10</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M 023</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustation(s) 2 193-215</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table </T4>4a_<T4>Wage Index for Urban Areas</T4><ITAG tagnum="96"/>[Areas that qualify as large urban areas are designated withan asterisk]<H1>Urban area (Constituent Counties or County Equivalents </H1><H1>Wage index</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Abilene, TX <D>0.8842</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Taylor, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Aguadilla, PR <D>0.4596</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Aguada, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Aguadilla, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Isabella, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Moca, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Akron, OH <D>0.9630</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Portage, OH </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Summit, OH </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Albany, GA <D>0.7799</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dougherty, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lee, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY <D>0.8706</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Albany, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Greene, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Montgomery, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rensselaer, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Saratoga, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Schenectady, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Albuquerque, NM <D>0.9960</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bernalillo, NM </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Alexandria, LA <D>0.8476</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rapides, LA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Allentown-Bethlehem, PA-NJ <D>0.9884</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Warren, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Carbon, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lehigh, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Northampton, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Altoona, PA <D>0.9523</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Blair, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Amarillo, TX <D>0.9624</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Potter, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Randall, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Anaheim-Santa Ana, CA <D>1.2194</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Orange, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Anchorage, AK <D>1.4335</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Anchorage, AK </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Anderson, IN <D>0.9158</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, IN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Anderson, SC <D>0.7807</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Anderson, SC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ann Arbor, MI <D>1.1592</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washtenaw, MI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Anniston, AL <D>0.7685</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Calhoun, AL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Appleton-Oshkosh-Neenah, WI <D>0.9522</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Calumet, WI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Outagamie, WI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Winnebago, WI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arecibo, PR <D>0.4374</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Arecibo, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Camuy, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hatillo, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Quebradillas, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Asheville, NC <D>0.8681</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Buncombe, NC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Athens, GA <D>0.7727</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clarke, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jackson, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Oconee, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Atlanta, GA <D>0.9303</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Barrow, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Butts, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cherokee, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clayton, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cobb, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Coweta, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">De Kalb, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Douglas, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fayette, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Forsyth, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fulton, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Gwinnett, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Henry, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Newton, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Paulding, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rockdale, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Spalding, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Walton, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Atlantic City, NJ <D>0.9859</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Atlantic, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cape May, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Augusta, GA-SC <D>0.8787</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Columbia, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">McDuffie, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Richmond, GA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Aiken, SC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Aurora-Elgin, IL <D>0.9889</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kane, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kendall, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Austin, TX <D>1.0307</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hays, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Travis, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Williamson, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bakersfield, CA <D>1.0890</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kern, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Baltimore, MD <D>0.9874</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Anne Arundel, MD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Baltimore, MD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Baltimore City, MD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Carroll, MD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Harford, MD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Howard, MD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Queen Annes, MD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bangor, ME <D>0.9079</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Penobscot, ME</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Baton Rouge, LA <D>0.9566</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ascension, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">East Baton Rouge, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Livingston, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">West Baton Rouge, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Battle Creek, MI <D>0.9651</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Calhoun, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX <D>0.9307</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hardin, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Orange, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Beaver County, PA <D>1.0465</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Beaver, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bellingham, WA <D>1.0857</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Whatcom, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Benton Harbor, MI <D>0.8491</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Berrien, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Bergen-Passaic, NJ <D>1.0488</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bergen, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Passaic, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Billings, MT <D>0.9893</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Yellowstone, MT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Biloxi-Gulfport, MS <D>0.8039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hancock, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Harrison, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Binghamton, NY <D>0.9222</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Broome, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tioga, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Birmingham, AL <D>0.9362</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Blount, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Saint Clair, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Shelby, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Walker, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismarck, ND <D>0.9280</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Burleigh, ND</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Morton, ND</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bloomington, IN <D>0.9122</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Monroe, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bloomington-Normal, IL <D>0.9666</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">McLean, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Boise City, ID <D>1.0178</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ada, ID</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Boston-Lawrence-Salem-Lowell-Brockton, MA <D>1.0778</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Essex, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Middlesex, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Norfolk, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Plymouth, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Suffolk, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Boulder-Longmont, CO <D>1.0782</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Boulder, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bradenton, FL <D>0.8941</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Manatee, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Brazoria, TX <D>0.8443</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Brazoria, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bremerton, WA <D>0.9583</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kitsap, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk-Danbury, CT <D>1.1317</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fairfield, CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Brownsville-Harlingen, TX <D>0.8632</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cameron, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bryan-College Station, TX <D>0.9750</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Brazos, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Buffalo, NY <D>0.9405</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Erie, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Burlington, NC <D>0.7641</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Alamance, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Burlington, VT <D>0.9401</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chittenden, VT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Grand Isle, VT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Caguas, PR <D>0.3977</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Caguas, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Gurabo, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Lorenz, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Aguas Buenas, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cayey, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cidra, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Canton, OH <D>0.8912</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Carroll, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Stark, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Casper, WY <D>0.9286</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Natrona, WY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cedar Rapids, IA <D>0.8919</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Linn, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Champaign-Urbana-Rantoul, IL <D>0.8913</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Champaign, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Charleston, SC <D>0.8551</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Berkeley, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Charleston, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dorchester, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Charleston, WV <D>0.9657</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kanawha, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Putnam, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC <D>0.8391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cabarrus, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Gaston, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lincoln, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Mecklenburg, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rowan, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Union, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">York, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Charlottesville, VA <D>0.8854</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Albermarle, Va</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Charlottesville City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fluvanna, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Greene, Va</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chattanooga, TN-GA <D>0.8889</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Catoosa, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dade, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Walker, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hamilton, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Marion, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sequatchie, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cheyenne, WY <D>0.8795</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Laramie, WY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Chicago, IL <D>1.0812</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cook, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Du Page, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">McHenry, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chico, CA <D>1.0575</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Butte, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN <D>1.0247</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dearborn, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Boone, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Campbell, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kenton, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clermont, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hamilton, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Warren, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Clarksville-Hopkinsville, TN-KY <D>0.7276</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Christian, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Montgomery, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Cleveland, OH <D>1.0776</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cuyahoga, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Geauga, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lake, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Medina, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Colorado Springs, CO <D>1.0273</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">El Paso, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Columbia, MO <D>1.0389</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Boone, MO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Columbia, SC <D>0.8280</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lexington, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Richland, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Columbus, GA-AL <D>0.7354</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Russell, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chattanoochee, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Muscogee, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Columbus, OH <D>0.9482</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Delaware, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fairfield, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Franklin, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Licking, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pickaway, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Union, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Corpus Christi, TX <D>0.8298</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Nueces, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Patricio, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cumberland, MD-WV <D>0.9132</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Allegeny, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Mineral, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Dallas, TX <D>1.0117</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Collin, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dallas, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Denton, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ellis, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kaufman, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rockwall, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Danville, VA <D>0.7637</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Danville City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pittsylvania, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Davenport-Rock Island-Moline, IA-IL <D>0.9456</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Scott, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Henry, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rock Island, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dayton-Springfield, OH <D>0.9929</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clark, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Greene, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Miami, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Montgomery, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Daytona Beach, FL <D>0.8496</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Volusia, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Decatur, AL <D>0.7093</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lawrence, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Morgan, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Decatur, IL <D>0.8912</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Macon, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Denver, CO <D>1.1770</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Adams, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Arapahoe, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Denver, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Douglas, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Des Moines, IA <D>0.9721</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dallas, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Polk, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Warren, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Detroit, MI <D>1.0795</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lapeer, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Livingston, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Macomb, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Monroe, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Oakland, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Saint Clair, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wayne, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dothan, AL<D>0.7900</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dale, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Houston, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dubuque, IA<D>0.9466</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dubuque, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Duluth, MN-WI<D>0.9613</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Louis, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Douglas, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Eau Claire, WI<D>0.8875</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chippewa, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Eau Claire, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">El Paso, TX<D>0.8824</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">El Paso, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Elkhart-Goshen, IN<D>0.9207</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Elkhart, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Elmira, NY<D>0.9144</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chemung, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Enid, OK<D>0.9196</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Garfield, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Erie, PA<D>0.9578</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Erie, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Eugene-Springfield, OR<D>1.0209</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lane, OR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Evansville, IN-KY<D>1.0313</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Posey, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Vanderburgh, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Warrick, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Henderson, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fargo-Moorhead, ND-MN<D>1.0050</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clay, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cass, ND</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fayetteville, NC<D>0.8167</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cumberland, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fayetteville-Springdale, AR<D>0.7391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Flint, MI<D>1.1665</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Genesee, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Florence, AL<D>0.7093</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Colbert, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lauderdale, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Florence, SC<D>0.7712</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Florence, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fort Collins-Loveland, CO <D>1.0303</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Larimor, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood-Pompano Beach, FL<D>1.0271</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Broward, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fort Myers-Cape Coral, FL<D>0.9013</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lee, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fort Pierce, FL<D>1.0491</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Martin, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Lucie, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fort Smith, AR-OK<D>0.8759</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Crawford, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sebastian, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sequoyah, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fort Walton Beach, FL<D>0.8190</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Okaloosa, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fort Wayne, IN<D>0.9018</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Allen, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">De Kalb, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Whitley, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Fort Worth-Arlington, TX<D>0.9545</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Johnson, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Parker, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tarrant, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fresno, CA<D>1.1148</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fresno, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadsden, AL<D>0.8532</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Etowah, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gainesville, FL<D>0.8737</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Alachua, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bradford, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Galveston-Texas City, TX<D>1.0831</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Galveston, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gary-Hammond, IN<D>1.0504</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lake, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Porter, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Glens Falls, NY<D>0.8745</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Warren, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Grand Forks, ND<D>0.9638</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Grand Forks, ND</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Grand Rapids, MI<D>1.0087</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kent, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ottawa, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Great Falls, MT<D>0.9849</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cascade, MT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Greeley, CO <D>1.0225</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Weld, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Green Bay, WI <D>0.9672</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Brown, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Greensboro-Winston-Salem-High Point, NC <D>0.8592</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Davidson, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Davie, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Forsyth, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Guilford, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Randolph, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Stokes, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Yadkin, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Greenville-Spartanburg, SC <D>0.9331</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Greenville, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pickens, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Spartanburg, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hagerstown, MD <D>0.8725</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hamilton-Middletown, OH <D>0.9691</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Butler, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Harrisburg-Lebanon-Carlisle, PA <D>1.0526</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cumberland, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dauphin, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lebanon, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Perry, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Hartford-Middletown-New Britain-Bristol, CT <D>1.1015</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hartford, CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Litchfield, CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Middlesex, CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tolland, CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hickory, NC <D>0.8224</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Alexander, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Burke, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Catawaba, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Honolulu, HI <D>1.1379</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Honolulu, HI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Houma-Thibodaux, LA <D>0.7493</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lafourche, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Terrebonne, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Houston, TX <D>0.9697</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fort Bend, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Harris, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Liberty, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Montgomery, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Waller, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH <D>0.9187</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Boyd, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Carter, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Greenup, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lawrence, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cabell, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wayne, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Huntsville, AL <D>0.8269</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Indianapolis, IN <D>0.9920</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Boone, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hamilton, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hancock, IN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hendricks, IN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Johnson, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Marion, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Morgan, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Shelby, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iowa City, IA <D>1.0962</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Johnson, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jackson, MI <D>0.9293</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jackson, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jackson, MS <D>0.8084</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hinds, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rankin, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jackson, TN <D>0.7567</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jacksonville, FL <D>0.8930</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clay, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Duval, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Nassau, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Johns, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jacksonville, NC <D>0.7226</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Onslow, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Janesville-Beloit, WI <D>0.9008</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rock, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jersey City, NJ <D>1.0748</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hudson, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Johnson City-Kingsport-Bristol, TN-VA <D>0.8785</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Carter, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hawkins, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sullivan, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Unicoi, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bristol City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Scott, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Johnstown, PA <D>0.9159</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cambria, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Somerset, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Joliet, IL <D>1.0432</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Grundy, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Will, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Joplin, MO <D>0.8644 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jasper, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Newton, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kalamazoo, MI <D>1.1100 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kalamazoo, MI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kankakee, IL <D>0.9034 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kankakee, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Kansas City, KS-MO <D>1.0103</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Johnson, KS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Leavenworth, KS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Miami, KS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wyandotte, KS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cass, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clay, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jackson, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lafayette, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Platte, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ray, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kenosha, WI <D>1.0538 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kenosha, WI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Killeen-Temple, TX <D>1.1238 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bell, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Coryell, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Knoxville, TN <D>0.8211 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Anderson, TN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Blount, TN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Grainger, TN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, TN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Knox, TN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sevier, TN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Union, TN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kokomo, IN <D>0.9420 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Howard, IN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tipton, IN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">LaCrosse, WI <D>0.9696 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">LaCrosse, WI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lafayette, LA <D>0.9012 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lafayette, LA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Martin, LA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lafayette, IN <D>0.8852</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tippecanoe, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lake Charles, LA <D>0.8909</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Calcasieu, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lake County, IL <D>1.0865</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lake, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL <D>0.8198</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Polk, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lancaster, PA <D>0.9953</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lancaster, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lansing-East Lansing, MI <D>1.0371</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clinton, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Eaton, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ingham, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Laredo, TX <D>0.7367</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Webb, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Las Cruces, NM <D>0.8478</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dona Ana, NM</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Las Vegas, NV <D>1.1158</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clark, NV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lawrence, KS <D>0.9920</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Douglas, KS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lawton, OK <D>0.8256</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Comanche, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lewiston-Auburn, ME <D>0.9201</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Androscoggin, ME</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lexington-Fayette, KY <D>0.9170</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bourbon, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clark, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fayette, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jessamine, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Scott, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Woodford, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lima, OH <D>0.9188</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Allen, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Auglaize, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lincoln, NE <D>0.9439</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lancaster, NE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Little Rock-North Little Rock, AR <D>0.8555</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Faulkner, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lonoke, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pulaski, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Saline, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Longview-Marshall, TX <D>0.8163</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Gregg, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Harrison, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lorain-Elyria, OH <D>0.9372</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lorain, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">* Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA<D>1.2428</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Los Angeles, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Louisville, KY-IN <D>0.9557</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clark, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Floyd, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Harrison, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bullitt, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Oldham, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Shelby, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lubbock, TX <D>0.9610</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lubbock, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lynchburg, VA <D>0.8507</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Amherst, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Campbell, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lynchburg City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Macon-Warner Robins, GA <D>0.7811</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bibb, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Houston, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jones, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Peach, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Madison, WI <D>1.0083</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dane, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Manchester-Nashua, NH <D>0.9396</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hillsborough, NH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Merrimack, NH </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mansfield, OH <D>0.8905</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Richland, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mayaguez, PR <D>0.4813</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Anasco, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cabo Rojo, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hormigueros, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Mayaguez, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San German, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">McAllan-Edinburg-Mission, TX <D>0.7687</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hidalgo, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Medford, OR <D>0.9663</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jackson, OR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Melbourne-Titusville, FL <D>0.8903</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Brevard, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Memphis, TN-AR-MS <D>0.9422</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Crittenden, AR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">De Soto, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Shelby, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tipton, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Merced, CA <D>1.0064</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Merced, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">* Miami-Hialeah, FL<D>1.0235</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dade, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Middlesex-Somerset-Hunterdon, NJ<D>0.9939</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hunterdon, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Middlesex, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Somerset, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Midland, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Midland, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">* Milwaukee, WI<D>1.0142</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Milwaukee, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ozaukee, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Waukesha, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">* Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN-WI<D>1.1358</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Anoka, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Carver, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chisago, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dakota, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hennepin, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Isanti, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ramsey, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Scott, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wright, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Croix, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mobile, AL<D>0.8243</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Baldwin, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Mobile, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Modesto, CA<D>1.0710</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Stanislaus, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Monmouth-Ocean, NJ<D>0.9397</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Monmouth, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ocean, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Monroe, LA<D>0.8158</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ouachita, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Montgomery, AL<D>0.7977</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Autauga, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Elmore, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Montgomery, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Muncie, IN<D>0.9662</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Delaware, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Muskegon, MI<D>0.9915</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Muskegon, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Naples, FL<D>1.0011</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Collier, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nashville, TN<D>0.8902</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cheatham, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Davidson, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dickson, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Robertson, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rutherford, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sumner, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Williamson, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wilson, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">* Nassau-Suffolk, NY<D>1.2120</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Nassau, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Suffolk, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Bedford-Fall River-Attleboro, MA<D>0.9489</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bristol, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Haven-Waterbury-Meriden, CT<D>1.0779</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">New Haven, CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New London-Norwich, CT<D>1.0680</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">New London, CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">* New Orleans, LA<D>0.9362</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Orleans, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Bernard, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Charles, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. John The Baptist, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Tammany, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*New York, NY<D>1.3196</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bronx, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kings, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">New York City, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Putnam, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Queens, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Richmond, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rockland, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Westchester, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Newark, NJ<D>1.0890</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Essex, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Morris, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sussex, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Union, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Niagara Falls, NY<D>0.8555</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Niagara, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport News, VA <D>0.9277</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chesapeake City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Gloucester, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hampton City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">James City Co., VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Newport News City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Norfolk City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Poquoson, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Portsmouth City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Suffolk City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Virginia Beach City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Williamsburg City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">York, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Oakland, CA<D>1.4039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Alameda, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Contra Costa, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ocala, FL <D>0.8151</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Marion, FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Odessa, TX<D>0.8793</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ector, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Oklahoma City, OK <D>0.9854</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Canadian, OK </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cleveland, OK </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Logan, OK </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">McClain, OK </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Oklahoma, OK </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pottawatomie, OK </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Olympia, WA<D>1.0551</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Thurston, WA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Omaha, NE-IA<D>0.9761</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pottawattamie, IA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Douglas, NE </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sarpy, NE </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, NE </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Orange County, NY <D>0.8909</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Orange, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Orlando, FL<D>0.9133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Orange, FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Osceola, FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Seminole, FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Owensboro, KY <D>0.8960</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Daviess, KY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Oxnard-Ventura, CA <D>1.3918</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ventura, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Panama City, FL <D>0.7908</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bay, FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Parkersburg-Marietta, WV-OH <D>0.9074</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, OH </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wood, WV </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pascagoula, MS<D>0.8758</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jackson, MS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pensacola, FL<D>0.8259</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Escambia, FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Santa Rosa, FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Peoria, IL<D>0.9804</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Peoria, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tazewell, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Woodford, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Philadelphia, PA-NJ<D>1.0785</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Burlington, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Camden, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Gloucester, NJ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bucks, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chester, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Delaware, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Montgomery, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Philadelphia, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Phoenix, AZ<D>1.0026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Maricopa, AZ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pine Bluff, AR<D>0.7999</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, AR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Pittsburgh, PA<D>1.0119</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Allegheny, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fayette, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Westmoreland, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pittsfield, MA<D>1.0252</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Berkshire, MA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ponce, PR<D>0.5479</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Juana Diaz, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ponce, PR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Portland, ME<D>0.9628</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cumberland, ME </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sagadahoc, ME </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">York, ME </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Portland, OR<D>1.1229</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clackamas, OR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Multnomah, OR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, OR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Yamhill, OR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Portsmouth-Dover-Rochester, NH<D>0.9409 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rockingham, NH </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Strafford, NH </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Poughkeepsi, NY<D>09.738 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dutchess, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Providence-Pawtucket-Woonsocket, RI <D>0.9745 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bristol, RI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Kent, RI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Newport, RI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Providence, RI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washington, RI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Provo-Orem, UT <D>0.9285 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Utah, UT </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pueblo, CO <D>0.9305 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pueblo, CO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Racine, WI <D>0.9192 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Racine, WI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Raleigh-Durham, NC <D>0.9405 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Durham, NC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Franklin, NC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Orange, NC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wake, NC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rapid City, SD <D>0.8358 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pennington, SD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Reading, PA <D>0.9127 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Berks, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Redding, CA <D>0.9911 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Shasta, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Reno, NV <D>1.1269 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Washoe, NV </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Richland-Kennewick, WA <D>0.9730 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Benton, WA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Franklin, WA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Richmond-Petersburg, VA <D>0.8873 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Charles City Co., VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chesterfield, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Colonial Heights City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dinwiddie, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Goochland, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hanover, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Henrico, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hopewell City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">New Kent, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Petersburg City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Powhatan, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Prince George, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Richmond City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Riverside-San Bernardino, CA <D>1.1303 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Riverside, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Bernardino, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Roanoke, VA <D>0.8233 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Botetourt, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Roanoke, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Roanoke City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Salem City, VA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rochester, MN <D>1.0550 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Olmsted, MN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rochester, NY <D>0.9500 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Livingston, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Monroe, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ontario, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Orleans, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wayne, NY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rockford, IL <D>0.9816 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Boone, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Winnebago, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Sacramento, CA <D>1.2084 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Eldorado, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Placer, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sacramento, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Yolo, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Saginaw-Bay City-Midland, MI <D>1.0780 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bay, MI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Midland, MI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Saginaw, MI </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">St. Cloud, MN <D>0.9900 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Benton, MN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sherburne, MN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Stearns, MN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">St. Joseph, MO <D>0.8700 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Buchanan, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*St. Louis, MO IL <D>0.0138 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clinton, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jersey, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Monroe, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Clair, IL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Franklin, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Charles, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Louis, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Louis City, MO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Salem, OR <D>1.0514 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Marion, OR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Polk, OR </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Salinas-Seaside-Monterey, CA <D>1.2595 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Monterey, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT <D>0.9281 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Davis, UT </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Salt Lake, UT </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Weber, UT </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">San Angelo, TX <D>0.8404 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tom Green, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*San Antonio, TX <D>0.8343 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bexar, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Comal, TX </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Guadalupe, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*San Diego, CA<D>1.2377</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Diego, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*San Francisco, CA<D>1.4365</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Marin, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Francisco, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Mateo, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*San Jose, CA<D>1.4717</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Santa Clara, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*San Juan, PR<D>0.5368</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Barcelona, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bayoman, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Canovanas, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Carolina, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Catano, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Corozal, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dorado, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fajardo, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Florida, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Guaynabo, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Humacao, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Juncos, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Los Piedras, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Loiza, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Luguillo, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Manati, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Naranjito, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rio Grande, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Juan, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Toa Alta, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Toa Baja, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Trojillo Alto, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Vega Alta, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Vega Baja, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Lompoc, CA<D>1.1734</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Santa Barbara, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Santa Cruz, CA<D>1.2338</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Santa Cruz, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Santa Fe, NM<D>0.9498</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Los Alamos, NM</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Santa Fe, NM</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA<D>1.4206</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sonoma, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sarasota, FL<D>0.9265</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sarasota, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Savannah, GA<D>0.8424</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Chatham, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Effingham, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scranton-Wilkes Barre, PA<D>0.9249</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Columbia, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lackawanna, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Luzerne, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Monroe, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wyoming, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Seattle, WA<D>1.0913</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">King, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Snohomish, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sharon, PA<D>0.9219</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Mercer, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sheboygan, WI<D>0.9339</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sheboygan, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sherman-Denison, TX<D>0.8462</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Grayson, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Shreveport, LA<D>0.8949</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bossier, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Caddo, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sioux City, IA-NE<D>0.9036</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Woodbury, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Dakota, NE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sioux Falls, SD<D>0.9502</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Minnehaha, SD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">South Bend-Mishawaka, IN<D>0.9723</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">St. Joseph, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Spokane, WA<D>1.0775</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Spokane, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Springfield, IL<D>1.0051</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Menard, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sangamon, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Springfield, MO<D>0.8875</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Christian, MO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Greene, MO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Springfield, MA<D>1.0051</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hampden, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hampshire, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">State College, PA<D>1.0474</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Centre, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Steubenville-Weirton, OH-WV<D>0.9131</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Jefferson, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Brooke, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hancock, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Stockton, CA<D>1.1384</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">San Joaquin, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Syracuse, NY<D>0.9770</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Madison, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Onondaga, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Oswego, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tacoma, WA<D>1.0257</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pierce, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tallahassee, FL<D>0.8123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Gadsden, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Leon, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL<D>0.9006</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hernando, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Hillsborough, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pasco, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pinellas, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terre Haute, IN <D>0.8226</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clay, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Vigo, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Texarkana, TX-Texarkana, AR <D>0.8007</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Miller, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bowie, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Toledo, OH <D>1.0670</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fulton, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lucas, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wood, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Topeka, KS <D>0.9912</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Shawnee, KS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Trenton, NJ <D>1.0321</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Mercer, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tucson, AZ <D>0.9787</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Pima, AZ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tulsa, OK <D>0.9167</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Creeks, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Osage, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Rogers, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tulsa, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wagoner, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tuscaloosa, AL <D>0.9432</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tuscaloosa, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tyler, TX <D>0.9215</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Smith, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Utica-Rome, NY <D>0.8109</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Herkimer, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Oneida, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vallejo-Fairfield-Napa, CA <D>1.2292</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Napa, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Solano, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vancouver, WA <D>1.0581</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Clark, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Victoria, TX <D>0.8266</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Victoria, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton, NJ <D>0.9818</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cumberland, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Visalia-Tulare-Porterville, CA <D>1.2810</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Tulare, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Waco, TX <D>0.8597</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">McLennan, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">*Washington, DC-MD-VA <D>1.0839</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">District of Columbia, DC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Calvert, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Charles, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Frederick, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Montgomery, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Prince Georges, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Alexandria City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Arlington, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fairfax, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Fairfax City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Falls Church City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Loudoun, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Manassas City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Manassas Park City, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Prince William, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Stafford, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Waterloo-Cedar Falls, IA <D>0.9466</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Black Hawk, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Bremer, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wausau, WI <D>0.9628</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Marathon, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Delray Beach, FL <D>0.9482</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Palm Beach, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wheeling, WV-OH <D>0.8563</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Belmont, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Marshall, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Ohio, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wichita, KS <D>1.0236</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Butler, KS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Harvey, KS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sedgwick, KS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wichita Falls, TX <D>0.8324</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Wichita, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Williamsport, PA <D>0.9096</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Lycoming, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wilmington, DE-NJ-MD <D>1.0290</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">New Castle, DE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Cecil, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Salem, NJ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wilmington, NC <D>0.8188</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">New Hanover, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Worcester-Fitchburg-Leominster, MA <D>0.9427</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Worcester, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yakima, WA <D>0.9929</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Yakima, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">York, PA <D>0.9413</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Adams, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">York, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Youngstown-Warren, OH <D>1.0027</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Mahoning, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Trumbull, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yuba City, CA <D>1.0101</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Sutter, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="12">Yuba, CA</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table </T4>4b_<T4>Wage Index For Rural Areas</T4><H1>Nonurban area</H1><H1>Wage index</H1>  <ITAG tagnum="1">Alabama<D>0.6972  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Alaska<D>1.3749  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arizona<D>0.8791  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arkansas<D>0.6999  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">California<D>1.0152  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Colorado<D>0.8562  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Connecticut<D>1.0186  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Delaware<D>0.8340  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Florida<D>0.8157  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Georgia<D>0.7454</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hawaii<D>0.8849  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Idaho<D>0.8069  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Illinois<D>0.8002  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indiana<D>0.8041  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iowa<D>0.7942</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kansas<D>0.7917  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kentucky<D>0.7948  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Louisiana<D>0.7593  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Maine<D>0.8242  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Maryland<D>0.7974</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Massachusetts<D>1.0145  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Michigan<D>0.9120  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Minnesota<D>0.8940  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mississippi<D>0.7183  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Missouri<D>0.7469</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Montana<D>0.8508  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nebraska<D>0.7688  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nevada<D>0.9482  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Hampshire<D>0.8882  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Jersey \1\<D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Mexico<D>0.8058  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New York<D>0.8067  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">North Carolina<D>0.7647  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">North Dakota<D>0.8405  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ohio<D>0.8659</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Oklahoma<D>0.7917  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Oregon<D>0.9919  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pennsylvania<D>0.8771  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Puerto Rico<D>0.5376  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhode Island \1\<D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">South Carolina<D>0.7200  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">South Dakota<D>0.7566 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tennessee<D>0.7053  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Texas<D>0.7599  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Utah<D>0.8627  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vermont<D>0.8415  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Virginia<D>0.7876</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Washington<D>0.9931  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">West Virginia<D>0.8516  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wisconsin<D>0.8463</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wyoming<D>0.9036</D><F>\1\ All counties within the State are classified urban.</F></ITAG></ITAG>  <ITAG tagnum="110"><C/>Table 4c_WAGE INDEX FOR RURAL COUNTIES WHOSE HOSPITALS ARE DEEMEDURBAN  <ITAG tagnum="96">Areas that Qualify as Large Urban Areas Are Designated with an Asterisk</ITAG><H1>County</H1><H1>Urban Area</H1><H1>Wage Index</H1>   <ITAG tagnum="1">Limestone, AL<D>Huntsville, AL</D><D>0.7462  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Marshall, AL<D>Huntsville, AL</D><D>0.7215  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Charlotte, FL<D>Sarasota, FL</D><D>0.8320  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indian River, FL<D>Fort Pierce, FL</D><D>0.8622  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Christian, IL<D>Springfield, IL</D><D>0.7904    </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Macoupin, IL<D>*St. Louis, MO-IL</D><D>0.7600  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mason, IL<D>Peoria, IL</D><D>0.7372  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Clinton, IN<D>Lafayett, IN</D><D>0.8104  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Henry, IN<D>Anderson, IN</D><D>0.8419  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Owen, IN \1\<D>Bloomington, IN</D><D>    </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jefferson, KS<D>Topeka, KS</D><D>0.6047  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Allegan, MI<D>Grand Rapids, MI</D><D>1.0085  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barry, MI<D>Battle Creek, MI</D><D>0.8345  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cass, MI<D>Benton Harbon, MI</D><D>0.7965  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ionia, MI<D>Lansing-East Lansing, MI</D><D>0.8394    </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lenawee, MI<D>Ann Arbon, MI</D><D>1.0253  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Shiawassee, MI<D>Flint, MI</D><D>0.0247  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tuscola, MI<D>Saginaw-Bay City-Midland, MI</D><D>0.9030  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Van Buren, MI<D>Kalamazoo, MI</D><D>0.8619  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Clinton, MO<D>*Kansas City, KS-MO</D><D>0.6313    </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cass, NE \1\<D>Omaha, NE</D><D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Caswell, NC \1\<D>Danville, VA</D><D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Currituck, NC \1\<D>*Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport News, VA</D><D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Harnett, NC<D>Fayetteville, NC</D><D>0.7505  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Genesee, NY<D>Rochester, NY</D><D>0.7182    </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Columbiana, OH<D>Beaver Country, PA</D><D>0.9098  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Morrow, OH<D>Mansfield, OH</D><D>0.6749  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Preble, OH \1\<D>Dayton-Springfield, OH</D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Van Wert, OH<D>Lima, OH</D><D>0.8384  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lawrence, PA<D>Beaver County, PA</D><D>0.8478    </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cherokee, SC<D>Greenville-Spartanburg, SC</D><D>0.6073  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bedford, VA<D>Roanoke, VA</D><D>0.7268  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fredericksburg City, VA<D>*Washington, DC-MD-VA</D><D>0.8241  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Isle of Wight, VA<D>*Norfork-Virginia Beach-Newport News, VA</D><D>  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Spotsylvania, VA \1\<D>*Washington, DC-MD-VA</D><D>   </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jefferson, VA \1\<D>*Milwaukee, WI</D><D>0.8749  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Walworth, WI<D>*Milwaukee, WI</D><D>0.9485  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Jefferson, WV<D>*Washington, DC-MD-VA</D><D>0.6893  </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lincoln, WV \1\<D>Charleston, WV</D><D> </D><F>\1\ There are no prospective payment hospitals in these counties.</F></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M014  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration(s) 2 252-265  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table</T4> 6a_<T4>New Diagnosis Codes</T4><H1>Diagnosis code</H1><H1>Description</H1><H1>DRG</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">088.81<D>Lyme disease</D><D>423</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">088.89<D>Other specified arthropod-borne diseases</D><D>423</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.00<D>Generalized nonconvulsive epilepsy, without mention of intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.01<D>Generalized nonconvulsive epilepsy, with intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.10<D>Generalized convulsive epilepsy, without mention of intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.11<D>Generalized convulsive epilepsy, with intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.40<D>Partial epilepsy, with impairment of consciousness, without mentionof intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.41<D>Partial epilepsy, with impairment of consciousness, with intractableepilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.50<D>Partial epilepsy, without mention of impairment of consciousness, withoutmention of intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.51<D>Partial epilepsy, without mention of impairment of consciousness, withintractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.60<D>Infantile spasms, without mention of intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.61<D>Infantile spasms, with intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.70<D>Epilepsia partialis continua, without mention of intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.71<D>Epilepsia partialis continua, with intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.80<D>Other forms of epilepsy, without mention of intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.81<D>Other forms of epilepsy, with intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.90<D>Epilepsy, unspecified, without mention of intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.91<D>Epilepsy, unspecified with intractable epilepsy</D><D>024, 025, 026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.00<D>Hypertensive renal disease, malignant, without mention of renal failure</D><D>331, 332, 333</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.01<D>Hypertensive renal disease, malignant, with renal failure</D><D>316</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.10<D>Hypertensive renal disease, benign, without mention of renal failure</D><D>331, 332, 333</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.11<D>Hypertensive renal disease, benign, with renal failure</D><D>316</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.90<D>Hypertensive renal disease, unspecified, without mention of renal failure</D><D>331, 332, 333</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.91<D>Hypertensive renal disease, unspecified, with renal failure</D><D>316</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.00<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, malignant, without mention ofcongestive heart failure or renal failure</D><D>134</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.01<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, malignant, with congestive heartfailure</D><D>127</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.02<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, malignant, with renal failure</D><D>316</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.03<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, malignant, with congestive heartfailure or renal failure</D><D>316</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.10<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, benign, without mention of congestiveheart failure or renal failure</D><D>134</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.11<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, benign, with congestive heartfailure</D><D>127</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.12<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, benign, with renal failure</D><D>316</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.13<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, benign, with congestive heartfailure or renal failure</D><D>127</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.90<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, unspecified, without mention ofcongestive heart failure or renal failure</D><D>134</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.91<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, unspecified, with congestive heartfailure</D><D>127</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.92<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, unspecified, with renal failure</D><D>316</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.93<D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, unspecified, with congestive heartfailure and renal failure</D><D>127</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.00<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of anterolateral wall, episode of care,unspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.01<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of anterolateral wall, initial episodeof care</D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.02<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of anterolateral wall, subsequent episodeof care</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.10<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other anterior wall, episode of careunspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.11<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other anterior wall, initial episodeof care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.12<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other anterior wall, subsequent episodeof care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.20<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferolateral wall, episode of careunspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.21<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferolateral wall, initial episodeof care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.22<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferolateral wall, subsequent episodeof care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.30<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferoposterior wall, episode of careunspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.31<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferoposterior wall, initial episodeof care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.32<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferoposterior wall, subsequent episodeof care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.40<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other inferior wall, episode of careunspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.41<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other inferior wall, initial episodeof care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.42<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other inferior wall, subsequent episodeof care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.50<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other lateral wall, episode of careunspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.51<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other lateral wall, initial episodeof care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.52<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other lateral wall, subsequent episodeof care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.60<D>Acute myocardial infarction, true posterior wall infarction, episodeof care unspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.61<D>Acute myocardial infarction, true posterior wall infarction, initialepisode of care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.62<D>Acute myocardial infarction, true posterior wall infarction, subsequentepisode of care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.70<D>Acute myocardial infarction, subendocardial infarction, episode of careunspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.71<D>Acute myocardial infarction, subendocardial infarction, initial episodeof care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.72<D>Acute myocardial infarction, subendocardial infarction, subsequent episodeof care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.80<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other specified sites, episode of careunspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.81<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other specified sites, initial episodeof care </D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.82<D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other specified sites, subsequent episodeof care </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.90<D>Acute myocardial infarction, unspecified site, episode of care unspecified</D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.91<D>Acute myocardial infarction, unspecified site, initial episode of care</D><D>121, 122, 123</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.92<D>Acute myocardial infarction, unspecified site, subsequent episode ofcare </D><D>132, 133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">411.81<D>Acute ischemic heart disease without myocardial infarction</D><D>124</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">411.89<D>Other acute and subacute forms of ischemic heart disease</D><D>124</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">429.71<D>Acquired cardiac septal defect</D><D>124</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">429.79<D>Other certain sequelae of myocardial infarction, not elsewhere classified</D><D>124</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">493.20<D>Chronic obstructive asthma (with obstructive pulmonary disease), withoutmention of status asthmaticus</D><D>088</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">493.21<D>Chronic obstructive asthma (with obstructive pulmonary disease), withstatus asthmaticus</D><D>088</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.30<D>Twin pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one fetus, unspecifiedas to episode of care or not applicable</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.31<D>Twin pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one fetus, delivered,with or without mention of antepartum condition</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.33<D>Twin pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one fetus, antepartumcondition or complication</D><D>383, 384</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.40<D>Triplet pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or more fetus(es),unspecified as to episode of care or not applicable</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.41<D>Triplet pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or more fetus(es),delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.43<D>Triplet pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or more fetus(es),antepartum condition or complication</D><D>383, 384</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.50<D>Quadruplet pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or more fetus(es),unspecified as to episode of care or not applicable</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.51<D>Quadruplet pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or more fetus(es),delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.53<D>Quadruplet pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or more fetus(es),antepartum condition or complication</D><D>383, 384</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.60<D>Other multiple pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or morefetus(es), unspecified as to episode of care or not applicable</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.61<D>Other multiple pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or morefetus(es), delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition</D><D>370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">651.63<D>Other multiple pregnancy with fetal loss and retention of one or morefetus(es), antepartum condition or complication</D><D>383, 384</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">759.81<D>Prader-Willi syndrome</D><D>390</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">759.82<D>Marfan syndrome</D><D>390</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">759.89<D>Other specified anomalies</D><D>390</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.60<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to unspecified device, implant,and graft </D><D>452, 453</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.61<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to cardiac device, implant,and graft </D><D>144, 145</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.62<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other vascular device, implant,and graft </D><D>144, 145</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.63<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to nervous system device, implant,and graft </D><D>034, 035</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.64<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to indwelling urinary catheter</D><D>331, 332, 333</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.65<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other genitourinary device,implant, and graft </D><D>331, 332, 333</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.66<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal joint prosthesis</D><D>249</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.67<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other internal orthopedicdevice, implant, and graft </D><D>249</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.69<D>Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other internal prostheticdevice, implant, and graft </D><D>452, 453</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.70<D>Other complications due to unspecified device, implant, and graft </D><D>452, 453</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.71<D>Other complications due to heart valve prosthesis</D><D>144, 145</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.72<D>Other complications due to other cardiac device, implant, and graft</D><D>144, 145</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.73<D>Other complications due to renal dialysis device, implant, and graft</D><D>144, 145</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.74<D>Other complications due to other vascular device, implant, and graft</D><D>144, 145</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.75<D>Other complications due to nervous system device, implant, and graft</D><D>034, 035</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.76<D>Other complications due to genitourinary device, implant, and graft</D><D>331, 332, 333</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.77<D>Other complications due to internal joint prosthesis</D><D>249</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.78<D>Other complications due to other internal orthopedic device, implant,and graft </D><D>249</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.79<D>Other complications due to other internal prosthetic device, implant,and graft </D><D>452, 453</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V23.7<D>Insufficient prenatal care</D><D>469</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V30.00<D>Single liveborn, born in hospital, delivered without mention of cesareansection </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V30.01<D>Single liveborn, born in hospital, delivered by cesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V31.00<D>Twin, mate liveborn, born in hospital, delivered without mention ofcesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V31.01<D>Twin, mate liveborn, born in hospital, delivered by cesarean section</D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V32.00<D>Twin, mate stillborn, born in hospital, delivered without mention ofcesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V32.01<D>Twin, mate stillborn, born in hospital, delivered by cesarean section</D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V33.00<D>Twin, unspecified, born in hospital, delivered without mention of cesareansection</D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V33.01<D>Twin, unspecified, born in hospital, delivered by cesarean section</D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V34.00<D>Other multiple, mates all liveborn, born in hospital, delivered withoutmention of cesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V34.01<D>Other multiple, mates all liveborn, born in hospital, delivered by cesareansection </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V35.00<D>Other multiple, mates all stillborn, born in hospital, delivered withoutmention of cesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V35.01<D>Other multiple, mates all stillborn, born in hospital, delivered bycesarean section</D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V36.00<D>Other multiple, mates live- and stillborn, born in hospital, deliveredwithout mention of cesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V36.01<D>Other multiple, mates live- and stillborn, born in hospital, deliveredby cesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V37.00<D>Other multiple, unspecified, born in hospital, delivered without mentionof cesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V37.01<D>Other multiple, unspecified, born in hospital, delivered by cesareansection </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V39.00<D>Unspecified, born in hospital, delivered without mention of cesareansection </D><D>391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V39.01<D>Unspecified, born in hospital, delivered by cesarean section </D><D>391</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table </T4>6b_<T4>New Procedure Codes </T4><H1>Procedure code </H1><H1>Description </H1><H1>DRG</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">11.75 <D>Radial Keratotomy* </D><D>42; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">11.76 <D>Epikeratophakia* </D><D>40, 41; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">31.95 <D>Tracheoesophageal fistulization </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">32.01 <D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of bronchus </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">32.09 <D>Other local excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of bronchus</D><D>75 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">32.28 <D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of lung </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">38.95 <D>Venous catheterization for renal dialysis </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">42.33 <D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of esophagus</D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">43.11 <D>Percutaneous (endoscopic) gastrostomy (PEG) </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">43.19 <D>Other gastrostomy </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">44.43 <D>Endoscopic control of gastric or duodenal bleeding </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">44.44 <D>Transcatheter embolization for gastric or duodenal bleeding </D><D>Non-OR</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">44.49 <D>Other control of hemmorrhage of stomach or duodenum </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45.30 <D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion of duodenum </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45.43 <D>Endoscopic destruction of other lesion or tissue of large intestine</D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">46.32 <D>Precutaneous (endoscopic) jejunostomy (PEJ) </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">46.85 <D>Dilation of colon </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">49.31 <D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of anus </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">49.39 <D>Other local excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of anus </D><D>157, 158; 267 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.10 <D>Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.14 <D>Other closed (endoscopic) biopsy of biliary duct or sphincter of Oddi</D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.15 <D>Pressure measurement of sphincter of Oddi </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.64 <D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion of biliary ducts or sphincterof Oddi </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.84 <D>Endoscopic dilation of ampulla and biliary duct </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.86 <D>Endoscopic insertion of nasobiliary drainage tube </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.87 <D>Endoscopic insertion of stent (tube) into bile duct </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.88 <D>Endoscopic removal of stone(s) from biliary tract </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.13 <D>Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.14 <D>Closed (endoscopic) biopsy of pancreatic duct </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.21 <D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of pancreaticduct </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.22 <D>Other excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of pancreas or pancreaticduct </D><D>191, 192; 292, 293</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.97 <D>Endoscopic insertion of nasopancreatic drainage tube </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.98 <D>Endoscopic dilation of pancreatic duct </D><D>Non-OR, 412 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.17 <D>Percutaneous cystostomy </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.18 <D>Other suprapubic cystostomy </D><D>308, 309; 344, 345; 360; 400, 406, 407; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">77.56 <D>Repair of hammer toe </D><D>63; 225; 233, 234; 292, 293; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">77.57 <D>Repair of claw toe </D><D>7, 8; 63; 225, 226, 227; 292, 293; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">77.58 <D>Other excision, fusion, and repair of toes </D><D>225; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.40 <D>Repair of hip, not elsewhere classified </D><D>210, 211; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.52 <D>Partial hip replacement </D><D>209, 471; 292, 293; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.53 <D>Revision of hip replacement </D><D>209, 471; 292 293; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.54 <D>Total knee replacement </D><D>209, 471; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.55 <D>Revision of knee replacement </D><D>209, 471; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.56 <D>Total ankle replacement </D><D>209, 471; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.57 <D>Replacement of joint of foot and toe </D><D>7, 8; 225; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.72 <D>Arthroplasty of metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint withoutimplant </D><D>7, 8, 228; 441 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.73 <D>Total wrist replacement </D><D>209, 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.74 <D>Arthroplasty of carpocarpal or carpometacarpal joint with implant </D><D>7, 8, 228, 441 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.75 <D>Arthroplasty of carpocarpal or carpometacarpal joint without implant</D><D>7, 8, 228, 441 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.80 <D>Total shoulder replacement </D><D>209; 442, 443 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">88.97 <D>Magnetic resonance imaging of other and unspecified sites </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">88.98 <D>Bone mineral density studies* </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">88.10 <D>Intracarotid amobarbital test </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">89.19 <D>Video and radio-telemetered electroencephalographic monitoring </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.61 <D>Alcohol rehabilitation </D><D>433, 436 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.62 <D>Alcohol detoxification </D><D>433, 434, 435 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.63 <D>Alcohol rehabilitation and detoxification </D><D>433, 437 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.64 <D>Drug rehabilitation </D><D>433, 436 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.65 <D>Drug detoxification </D><D>433, 434, 435 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.66 <D>Drug rehabilitation and detoxification </D><D>433, 437 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.67 <D>Combined alcohol and drug rehabilitation </D><D>433, 436 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.68 <D>Combined alcohol and drug detoxification </D><D>433, 434, 435 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">94.69 <D>Combined alcohol and drug rehabilitation and deoxification </D><D>433, 437 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">97.05 <D>Replacement of stent (tube) in biliary or pancreatic duct </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">98.51 <D>Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) of the kidney, ureter and/orbladder </D><D>Non-OR, 323</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">98.52 <D>Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) of the gallbladder and/orbile duct* </D><D>Non-OR </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">98.59 <D>Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy of other sites* </D><D>Non-OR </D><F>*These procedures are not covered under Medicare. See Medicare CoverageIssues Manual 35-54; 35-81 and 50-44. Procedures potentially classifiedunder code 98.59 will be evaluated for Medicare Coverage as they are developed.</F></ITAG></ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table </T4>6c_<T4>Revised Procedure Code Titles and Inclusion Terms That Affect DRG Assignment</T4><H1>Procedure code </H1><H1>Description </H1><H1>DRG</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">38.93<D>Venous catheterization, not elsewhere classified</D><D>No change.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">43.41<D>Endoscopic excision or destruction of lesion or tissue of stomach</D><D>Non-OR; 412.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45.31<D>Other local excision of lesion of duodenum</D><D>No change.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45.41<D>Excision of lesion or tissue of larger intestine</D><D>No change.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">45.42<D>Endoscopic polypectomy of large intestine</D><D>Non-OR; 412.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.11<D>Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography [ERC]</D><D>Non-OR; 412.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.12<D>Percutaneous biopsy of gallbladder or bile ducts</D><D>Non-OR.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.82<D>Pancreatic sphincterotomy</D><D>154, 155, 156; 191, 192; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.2<D>Local excision or destruction of pancreas and pancreatic duct</D><D>191, 192, 292, 293.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.92<D>Cannulation of pancreatic duct</D><D>No change.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.93<D>Endoscopic insertion of stent (tube) into pancreatic duct\1\</D><D>Non-OR; 412.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.94<D>Endoscopic removal of stone(s) from pancreatic duct\1\</D><D>Non-OR.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.99<D>Other operation on pancreas, not elsewhere classified\1\</D><D>170, 171; 192, 193; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.19<D>Other cystostomy</D><D>308, 309; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.21<D>Vesicostomy</D><D>308, 309; 344, 345; 360; 400, 406, 407; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">57.22<D>Revision or closure of vesicostomy</D><D>308, 309; 344, 345; 365, 400; 406, 407; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">77.54<D>Excision or correction of bunionette</D><D>No change.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.02<D>Other cervical fusion, anterior technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.03<D>Other cervical fusion, posterior technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.04<D>Dorsal and dorsolumbar fusion, anterior technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.05<D>Dorsal and dorsolumbar fusion, posterior technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.06<D>Lumbar and lumbosacral fusion, anterior technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.07<D>Lumbar and lumbosacral fusion, lateral transverse process technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.08<D>Lumbar and lumbosacral fusion, posterior technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.09<D>Refusion of spine, any level or technique</D><D>4; 214, 215; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.51<D>Total hip replacement</D><D>209, 471; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.59<D>Revision of joint replacement, not elsewhere classified</D><D>233, 234; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.71<D>Arthroplasty of metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint with implant</D><D>7, 8; 228; 441.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.79<D>Other repair of hand, fingers, and wrist</D><D>7, 8, 228; 441.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.81<D>Partial shoulder replacement</D><D>209; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.84<D>Total elbow replacement</D><D>209; 442, 443.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">89.68<D>Monitoring of cardiac output by other technique</D><D>Non-OR.</D><F>\1\The notes for code 52.99 were revised to include the open proceduresformerly included in codes 52.93 and 52.94, thus adding 52.99 to DRGs 170and 171.</F></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table</T4> 6d_<T4>Expanded Diagnosis Codes That Are No Longer Accepted In Grouper \1\</T4><H1>Diagnosis code </H1><H1>Description </H1><H1>DRG</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">088.8 <D>Other specified arthropod-borne disease </D><D>423 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.0 <D>Generalized nonconvulsive epilepsy </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.1 <D>Generalized convulsive epilepsy </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.4 <D>Partial epilepsy, with impairment or consciousness </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.5 <D>Partial epilepsy, without mention of impairment of consciousness </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.6 <D>Infantile spasms </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.7 <D>Epilepsia partialis continua </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.8 <D>Other forms of epilepsy </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">345.9 <D>Epilepsy, unspecified </D><D>024, 025, 026 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.0 <D>Hypertensive renal disease, malignant </D><D>331, 332, 333 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.1 <D>Hypertensive renal disease, benign </D><D>331, 332, 333 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">403.9 <D>Hypertensive renal disease, unspecified </D><D>331, 332, 333 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.0 <D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, malignant </D><D>134 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.1 <D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, benign </D><D>134 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">404.9 <D>Hypertensive heart and renal disease, unspecified </D><D>134 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.0 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, of anterolateral wall </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.1 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other anterior wall </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.2 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferolateral wall </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.3 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, of inferoposterior wall </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.4 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other inferior wall </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.5 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, of other lateral wall </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.6 <D>True posterior wall infarction </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.7 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, subendocardial infarction </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.8 <D>Acute myocardial infarction of other specified sites </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">410.9 <D>Acute myocardial infarction, unspecified site </D><D>121, 122, 123 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">411.8 <D>Other acute and subacute forms of ischemic heart disease, unspecified</D><D>140 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">759.8 <D>Other specified congenital anomalies </D><D>390 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.6 <D>Infection and inflamatory reaction due to internal prosthetic device,implant, and graft </D><D>452, 453 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">996.7 <D>Other complications of internal prosthetic device, implant, and graft</D><D>452, 453 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V30.0 <D>Single liveborn, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V31.0 <D>Twin, mate liveborn, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V32.0 <D>Twin, mate stillborn, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V33.0 <D>Twin, unspecified, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V34.0 <D>Other multiple, mates all live-born, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V35.0 <D>Other multiple, mates all stillborn, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V36.0 <D>Other multiple, mates live- and stillborn, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V37.0 <D>Other multiple unspecified, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">V39.0 <D>Liveborn unspecified, born in hospital </D><D>391 </D><F>\1\ See Table 6a for New Diagnosis Codes (5 digits).</F></ITAG></ITAG>  <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,i1,s6,r30</C><T4>Table </T4>6e_<T4>Deleted Procedure Codes </T4><H1> </H1><H1/> <ITAG tagnum="1">43.2 <D>Permanent gastrostomy </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">51.97 <D>Therapeutic endoscopic procedures on biliary tract, oral route </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">52.91 <D>Endoscopic retrograde cannulation of pancreatic duct [ERCP] </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">59.96 <D>Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy [ESWL] </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.18 <D>Other fusion of toe </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.31 <D>Arthroplasty of foot and toe with synthetic prosthesis </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.39 <D>Other arthroplasty of foot and toe </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.41 <D>Total knee replacement </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.48 <D>Total ankle replacement </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.6  <D>Other arthroplasty of hip </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.61 <D>Replacement of head of femur with use of methyl methacrylate </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.62 <D>Other replacement of head of femur </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.63 <D>Replacement of acetabulum with use of methyl methacrylate </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.64 <D>Other replacement of acetabulum </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.69 <D>Other repair of hip </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.86 <D>Arthroplasty of carpals with synthetic prosthesis </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">81.87 <D>Other repair of wrist </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">88.99 <D>Magnetic resonance imaging of other and unspecified sites</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M001 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration 2284 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M003 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration 285-290 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M020 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration 291-310 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C </ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L2,i1,s30,6,6</C><T4>Table </T4>8._<T4>Statewide Average Cost-to Charge Ratios For Urban and Rural Hospitals</T4><ITAG tagnum="96">(Case Weighted) </ITAG><H1>State </H1><H1>Urban </H1><H1>Rural</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">Alabama <D>.5349 </D><D>.5805</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Alaska <D>.6669 </D><D>.8300</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arizona <D>.6131 </D><D>.6493</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arkansas <D>.6345 </D><D>.6179</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">California <D>.5984 </D><D>.6148</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Colorado <D>.6324 </D><D>.6757</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Connecticut <D>.7325 </D><D>.8221</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Delaware <D>.6140 </D><D>.6292</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">District of Columbia <D>.6311 </D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Florida <D>.5546 </D><D>.5476</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Georgia <D>.6409 </D><D>.6111</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hawaii <D>.6123 </D><D>.7726</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Idaho <D>.7300 </D><D>.7165</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Illinois <D>.6059 </D><D>.6767</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indiana <D>.7178 </D><D>.7375</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iowa <D>.6603 </D><D>.7469</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kansas <D>.6448 </D><D>.7729</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Kentucky <D>.6395 </D><D>.6070</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Louisiana <D>.6020 </D><D>.6263</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Maine <D>.7219 </D><D>.7083</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Maryland <D>.6620 </D><D>.6300</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Massachusetts <D>.6881 </D><D>.7601</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Michigan <D>.6176 </D><D>.7011</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Minnesota <D>.7089 </D><D>.7464</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mississippi <D>.6451 </D><D>.6499</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Missouri <D>.6068 </D><D>.6494</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Montana <D>.6790 </D><D>.6965</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nebraska <D>.6300 </D><D>.7245</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nevada <D>.5185 </D><D>.7154</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Hampshire <D>.7290 </D><D>.7470</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Jersey <D>.7238 </D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New Mexico <D>.6275 </D><D>.6081</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">New York <D>.6491 </D><D>.7500</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">North Carolina <D>.6884 </D><D>.6255</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">North Dakota <D>.7153 </D><D>.7351</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ohio <D>.6777 </D><D>.6879</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Oklahoma <D>.6343 </D><D>.6482</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Oregon <D>.6706 </D><D>.7071</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pennsylvania <D>.5815 </D><D>.6312</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Puerto Rico <D>.5366 </D><D>.6193</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhode Island <D>.7646 </D><D> </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">South Carolina <D>.5895 </D><D>.5800</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">South Dakota <D>.6276 </D><D>.6923</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tennessee <D>.5840 </D><D>.6009</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Texas <D>.6071 </D><D>.6895</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Utah <D>.7074 </D><D>.6966</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vermont <D>.7690 </D><D>.7130</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Virginia <D>.6208 </D><D>.6197</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Washington <D>.7211 </D><D>.7391</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">West Virginia <D>.6586 </D><D>.5993</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wisconsin <D>.7775 </D><D>.7710</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Wyoming <D>.7473 </D><D>.7842</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84"> Appendix A. Regulatory Impact Analysis</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Introduction</ITAG>Executive Order (E.O.) 12291 requires us to prepare and publish an initialregulatory impact analysis for any proposed rule that meets one of theE.O criteria for a ``major rule''; that is, that would be likely to resultin: an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; a major increasein costs or prices for consumers, individual industries, Federal, State,or local government agencies, or geographic regions; or significant adverseeffects on competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation,or on the ability of United States-based enterprises to compete with foreignbased enterprises in domestic or export markets. In addition, we generally prepare an initial regulatory flexibility analysisthat is consistent with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) (5 U.S.C.601 through 612), unless the Secretary certifies that a proposed rule wouldnot have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of smallentities. For purposes of the RFA, we treat all hospitals as small entities.Also, section 1102(b) of the Act requires the Secretary to prepare an initialregulatory impact analysis for any proposed rule that may have a significantimpact on the operations of a substantial number of small rural hospitals.Such an analysis must conform to the provisions of section 603 of the RFA.With the exception of hospitals located in certain rural counties adjacentto urban areas, for purposes of section 1102(b) of the Act, we define asmall rural hospital as a hospital with fewer than 50 beds located outsideof a Metropolitan Statistical Area or New England County Metropolitan Area,as modified for purposes of the prospective payment system in accordancewith the provisions of 601(g) of the Social Security Amendments of 1983(Pub. L. 98-21). Section 1886(d)(8)(B) of the Act, specifies that hospitalslocated in certain rural counties adjacent to one or more urban areas aredeemed to be located in the adjacent urban area. We have identified 52rural hospitals, some of which may be considered small, that we are classifyingas urban hospitals. It is clear that the changes proposed in this document would affect botha substantial number of small rural hospitals as well other classes ofhospitals, and the effects on some would be significant. Therefore, thediscussion below, in combination with the rest of this proposed rule, constitutesa combined regulatory impact analysis and regulatory flexibility analysisin accordance with E.O. 12291 and the RFA.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Objectives</ITAG>We expect these proposed changes to further Congress original objectivesin establishing the prospective payment system. The prospective paymentrates create incentives similar to the incentives a hospital faces in pricingand marketing its services in a conventional market. By paying similarhospitals the same rate for similar services, we let hospitals know inadvance the amount they will be paid per discharge. We give them both anopportunity to receive this payment, regardless of their specific costexperience, and a strong incentive to operate more efficiently, thus minimizingunnecessary costs. Unlike a cost limitation approach, which achieves savingslargely by disallowing Medicare payment for costs that are not reasonableor that are in excess of a specific limit, the prospective payment systemachieves savings by intensifying hospitals incentives to operate efficiently.Thus, our objectives include_ andbullet; Restructuring hospitals economic incentives; andbullet; Basing payment on a system that identifies the product being purchasedmore accurately than cost reimbursement; andbullet; Reinforcing the role of the Federal government as a prudent buyerof services; and andbullet; Restraining the rate of hospital cost increases, thus moderatingthe outflow of expenditures from the Medicare trust fund while maintaininghigh quality care.In addition, we share national goals of deficit reduction and restraintson government spending in general. We believe these proposals would furtherall of our goals while maintaining the financial viability of the hospitalindustry and ensuring access to high quality care for beneficiaries.We also expect these proposed changes to further these objectives whileavoiding or minimizing unintended adverse consequences and ensuring thatthe outcomes of this payment system are, in general, reasonable and equitable.Thus, the intent is to refine further the prospective payment system withoutundercutting our objectives. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Limitations of Our Analysis </ITAG>From the outset of the prospective payment system, we have developed increasinglysophisticated models of how the prospective payment system works. Nevertheless,at present, we still have no adequate way to model, and therefore to quantify,many of the potential behavioral changes in response to the prospectivepayment system on the part of hospitals, hospital managers and employees,physicians, suppliers, or beneficiaries. Further, changes in the privatesector, related to both the supply of, and demand for, health care services,interact with the behavioral incentives created by the Medicare paymentsystem. We do not have the capability to model such behavioral changesor interactions among the various parties participating in the market place.We continue to study many aspects of the prospective payment system withthe intent of obtaining more adequate data to better assess behavioralchanges in response to the incentives of the payment system. Examples ofthese initiatives include various reports to Congress, as required by section603 of Pub. L. 98-21, sections 9113 and 9114 of the Consolidated OmnibusBudget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (Pub. L. 99-272), and section 9305 ofthe Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-509). These reportsexamine many issues, including the need for and the feasibility of developingseverity of illness measures and the quality of postacute care. We arealso required, under section 603(a)(2)(A) of Pub. L. 98-21, to study andreport annually to the Congress on the impact of the prospective paymentsystem.In addition to these initiatives, we and others (such as the ProspectivePayment Assessment Commission (ProPAC) and the Office of the InspectorGeneral) have undertaken a variety of studies on the effects of the prospectivepayment system, such as examining the effects of the payment system ondifferent classes of hospitals. In spite of these efforts, our abilityto attribute causability to particular regulations is still limited. Thecomplexity of the prospective payment system itself, along with numerousother rapidly occurring changes in the hospital environment, make it virtuallyimpossible for us to isolate the effects of any one change in our policy,much less the effects of the entire prospective payment system on the healthcare industry. Therefore, as has been the case in previously published regulatory impactanalyses, the following quantitative analysis is limited to presentingthe projected effects of proposed policy and rate changes on current andprojected payment rates. In the analysis that follows, we examined theeffects of both statutory and proposed policy changes on hospital paymentsby projecting estimated payments under each set of policy changes on tothe current payment amounts. That is, we projected the effects of eachpolicy change on payments while holding all other payment variables constant.Thus, we are not attempting to predict behavioral responses to our proposals,and we are not generally accounting for changes in such exogenous variablesas admissions, lengths of stay, or case mix. In view of the difficulty we have in quantifying impacts and attributingcausality, we believe that the approach we are taking in the specific impactdiscussions below is the most feasible one. Wherever possible, we haveincluded quantitative representations of proposed changes. As with previouslypublished impact analyses, we are soliciting comments and information aboutthe anticipated effects of these proposed changes on the prospective paymentsystem.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Hospitals Included In and Excluded From the Prospective PaymentSystem</ITAG>In general, hospitals began operating under the prospective payment systemwith the start of their cost reporting period beginning on or after Octoberl, 1983. Further, since September 1985, both Massachusetts and New Yorkhave terminated the waivers under which they were excluded from the Medicareprospective payment system, and hospitals in those States have enteredthat system. (Massachusetts hospitals came under the Medicare prospectivepayment system in October 1985, while New York hospitals began receivingMedicare prospective payments in January 1986.) Effective January l, 1989,the 94 short-term, acute care hospitals located in New Jersey came underthe prospective payment system. The demonstration project being conductedin the Rochester region of New York State has come to an end and the 10hospitals in the region are now under the prospective payment system. Asof March 1, 1989, about 5700 hospitals (86 percent of all Medicare-participatinghospitals) were operating under the prospective payment system.With the enactment of section 9304 of Pub. L. 99-509, which added section1886(d)(9) to the Act, the 58 acute care hospitals located in Puerto Ricobegan receiving payments under the prospective payment system effectivewith discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1987. Also, effectivewith cost reporting periods that began on or after October l, 1987, alcohol/drughospitals and units that had been excluded from the prospective paymentsystem under andSection; 412.22(c) of the regulations began receiving Medicareprospective payments. Thus, only 59 short-term, acute care hospitals remainexcluded from the prospective payment system under section 1814(b)(3) ofthe Act (in Maryland) or demonstration projects (in the Finger Lakes regionsof New York State). As of March l, 1989, almost 900 Medicare hospitals were excluded from theprospective payment system and continue to be paid on the basis of reasonablecost reimbursement, subject to limits on the rate of their cost increases.These hospitals include psychiatric, rehabilitation, long-term care, andchildren's hospitals. Another 1,637 psychiatric and rehabilitation unitsin hospitals subject to the prospective payment system are excluded fromthe prospective payment system as of the same date. These units, too, arepaid on the basis of reasonable cost reimbursement subject to limits onthe rate of their cost increases. More than 580 hospitals are being paid on various special bases under theprospective payment system, as required by statute. They include sole communityhospitals, rural referral centers and cancer treatment and research hospitalsthat meet certain conditions. In addition, there are some 1500 hospitalsthat are receiving additional payments on the basis of being classifiedas disproportionate share hospitals and about 1130 hospitals receivingadditional payments for the indirect cost of medical education. There areabout 570 hospitals that qualify for additional payments under both categories.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Impact on Excluded Hospitals and Units </ITAG>As noted in the previous section, almost 900 Medicare hospitals and 1,640units in hospitals included in the prospective payment system currentlyare paid on a reasonable cost basis subject to the rate-of-increase ceilingrequirement of andSection; 413.40. For cost reporting periods beginning inFY 1990, these hospitals would have their individual target amounts increasedby the hospital market basket percentage increase. We are projecting anincrease in the hospital market basket of 5.8 percent. The effect this would have on affected hospitals and units would vary dependingon each hospital's or unit's existing relationship of costs per dischargeto its target amount, and the relative gains in productivity (efficiency)the hospital or unit is able to achieve. For hospitals and units that incurper discharge costs lower than their target amounts, the primary impactwould be on the level of incentive payments made under andSection; 413.40(d).A hospital may receive incentive payments for incurring costs that arelower than its target amount, but may not receive payments for costs thatexceed the target amount. We expect the increased ceiling on payments wouldmaintain existing incentives for economy and efficiency experienced byexcluded hospitals and units. <ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Impact of the Proposed Changes on Sole Community Hospitals andRural Referral Centers </ITAG>A. Changes in the Qualifying Criteria for Sole Community Hospitals In section IV.B. of the preamble to this proposed rule, we explained thatunder current regulations, a hospital may qualify as a sole community hospital(SCH) if it had been designated as an SCH prior to the beginning of theprospective payment system, or it meets one of the following criteria:andbullet; It is located more than 50 miles from other like hospitals. andbullet; It is located between 25 and 50 miles from other hospitals, andit__Serves at least 75 percent of inpatients in its market area; _Is isolated by local topography or extreme weather conditions for onemonth of each year; or _Has fewer than 50 beds and would qualify on the basis of market shareexcept that some patients seek specialized care unavailable at the hospital.andbullet; It is located between 15 and 25 miles from other hospitals andisolated by local topography or extreme weather for one month of each year.As discussed in the preamble to this proposed rule, we are concerned aboutthose rural hospitals that do not meet the present criteria for SCH designation,but are located in relatively isolated localities and provide a major portionof the health care services to the Medicare beneficiaries in the surroundingcommunity (hospitals that are between 25 miles and 50 miles from the nearestsimilar hospital). By eliminating the market share criterion for hospitalslocated more than 35 miles from a similar hospital, we would help ensurethat Medicare beneficiaries continue to have access to necessary healthcare services. As a result of the proposed change in qualifying criteriafor SCHs, we estimate that approximately 110 more rural hospitals wouldqualify for SCH status. Whether or not the hospitals actually apply forSCH status will depend, in large part, on whether they will be advantagedby the special payment provisions for SCHs. In addition to the newly eligibleSCHs, we would expect the proposed change to allow a hospital that givesup SCH status to reapply after 1 year to have an impact on the number ofSCHs. We estimate that at least 25 hospitals have given up their SCH status.We anticipate that some of these hospitals would reapply for SCH statusif the proposed rule becomes final. In addition, we expect some existingSCHs whose payment rates are less than the Federal rate may give up theirSCH status in order to obtain the Federal rate since it would be easierunder the proposed change for them to regain SCH status if their circumstanceschange. The following table shows the distributions by census divisionof the additional hospitals that would meet the new SCH qualifying criteria.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,i1,s25,10</C><T4>Table I_Distribution of Newly Designated SCHs by Census Division UnderProposed Criteria</T4><H1>Census division</H1><H1>Number of new SCHs</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">New England <D>2 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Middle Atlantic <D>0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">South Atlantic <D>12 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">East North Central <D>5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">East South Central <D>4 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">West North Central <D>26 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">West South Central <D>11 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mountain <D>38 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pacific <D>11</D></ITAG></ITAG>B. Retention of Rural Referral Center Status As discussed in section IV.D.3. of the preamble to this proposed rule,we are proposing to reinstitute our policy on periodic review of the statusof hospitals designated as rural referral centers. Under this policy, theHCFA Regional Offices would review every 3 years each referral center'sdata on medical staff, number of discharges. case-mix index and numberof beds to determine whether a hospital that has been designated as a referralcenter for at least three full cost reporting periods has met the qualifyingcriteria in andSection; 412.96 (b) or (c) for 2 out of the last 3 years ormeets the criteria for designation in the current year. For those hospitalsthat qualified for rural referral center status using the revised bed criterionthat was effective on April 1, 1988, the review of these hospitals wouldnot begin until the completion of their third full cost reporting periodthat began on or after April l, 1988. Based on the cost report informationavailable to us, we estimate that about 75 percent of those hospitals nowmeeting the requirements for rural referral center status would retaintheir referral center status on the basis of the retention criteria. Someadditional hospitals may retain their status as a result of qualifyingfor referral center status on the basis of their most recent cost reports.To properly interpret and understand the significance of our estimate,two points should be noted. First, our judgment as to how many hospitalsmay lose their status as referral centers is based on the latest case-mixand cost report data available to us. Although the number of dischargesand bed size do not usually change dramatically from one year to the next,some hospitals that may not meet the referral center retention criteriabased on the data in our possession may meet the criteria based on latercase-mix or cost report data. Hence, our estimate of the number of RRCsfailing to meet the present qualifying criteria is predictive rather thandeterminative. Secondly, any hospital that does not retain its referralyears center status as a result of the proposed review policy may reapplyin subsequent years for referral center status if it believes that it againmeets the qualifying criteria. In total, we estimate the payments to those hospitals that no longer retainrural referral center status would have their payments reduced by $20 millionduring FY 1990. For an individual hospital, payments would be reduced by11 percent effective with discharges occurring on or after the beginningof its FY 1990 cost reporting period over what its payment would have beenif the hospital had retained rural referral center status. This reductionrepresents the difference between the proposed FY 1990 rate for rural hospitalsand for other urban hospitals. (The payment difference would be reducedif Congress provides for a higher update for rural hospitals, as recommendedby the Secretary (See Appendix C to this proposed rule).)<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Analysis of the Quantifiable Impact of Proposed Changes AffectingRates and Payment Amounts </ITAG>A. Basis and Methodology of EstimatesThe data used in developing the following quantitative estimates of changesin payments presented in Table II, below, are taken from FY 1988 billingdata and hospital-specific data for FY 1986 and FY 1987. As in previousanalyses, we propose to compare the effects of changes being proposed inthis document for FY 1990 to our estimate of the payment amounts in effectfor FY 1989.In addition, we have treated all hospitals in our data base as if theyhad the same cost reporting period; that is, a cost reporting period coincidingwith the Federal fiscal year. Furthermore, our model does not take intoaccount any prospective behavioral changes in response to these proposals.The tables and the discussion that follow reflect our best effort to identifyand quantify the effects of the changes being proposed in this document.It should be noted, however, that as a result of gaps in our data, we areunable to quantify some of the effects of the proposed rule. Also, we couldnot utilize all the hospitals in the recalibration or outlier data setsfor modeling the impact analysis because in some cases the hospital-specificdata necessary for constructing our impact model were missing. Data onhospital bed size and type of control were the data elements most frequentlymissing. The absent data prevented us from properly classifying and displayingthese hospitals in the impact analysis. The missing data, however, didnot prevent us from using the discharges from these hospitals in recalibratingthe DRG weights or calculating the proposed outlier payments that are includedin the final column of Table II showing the combined effects of all proposedchanges.The following analysis examines the proposed changes to the DRG weightsand wage index separately. That is, all variables except those associatedwith the provision under examination were held constant so as to displaythe effects of each provision compared to the baseline (FY 1989) provisions.In the last column (column 3), we present the combined effect of all changesbeing proposed in this rule. That is, column 3 displays the combined effectsof the previous four columns as well as the FY 1990 update factor and theupdating of the outlier payment thresholds. As such, this last column isthe only one in which the effects of all the quantifiable payment policychanges on simulated FY 1990 payments are reflected.Consistent with the display of the impact presented in Table II, the followingdiscussion is divided into two parts. The first part (columns 1 and 2)describes the effects of two major changes being proposed in this document:the annual changes to the DRG classification system and recalibration ofthe DRG weights required under section 1886(d)(4)(C) of the Act (includingthe adjustment for increased case mix); and replacement of the currentwage index based on an equal blend of 1982 and 1984 wage data with a wageindex based on 1984 wage data. The final section discusses the combinedeffect of all provisions being proposed in this rule.<ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M 003</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert Illustration(s) 330-332</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C </ITAG>B. Proposed Changes to the DRG Classification System and Recalibrationof the DRG Weights, and Changes to the Wage IndexIn Column l, we present the combined effects of revising the current DRGdefinitions and recalibrating the weights to reflect changes in practicepatterns, modes of treatment, and new technologies as required each yearby section 1886(d)(4)(C) of the Act. These changes are described in sectionII.C. of the preamble to this proposed rule. (The DRGs that have been recalibratedfor this analysis also reflect, insofar as possible, the proposed changesto the DRG classification system set forth in section II.B. of the preambleof this proposed rule.) As part of recalibrating and normalizing the DRGweights, we are proposing to adjust all the DRG weights to correct forincreases in the average case-mix index that have resulted from past GROUPERmodifications. As explained in detail in section II.D. of the preambleto this proposed rule, we are proposing to reduce each DRG weight by 1.35percent over what it would have been without this adjustment. Thus, inthe following analysis, we compared estimated FY 1989 hospital paymentsusing an estimate of each hospital's case-mix index based on the currentDRG classifications and weighting factors to FY 1989 simulated paymentsusing an estimate of each hospital's case-mix index based on the proposedDRG classifications and recalibrated weighting factors.Nationally, the reduction we are proposing to make in the DRG weights toaccount for the 1.35 percent increase in the case-mix index is the onlymeasurable effect on the reclassification and recalibration of the DRGweights. Since this adjustment would be made on a uniform basis to allDRG weights, it would result in the same percentage reduction across allclasses of hospitals. However, within certain census divisions and amongcertain types of hospitals, DRG reclassification and recalibration appearsto have a differential impact on hospital payments as a result of shiftsin the relative weights among DRGs. In analyzing these shifts, we foundthat the DRGs with increased relative weights tended to be more expensiveinitially (higher weighted) than the DRGs with decreased relative weights.Since rural hospitals have a lower case mix, one result is that the averagecase weight for rural hospitals would decrease relative to the averagecase weight for urban hospitals. Consequently, reclassifying and recalibratingDRGs would have a disproportionate impact on rural hospitals. The averagereduction in payments to rural hospitals would be about 1.8 percent comparedto an average reduction of about 1.2 percent for urban hospitals when wehold other payment variables constant. Holding all other payments variablesconstant, rural hospitals with fewer than 50 beds would experience a reductionin payments of 2.2 percent. This is a reduction significantly greater thanthe 1.3 percent reduction accounted for by the proposed adjustment to theDRG weights. Holding all other payment variables constant, sole communityhospitals and other rural hospitals would experience payment reductionsof about 1.8 percent.The fact that DRG reclassification and recalibration has the greatest impacton small rural hospitals and sole community hospitals may explain the largerthan average reductions for rural hospitals in the West North Central,West South Central and Mountain census divisions. The majority of smallhospitals and sole community hospitals are located in these areas.Column 2 of Table II displays the estimated effects of changes to the wageindex being proposed in this proposed rule. As discussed in section IIIof the preamble to this proposed rule, we are proposing to base the wageindex required under section 1886(d)(3)(E) and 1886(d)(9)(B)(vi) of theAct entirely on 1984 gross hourly wage data rather than on an equal blendof an index based on 1982 gross hourly wage data and one based on 1984data (as described in section III.B. of the preamble to this proposed rule).The proposed wage index values also reflect changes required by section1886(d)(8)(C) of the Act (which was added by section 8403(a) of the Technicaland Miscellaneous Revenue Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-647). This provisionrequires the Secretary to compute a separate wage index value for an urbanor rural area if the wage index value for that area was reduced as a resultof deeming hospitals in certain rural counties as urban in accordance withsection 1886(d)(8)(B) of the Act.The proposed changes to the wage index would have no significant effecton overall payments. The effect on hospitals in different geographic areasvaries from an average 0.6 increase in payments for hospitals in the ruralareas of the South Atlantic census division to a 0.7 reduction in paymentsfor hospitals located in the rural localities of the West South Centraland Mountain census divisions and for the hospitals in the urban areasof the East North Central census division. Generally, the proposed wageindex changes would have no effect on the overall distribution of paymentsto rural hospitals and cause only a slight reduction to urban hospitals.The proposed changes to the wage index would have no effect on rural hospitalswith fewer than 50 beds.C. Combined Effects Column 3 of Table II shows the FY 1990 rates that incorporate the combinedeffects of all the proposed changes we are able to quantify. In additionto the changes described in columns 1 and 2, column 3 reflects the updatefactors mandated under section 1886(b)(3)(B)(i) of the Act. Because Column 3 combines the proposed FY 1990 payment rates and all otherproposed changes, the effects displayed also include the payment offsetfor outlier payments required under section 1886(d)(5)(A)(iv) of the Act.This provision requires that total outlier payments should not be lessthan five percent nor more than six percent of total prospective payments.In our analysis, similar to the analysis for FY 1989, we have set outlierthresholds and offset urban and rural rates for outliers so as to yieldestimated outlier payments for FY 1990 equal to 5.1 percent of total DRGpayments. In addition, section 1886(d)(9)(b)(iv) of the Act requires thatthe urban and rural rates be offset by the same percentage of total paymentsthat are outlier payments for urban and rural hospitals, respectively.Based on the most recent discharge data available, however, we anticipatethat total outlier payments for FY 1989 (exclusive of the impact of Pub.L. 100-360) will equal 5.5 percent of total prospective payments, insteadof the 5.1 percent accounted for by the offsets to the current rates. Therefore,column 3 also reflects a reduction of 0.4 percent in payments comparedto FY 1989 payments because the FY 1989 baseline payments are overstatedby the 0.4 percent outlier payments in excess of the outlier offsets reflectedin the FY 1989 standardized amounts. The 5.5 percent estimate of paymentsfrom the outlier pool is exclusive of the additional outlier payments thatresult from the elimination of the limitation on inpatient hospital servicesunder section 101 of Pub. L. 100-360. Outlier payments resulting from theprovisions of Pub. L. 100-360 are estimated at one percent of total DRGpayments, resulting in an estimated 6.5 percent in total FY 1989 outlierpayments. We estimate that the additional outlier payments resulting fromthe changes made by Pub. L. 100-360 would also be one percent in FY 1990and would result in FY 1990 outlier payments equal to 6.1 percent of totalDRG payments. Nationally, the effects of all changes we are proposing are expected toresult in a 4.0 percent payment increase. Geographically, hospitals inrural areas of the South Atlantic census division would receive the largestpercentage increase in prospective payments of 4.8 percent. However, hospitalsin rural areas of the Middle Atlantic census division could expect onlya 3.0 percent increase over FY 1989 payments. Generally, urban hospitals would receive a payment increase averaging 4.1percent (the national average) while the average increase for all ruralhospitals would be 3.9 percent. Among rural hospitals, it appears thathospitals with over 200 beds would receive an increase in payments of 4.6percent while hospitals with fewer than 50 beds would receive an increaseof about 3.3 percent. Among the different types of hospitals, rural referral centers would receivethe largest increase in payments (5.6 percent) while disproportionate sharehospitals located in rural areas would receive the smallest payment increase(3.2 percent). Sole community hospitals would receive an increase of about3.6 percent. Type of ownership does not appear to be a factor influencingpayment increases. Hospitals grouped by type of control (voluntary, proprietaryand government) would receive payment increases at or near the nationalaverage percentage increase. We must point out that there are interactions that result from the combiningof the various separate provisions analyzed in the previous columns thatwe are unable to isolate. Thus, the values appearing in column 3 do notrepresent merely the additive effects of the previous columns plus theupdate factors. Table III presents the projected FY 1990 average payments per case forurban and rural hospitals and for the different categories of hospitalsshown in Table II, and compares them to the average estimated per casepayments for FY 1989. As such, this table presents the combined effectsof the proposed changes presented in Table II in terms of the average dollaramounts paid per discharge. That is, the percentage change in average paymentsfrom FY 1989 to FY 1990 equals the percentage changes shown in the lastcolumn of Table II.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table III._Comparison of Payment Per Case </T4><ITAG tagnum="96">[FY 1990 Compared to FY 1989] </ITAG><H1> </H1><H1>Number of hospitals</H1><H1>Average FY 1989 payment per case (1)</H1><H1>Average FY 1990 payment per case (2)</H1><H1>Percentage change* (3)</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">All hospitals <D>$5,606</D><D>$4,578</D><D>$4,762</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG>Urban by region <ITAG tagnum="2">New England<D>182</D><D>5,194</D><D>5,417</D><D>4.3 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Middle Atlantic<D>376</D><D>5,646</D><D>5,864</D><D>3.9 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">South Atlantic<D>444</D><D>4,614</D><D>4,809</D><D>4.2 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">East North Central<D>540</D><D>4,963</D><D>5,135</D><D>3.5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">East South Central<D>179</D><D>4,286</D><D>4,464</D><D>4.2 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">West North Central<D>201</D><D>5,077</D><D>5,305</D><D>4.5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">West South Central<D>376</D><D>4,631</D><D>4,822</D><D>4.1 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Mountain<D>123</D><D>4,976</D><D>5,189</D><D>4.3 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Pacific<D>515</D><D>5,764</D><D>6,016</D><D>4.4 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Puerto Rico<D>50</D><D>2,015</D><D>2,094</D><D>3.9 </D></ITAG>Rural by region <ITAG tagnum="2">New England<D>61</D><D>3,562</D><D>3,721</D><D>4.5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Middle Atlantic<D>96</D><D>3,328</D><D>3,427</D><D>3.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">South Atlantic<D>344</D><D>2,999</D><D>3,144</D><D>4.8 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">East North Central<D>332</D><D>3,015</D><D>3,135</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">East South Central<D>311</D><D>2,605</D><D>2,704</D><D>3.8 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">West North Central<D>588</D><D>2,814</D><D>2,917</D><D>3.7 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">West South Central<D>438</D><D>2,734</D><D>2,836</D><D>3.7 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Mountain<D>270</D><D>3,118</D><D>3,222</D><D>3.4 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Pacific<D>172</D><D>3,673</D><D>3,797</D><D>3.4 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Puerto Rico<D>8</D><D>1,551</D><D>1,608</D><D>3.7 </D></ITAG>Large urban areas <ITAG tagnum="2">(populations over 1 million)<D>1,480</D><D>5,498</D><D>5,714</D><D>3.9 </D></ITAG>Other urban areas <ITAG tagnum="1">(populations with 1 million or fewer)<D>1,506</D><D>4,571</D><D>4,763</D><D>4.2 </D></ITAG>Urban hospitals<D>2,986</D><D>5,044</D><D>5,248</D><D>4.1 </D><ITAG tagnum="2">0-99 beds<D>693</D><D>3,868</D><D>4,008</D><D>3.6 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">100-199 beds<D>778</D><D>4,308</D><D>4,471</D><D>3.8 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">200-299 beds<D>579</D><D>4,701</D><D>4,888</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">300-399 beds<D>610</D><D>5,122</D><D>5,334</D><D>4.1 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">400+ beds<D>271</D><D>6,043</D><D>6,296</D><D>4.2</D></ITAG>Rural hospitals<D>2,620</D><D>2,957</D><D>3,072</D><D>3.9 </D><ITAG tagnum="2">0-49 beds<D>1,064</D><D>2,506</D><D>2,590</D><D>3.3 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">50-99 beds<D>833</D><D>2,686</D><D>2,779</D><D>3.5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">100-149 beds<D>368</D><D>2,905</D><D>3,021</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">150-199 beds<D>150</D><D>3,159</D><D>3,273</D><D>3.6 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">200+ beds<D>151</D><D>3,487</D><D>3,648</D><D>4.6 </D></ITAG>Teaching status <ITAG tagnum="2">Nonteaching<D>4,471</D><D>3,830</D><D>3,981</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Resident/bed ratio less than 0.25<D>913</D><D>5,068</D><D>5,274</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Resident/bed ratio .025 or greater<D>221</D><D>7,552</D><D>7,872</D><D>4.2 </D></ITAG>Disproportionate Share Hospitals (DSH) <ITAG tagnum="2">Non-DSH<D>4,111</D><D>4,160</D><D>4,329</D><D>4.1 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Urban DSH 100 beds or more<D>1,058</D><D>5,560</D><D>5,784</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Urban DSH fewer than 100 beds<D>132</D><D>4,296</D><D>4,445</D><D>3.5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Rural DSH<D>305</D><D>2,858</D><D>2,951</D><D>3.2 </D></ITAG>Urban teaching and DSH <ITAG tagnum="2">Both teaching and DSH<D>573</D><D>6,138</D><D>6,388</D><D>4.1 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Teaching only<D>480</D><D>5,245</D><D>5,462</D><D>4.1 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">DSH only<D>617</D><D>4,527</D><D>4,703</D><D>3.9 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Nonteaching and non-DSH<D>1,316</D><D>4,263</D><D>4,434</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG>Other special status (rural) <ITAG tagnum="2">Sole Community Hospital (SCHs)<D>309</D><D>2,944</D><D>3,050</D><D>3.6 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Rural Referral Center (RRCs)<D>195</D><D>3,563</D><D>3,761</D><D>5.6 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Both SCH and RRC<D>23</D><D>3,614</D><D>3,764</D><D>4.1 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Type of ownership </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Voluntary<D>3,022</D><D>4,752</D><D>4,943</D><D>4.0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Proprietary<D>916</D><D>4,096</D><D>4,267</D><D>4.2 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Government<D>1,551</D><D>4,147</D><D>4,313</D><D>4.0 </D><F>*Percentage changes shown in this column are taken from Table II, column3. Because the dollar amounts shown in this table are rounded to the nearestdollar, percentage changes computed on the basis of these amounts willdiffer slightly from those displayed in this column.</F></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Appendix B </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">February 28, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26"><T3>The Honorable Jim Wright, </T3>Speaker of the House of Representatives,Washington, DC 20515. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dear Mr. Speaker: Section 1886(e)(3)(B) of the Social Security Actrequires that the Secretary of Health and Human Services, not later thanMarch 1, 1989, report to the Congress his initial estimate of the applicablepercentage increase for FY 1990 that he will recommend for hospitals subjectto the Medicare prospective payment system (PPS) and for excluded hospitals.This submission constitutes the required report. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">President Reagan's final budget, submitted to you on January 9th,contained a proposal that all hospitals receive an update in their paymentsfor FY 1990 of 3.2 percent, which is equal to the market basket rate ofincrease (projected in the budget at 4.7 percent) less 1.5 percentage points.Accordingly, this constitutes our initial estimate of the applicable percentageincrease that we will eventually recommend. (We note that under the specialMedicare rule of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings, the maximum sequester would implyan effective update of 2.7 percent in FY 1990.) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">As President Bush indicated in his February 9 message, Medicare expenditureshave more than doubled every seven years and, without further reform, expenditureswill continue to soar at double-digit annual rates for the foreseeablefuture. Hence, it is the intent of the Administration that we act to modestlyrestrain the growth in Medicare payments to hospitals (and other providers).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In addition, President Bush's budget endorsed a proposal that hadbeen included in the Reagan FY 1990 budget to reduce the indirect medicaleducation payment adjustment. Teaching hospitals historically have hadMedicare operating margins that have been appreciably higher than the nationalaverage. If the inequitable payment adjustment is not reduced, this wouldcontinue to be the case.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Our recommendation for the updates is contingent on current projectionsof relevant data, and comes before we have had the opportunity to evaluatefully the recommendations of the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission(ProPAC). We will make our final recommendation on the appropriate percentageincreases for FY 1990 nearer the beginning of the new Federal fiscal year,based on our analysis of the latest estimates of all relevant factors,including ProPAC's recommendations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"> Sincerely, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Don M. Newman, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">February 28, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26"><T3>The Honorable Dan Quayle, </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">President of the Senate, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Washington, DC 20510</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dear Mr. President: Section 1886(e)(3)(B) of the Social Security Actrequires that the Secretary of Health and Human Services, not later thanMarch 1, 1989, report to the Congress his initial estimate of the applicablepercentage increase for FY 1990 that he will recommend for hospitals subjectto the Medicare prospective payment system (PPS) and for excluded hospitals.This submission constitutes the required report.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">President Reagan's final budget, submitted to you on January 9th,contained a proposal that all hospitals receive an update in their paymentsfor FY 1990 of 3.2 percent, which is equal to the market basket rate ofincrease (projected in the budget at 4.7 percent) less 1.5 percentage points.Accordingly, this constitutes our initial estimate of the applicable percentageincrease that we will eventually recommend. (We note that under the specialMedicare rule of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings, the maximum sequester would implyan effective update of 2.7 percent in FY 1990.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">As President Bush indicated in his February 9 message, Medicare expenditureshave more than doubled every seven years and, without further reform, expenditureswill continue to soar at double-digit annual rates for the foreseeablefuture. Hence, it is the intent of the Administration that we act to modestlyrestrain the growth in Medicare payments to hospitals (and other providers).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In addition, President Bush's budget endorsed a proposal that hadbeen included in the Reagan FY 1990 budget to reduce the indirect medicaleducation payment adjustment. Teaching hospitals historically have hadMedicare operating margins that have been appreciably higher than the nationalaverage. If the inequitable payment adjustment is not reduced, this wouldcontinue to be the case.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Our recommendation for the updates is contingent on current projectionsof relevant data, and comes before we have had the opportunity to evaluatefully the recommendations of the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission(ProPAC). We will make our final recommendation on the appropriate percentageincreases for FY 1990 nearer the beginning of the new Federal fiscal year,based on our analysis of the latest estimates of all relevant factors,including ProPAC's recommendations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"> Sincerely,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Don M. Newman,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix C_Recommendation of Update Factors for Rates of Payment forInpatient Hospital Services</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>Several provisions of the Social Security Act (the Act) impose requirementsconcerning procedures for setting update factors for Medicare payment forinpatient hospital services furnished during FY 1990. The provisions applyto update factors for hospitals subject to the prospective payment systemand for those excluded from the prospective payment system.Section 1886(b)(3)(B)(i) of the Act, as amended by section 4002(a) of theOmnibus Reconciliation Act of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-203), sets the FY 1990applicable percentage increases for prospective payment hospitals for FY1990 as the market basket percentage increase for all hospitals in allareas.Section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the Act also governs the target rate-of increaselimits for hospitals excluded from the prospective payment system. Section4002(e) of Pub. L. 100-203 amended section 1886(b)(3)(B)(ii) of the Actto provide that for FY 1990 the target rate-of-increase for hospitals excludedfrom the prospective payment system is the market basket percentage increase.Therefore, in accordance with section 1886(d)(3)(A) of the Act, we areproposing to update the average standardized amounts and the target rate-of-increaselimits for hospitals excluded from the prospective payment system as providedfor in section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the Act, as set forth above.Section 1886(e)(3)(A) of the Act requires that the Prospective PaymentAssessment Commission (ProPAC) have recommended to the Secretary by March1, 1989 an update factor that takes into account changes in the marketbasket index, hospital productivity, technological and scientific advances,the quality of health care provided in hospitals, and long-term cost effectivenessin the provision of inpatient hospital services.In its March 1, 1989 report, ProPAC recommended that prospective paymentupdate factors estimated to be 5.6 percent for hospitals located in ruralareas, 5.0 percent for hospitals located in large urban areas, and 4.5percent for hospitals located in other urban areas be approved. The componentsof these factors are described in detail in the ProPAC report, which ispublished as Appendix D to this document. We discuss ProPAC's recommendationsconcerning the update factors and our responses to those recommendationsbelow.Section 1886(e)(4) of the Act, as amended by section 4002(f) of Pub. L.100-203, requires that the Secretary, taking into consideration the recommendationsof ProPAC, recommend update factors for FY 1990 that take into accountthe amounts necessary for the efficient and effective delivery of medicallyappropriate and necessary care of high quality. Under section 1886(e)(5)of the Act, we are required to publish the recommended FY 1990 update factorsthat are provided for under section 1886(e)(4) of the Act. Accordingly,the purpose of this Appendix is to provide our recommendations of appropriateupdate factors, our analysis of the derivation of the amount of the updatefactors, and our responses to the ProPAC recommendations concerning theupdate factors.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Secretary's Recommendations</ITAG>Under section 1886(e)(4) of the Act, we are recommending that the prospectivepayment rates be increased, on average, by an amount equal to the marketbasket percentage increase minus 1.5 percentage points. Based on the currentlyforecasted hospital market basket increase of 5.8 percent, the recommendedupdate would be 4.3 percent on average.We believe, however, that differential updates for hospitals in rural,large urban, and other urban areas would be more appropriate than a uniformupdate to the payment amounts. Therefore, we strongly recommend a higherupdate for hospitals located in rural areas. We also recommend that hospitalslocated in large urban areas receive a higher update than hospitals locatedin other urban areas.In addition, we recommend a higher update to the target rate-of-increaselimits for hospitals excluded from the prospective payment system thanthe average update of the market basket increase minus 1.5 percentage points.In recommending these increases, we have taken into account the requirementin section 1886(e)(4) of the Act that the amounts be high enough to ensurethe efficient and effective delivery of medically appropriate and necessarycare of high quality. In addition, as required by section 1886(e)(4) ofthe Act, we have taken into consideration the recommendations of ProPAC.Our responses to the ProPAC recommendations concerning the update factorare discussed below.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. ProPAC Recommendations for Updating Prospective Payment SystemPayments and our Response</ITAG>For FY 1990, ProPAC recommends that the standardized amounts be updatedby the following factors:andbullet; A reduction of 0.8 percent applied to urban hospitals to reflectfirst-year prospective payment cost information. ProPAC recommends thatno reduction be applied to rural hospitals.andbullet; The projected increase in the hospital market basket (which wasestimated to be 5.7 percent at the time ProPAC's report was printed). Themarket basket used by ProPAC reflects changes in the use of wage and salarydata recommended by ProPAC.andbullet; A positive adjustment of 0.6 percent to correct errors in theFY 1989 market forecast.andbullet; A discretionary adjustment factor of 0.0 percent composed of anallowance for scientific and technological advancement and productivityimprovement.andbullet; An adjustment for case-mix change that incorporates real case-mixchange within and between DRGs and case-mix change resulting from codingimprovements. An adjustment of ^0.7 percent is recommended.Overall, the average net increase employing the above factors is 4.9 percent.ProPAC recommends a differential update for large urban, other urban, andrural hospitals, with large urban hospitals receiving a 5.0 percent update,other urban hospitals receiving a 4.5 percent update, and rural hospitalsreceiving a 5.6 percent update, based on ProPAC's current market basketforecast.For hospitals and units excluded from the prospective payment system, ProPACrecommends an update factor reflecting the increases in the market basketsfor children's hospitals and units and for psychiatric, rehabilitation,and long-term hospitals and units. Based on ProPAC's market basket forecasts,ProPAC recommends a 6.3 percent update in the limits for psychiatric, rehabilitation,and long-term hospitals and units.Response: We are recommending an update that is consistent with the Administrations budget proposal that, on average, all hospitals receive an update intheir payments for FY 1990 equal to the market basket percentage increaseminus 1.5 percentage points. To date, our analyses indicate that, whilehospitals nationally continued to have positive Medicare operating marginson average in the fourth year of the prospective payment system, theselevels have fallen from the high operating margins experienced in the first2 years of the prospective payment system. For this reason, we believea prospective payment system update somewhat higher than the updates inpast years is generally appropriate in order to ensure the availabilityof high quality care to Medicare beneficiaries. However, we believe thatan average update factor lower than the market basket rate of increaseis needed to continue to encourage hospitals to better control their costs.Although we are recommending an update that averages the market basketpercentage increase minus 1.5 percentage points for all prospective paymentsystem hospitals, we recommend differentiation of the update accordingto the geographic classification of the hospital. We strongly recommenda higher update for hospitals located in rural areas. We also recommendthat hospitals located in large urban areas (that is, those with a populationexceeding 1,000,000) receive a higher update than hospitals located inother urban areas. We are recommending differential updates based on geographic classificationof hospitals as a result of our research on hospital Medicare operatingmargins and our analysis of the impact the proposed FY 1990 rates (basedon a uniform update) will have on hospitals. While overall margins in FY1987, the latest period for which we have complete data, were 5.3 percent,we found a disparity between urban and rural margins. Urban hospitals hadFY 1987 inpatient Medicare operating margins of 6.3 percent. Rural hospitaloperating margins were ^0.2 percent. Further, rural hospitals under 50beds, which constitute 40 percent of rural hospitals, experienced, on average,operating margins of ^2.9 percent. Because of our concerns with respectto the financial viability of rural hospitals, we believe that a higherupdate is appropriate. For hospitals in large urban areas, our data suggestthat inpatient operating margins are declining as compared to the operatingmargins of hospitals in other urban areas, although such margins remainpositive. For FY I987, our data indicate that hospitals in large urbanareas experienced margins of 5.8 percent as compared to 6.8 percent forhospitals in other urban areas. In view of the differences between costsper case and payments per case and the lower average Medicare operatingmargins in large urban areas, we agree with ProPAC that hospitals in largeurban areas should receive a higher update than hospitals in other urbanareas.The proposed FY 1990 rates are based on a uniform update equal to the percentageincrease in the market basket, currently estimated at 5.8 percent. However,because of changes to the DRG weights (including the uniform 1.35 percentreduction to account for case mix increases) and the wage index, as wellas a reduction in outlier payments over current estimated FY 1989 levels,the proposed FY 1990 rates would have a differential impact on hospitalsaccording to geographic location. The net effect of all changes would beto increase payments to rural hospitals by 3.9 percent, to large urbanhospitals by 3.9 percent, and to other urban hospitals by 4.2 percent.The net effect of all changes in the proposed rule, including the currentlaw update, is a differential impact that is the opposite of the impactthat would be appropriate based on the analysis of Medicare operating margins.Implementation of a higher update for rural hospitals and for large urbanhospitals would reverse this effect.With respect to the ProPAC recommendation regarding the labor inputs usedto construct the hospital market basket, we intend to examine the hospitalmarket basket inputs as part of our next periodic rebasing of the hospitalmarket basket.<ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M047</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10781 Filed 5-1-89; 4:55 pm]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>