<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89929-0154 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-29-89.f2.A1153</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 52, No. 188 / Friday, September 29, 1989/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Juvenile Justice Statistics and Systems Development Program</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention,Justice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of reissuance of a solicitation for applicationsto establish a Juvenile Justice Statistics and Systems Development Program.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention(OJJDP), pursuant to sections 241 and 242 of the Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention Act, as amended, is sponsoring a program to establish a JuvenileJustice Statistics and Systems Development Program. The purpose of thisprogram is to develop and implement strategies for improving:andbullet; The quality and utility of national and subnational (state andlocal) statistics on juvenile justice; andandbullet; Decision making and management information systems within thejuvenile justice system.This effort will assist OJJDP in implementing the recommendations fromthe Assessment of National Juvenile Justice Statistics. This requires formulatingand implementing a program of national and subnational juvenile justicestatistics that promotes the development and effective use of statisticsfor system wide and individual agency planning and management; policy andprogram development and, research and evaluation at the Federal, stateand local level. The scope of the program related to improving nationaland subnational statistics includes Federally sponsored national surveysof individuals regarding their experience as victims and/or offenders aswell as Federally-sponsored administrative surveys that involve the collectionof data from local reporting units regarding some aspect of the justicesystem response to these juveniles.In addition to performing the tasks related to planning and improving nationaland subnational statistical networks and products, the recipient will beresponsible for:andbullet; Assessing operational juvenile justice agencies' decision makingand related management information systems;andbullet; Developing prototypes for decision making and related managementinformation systems and promoting the effective use of the informationgenerated by the systems for planning, management and resource allocationdevelopment;andbullet; Developing training and technical assistance materials to promotethe adoption of the prototype systems for test sites; andandbullet; Providing intensive training and technical assistance to implementthe prototypes in the test sites.It is expected that these two tracks: National Statistics and Systems Development,will complement each other and will improve the capability of Federal,state and local, public and private juvenile justice agencies to understandthe needs of the juvenile population they serve and as a result more effectivelymanage their resources for delinquents and other juveniles in need of services.<T3>Eligibility: </T3>Applications are invited from public agencies andprivate organizations which can demonstrate the capability to effectivelycarry out the mission of the Juvenile Justice Statistics and Systems DevelopmentProgram to enter into a cooperative agreement with OJJDP. The project periodwill be five years, with incremental budget periods. OJJDP has allocatedup to $800,000 for the initial budget period of 18 months. Based on successfulcompletion of the first budget period, the recipient of the cooperativeagreement will be eligible for several non-competing awards that are anticipatedover the program period. Applicants are encouraged to submit cost-competitiveproposals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>The deadline for receipt of applications in the OJJDP Officeis January 15, 1990. No application material delivered after that datewill be considered. For further information contact: Barbara Allen-Hagen,Research and Program Development Division (202/724-5929), or John Dawson,Special Emphasis Division (202/724-5911), Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, 633 Indiana Ave., NW., Washington, DC 20531. Inorder to provide clarification and guidance to prospective applicants,within 45 days of publication of this program announcement, not later thanNovember 17, 1989, OJJDP will hold a meeting to answer any questions regardingthe program and application procedures.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="72">JUVENILE JUSTICE STATISTICS AND SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">I. Definitions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">II. Introduction and Background</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">III. Program Goals and Objectives</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">IV. Program Strategy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">V. Dollar Amount and Duration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">VI. Eligibility Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">VII. Application Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">VIII. Procedures and Criteria for Selection</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">IX. Submission of Applications</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">X. Civil Rights Compliance</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Definitions</ITAG>The following definitions are offered to clarify terms and concepts frequentlyused in this solicitation. Because one of the purposes of this programis to help OJJDP further define the parameters of a national statisticalprogram and a model decision making system(s), these definitions are subjectto change.<T3>Juvenile_</T3>any person under the age of 18 in the United States (1)who is or may be, for statutorily determined conduct or circumstances (e.g.delinquency noncriminal misbehavior and abuse/neglect), subject to theadjudication and supervision processes of the juvenile court, or (2) who,although not described by criterion (1) above, is under the age of 18 andis either under criminal court jurisdiction or is a victim of a criminaloffense.<T3>Juvenile and Criminal Justice System Response_</T3>any official action(arrest/taking into custody, filing a petition, detention order, diversion,waiver/transfer, adjudication, disposition, probation order, commitment/placement,release from custody/jurisdiction, etc.) made in response to acts committedby or again a juvenile (delinquency, status offense, or abuse/neglect orcriminal victimization) that may come before the juvenile or criminal courtfor adjudication, disposition or judicial review. These actions may betaken by local and/or state agencies depending on the locus of the authority.<T3>National Juvenile Justice Statistics Program_</T3>a series of routinelyadministered data collection efforts that are designed to produce current,reliable, nationally representative data regarding the extent and natureof juvenile offending and victimization and the juvenile or criminal justicesystem response.<T3>Subnational Statistics_</T3>data routinely gathered on juvenile orcriminal justice system response generated or maintained by any local orstate agency or organization with the appropriate statutory or delegatedauthority to perform such a function.<T3>Assessment Recommendations_</T3>a series of recommendations containedin a draft document entitled, ``The Assessment of National Juvenile JusticeStatistics: An Agenda for Action'', (hereinafter referred to as ``Agenda''),James P. Lynch, based on a jointly-sponsored OJJDP/Bureau of Justice Statisticsassessment of Federally-sponsored national data collection efforts regardingjuveniles as victims and offenders. Copies of this document can be obtainedby calling Barbara Allen-Hagen, at 202/724-5929.<T3>Management Information System (MIS) Prototype_</T3>a proposed set (theminimum number) of variables and data elements with standardized definitionsfor juvenile or criminal justice system responses that meet local or stateagency information needs, as well as national information system requirementsfor developing national estimates regarding juvenile justice system responseto juvenile victims and offenders. Model or prototype management informationsystems will be developed for each component agency of the juvenile justicesystem or, where applicable, the criminal justice system.<T3>Decision Making System Prototype_</T3>a systematic approach to decisionmaking which delineates the range of juvenile or criminal justice systemresponses that can be made by local/state agencies regarding the processingof juveniles through each decision point in the juvenile or criminal justicesystem from initial contact with law enforcement or referral to juvenileor family court or court of similar jurisdiction through disposition andrelease from jurisdiction.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Introduction and Background</ITAG>OJJDP and the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) undertook the first majorassessment of the quality and utility of existing national statistics onjuveniles as victims and offenders. The overwhelming conclusion of thisassessment was that critical information on the extent and nature of juvenilecrime and victimization was seriously deficient for both policy and researchpurposes. In addition, national, state, and local data on important aspectsof the justice system response are fragmented, non-comparable, or non-existent.Further, if significant improvements were to be made, the current inadequaciesof the existing system would have to be approached systematically. Theproduct of this effort, ``The Assessment of National Juvenile Justice Statistics:An Agenda for Action'', outlines a comprehensive series of recommendationsfor improving the quality, utility and accessibility of data for national,state and local uses. Incorporated in the discussion of the recommendationsare steps to be taken to achieve a particular information goal. For nationaland subnational statistics these steps range from conducting secondaryanalysis of existing data to initiating new data collection efforts.There is general consensus that there is a need to improve juvenile justicedecision making related to planning, policy and program development andmanagement within and across juvenile justice agency lines. Often decisionsare not guided by explicit policies or criteria. These decisions are ferquentlymade in the absence of critical information that is often not availablewithin a single agency or is not shared between agencies. Both of theseinadequacies need to be addressed simultaneously for effective managementof juvenile justice resources. For example, in order to determine the needfor additional detention beds, a jurisdiction needs to specify the policies/screeningcriteria used to make detention decisions; to identify where the decisionsare made; and, to develop information on the number and types of youthdetained as well as their lenghts of stay. Without this type of information,population projections that may form the basis for expenditure of fundswill be flawed. There are a host of basic policy and information needs,such as those identified in the above example, that are common to almostany juvenile justice ``system'' that should be identified, and, aroundwhich a model decision making system(s) should be developed. Therefore,it is necessary to assess decision making policies and procedures, delineatingagency-level activities at each critical decision point in juvenile justicesystem. In addition, the assessment should document agencies use of currentlycollected data; and from this assessment develop a prototypical decisionmaking and related complementary management information system(s). Thelocal management information system(s) must be designed to contribute tothe development of a national base of information on critical aspects ofthe juvenile justice system response to juvenile crime and victimization.The Juvenile Justice Statistics and Systems Development Program is an integralpart of the strategy to implement the recommendations to improve nationaland subnational statistics, as well as to improve the decision making capabilityof local juvenile justice agencies. The program is being established toguide choices regarding the future direction of national statistics andmethods for assisting the development of local decision making and informationsystems data collection efforts. Finally it will focus on integrating thesetwo activities to ensure that local and state information systems can becomethe building blocks for a national juvenile justice statistics program.This is the beginning of a long term commitment which is needed to documentand monitor trends in the level and nature of delinquency and victimization,as well as the juvenile justice system's response to these problems. Oneof the major functions of this program will be the dissemination of existinginformation for policy-making purposes as well as to provide greater accessof existing data sets to the research community for policy analysis andprogram evaluation.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Program Goal and Objectives</ITAG>There are two major goals of this program:andbullet; To create a national juvenile justice statistics program thatis responsive to Federal, state and local information needs; andandbullet; To improve systemwide decisionmaking and management informationcapabilities of juvenile justice system and component agencies.A national juvenile justice statistics program must be developed that producesuseful and reliable national and subnational statistics on juveniles thatinform the public about the extent and nature of juvenile delinquency andvictimization, their correlates and consequences, as well as juvenile justicesystem response to these social problems. This program must yield dataon these phenomena that are useful for policy and program development andevaluation at the Federal, state and local level.A concurrent goal of this program is to improve the capability of the juvenilejustice system and its component agencies to respond to the problems ofjuvenile crime and victimization, through the development and testing ofprototypical decisionmaking and management information systems. The programis designed to promote the understanding and the use of prototypical systemwidejuvenile justice decisionmaking policies and practices to assess, monitorand improve the administration of juvenile justice. In addition to supportingsystems improvement, the program also is intended to contribute to buildinga national statistical system which promotes the effective use of statisticsfor planning, resource allocation and other juvenile justice system managementdecisions at the Federal, state and local level.In order to achieve these goals, a comprehensive program to improve thequality and utility of national and subnational statistics, and decisionmakingmust be developed and implemented. The Assessment of National JuvenileJustice Statistics has outlined a broad agenda for making needed improvementsin national and subnational statistics. The establishment of the JuvenileJustice Statistics and Systems Development Program is intended to buildupon this work. The recipient will be responsible for providing the necessarytechnical and substantive resources to achieve the following objectivesduring the first 18-month phase of the program's operation:National Statistics Objectivesandbullet; Assist in formulating long-term and short-term plans for systematicallyimproving juvenile statistics, including prioritizing information needs;choosing which Assessment Recommendations to pursue; and carrying out thenecessary steps to implement these plans;andbullet; Assess the potential of existing subnational statistical systems/networksfor contributing data to a national statistical reporting system; andandbullet; Develop a strategy for the analysis, publication and disseminationof existing national and subnational data on juveniles and the justicesystem;Systems Development Objectivesandbullet; Assess operational juvenile justice agencies' decisionmaking andrelated management information activities, policies, and procedures;andbullet; Develop prototypical decisionmaking systems and complementarymanagement information systems as well as model output reports pertainingto planning, management, resource development and allocation, and intra-and inter-agency coordination;andbullet; Develop training and technical assistance materials to transferprototypes;andbullet; Develop and implement a strategy for testing the effectivenessof the prototypical decisionmaking and management information systems;andandbullet; Determine the feasibility of building a network of jurisdictionsto contribute to a national juvenile justice statistical reporting programon juvenile justice system response.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Program Strategy</ITAG>OJJDP planning and program development activities are guided by a frameworkwhich specifies four sequential phases: research, development, demonstrationand dissemination. The framework guides the decisionmaking process regardingthe funding of future phases of the program.This program falls within the research and development phases. The purposeof the research phase is to develop new knowledge and to monitor trendsto inform and assess policy and program development. The national/subnationalstatistics objective fall under this phase. The purpose of the developmentphase is to develop prototypes and, to determine their effectiveness througha testing process, and to disseminate the prototypes to the field. Thesystems development objectives fall within this phase.This initiative is designed to evolve along two tracks. The first involvesdeveloping strategies to improve the quality and utility of federally sponsorednational data collection efforts, including surveys of individuals regardingtheir experience as victims and/or offenders as well as administrativesurveys that involve the collection of data from local reporting unitsregarding some aspect of the justice system response. The second trackinvolves efforts to improve the quality and utility of state and localdecisionmaking and related management information systems. While each trackhas its defined objectives and expected results, the two tracks are clearlyinterdependent. Therefore, although the activities of each track requiresomewhat different skills, strategies and schedules, it is critical thatthe grantee structure an approach to ensure that the development of thetwo tracks is closely coordinated and that the results of each track complementthe work of the other.Each track will involve several basic stages of development. As will bedescribed below, it is anticipated that stages one through three of thenational statistics track, and stages one and two of the systems developmenttrack will be completed during the first 18-month project period. Eachstage of the process detailed below is designed to result in complete andpublishable products, and a dissemination strategy to inform the fieldof the development of the program and the results and products of eachstage.A project advisory committee, consisting of knowledgeable survey methodologists;statisticians; data users and suppliers; practitioners and experts in juvenilejustice policy, systems and resource management will be appointed to providedirection, guidance and oversight to the program in carrying out its functions,reviewing plans, and products. Two subcommittees, supplemented by technicalconsultants as necessary, should be formed to advise the development ofeach track. The role of the advisory board is viewed as critical to thesuccess of the program.National Statistical Track<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 1_Assessment</ITAG>During this stage the recipient will review the recommendations of the``Agenda'', and other relevant literature, and assist OJJDP in selectingthose recommendations that should be adopted and in what priority orderthey should be pursued. It is anticipated that this will require an intensiveprocess involving the participation of OJJDP, the recipient, and the projectadvisory board. This stage will also involve preliminary identificationof national data system requirements that will inform the development oflocal management information system prototypes under the Systems DevelopmentTrack.To assist in the prioritization and selection of recommendations to bepursued, the recipient will provide the necessary background informationon the resources, technology and agency cooperation that would be requiredto implement the recommendations. Based on the approval by OJJDP of thefirst set of recommendations to be adopted, the recipient will identifythe steps involved in implementing each selected recommendation. Finally,the recipient will develop a detailed, comprehensive plan for the implementationof the selected recommendations focused on improvement of national andsubnational statistics, and on the asnalysis and dissemination of existinginformation.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities</ITAG>The major activities of this stage are:andbullet; Establishment and convening of the project advisory committeeboard;andbullet; Development of an Assessment Plan specifying the approach foreach step of the assessment stage;andbullet; Identification of the national data system information requirementsthat should be incorporated into the development of the prototype localmanagement information systems under the System Development Track;andbullet; Review of the National Justice Statistics Assessment and prioritizationof recommendations; specifying the approach for developing long-term andshort-term objectives for improving juvenile justice statistics,andbullet; Specifications of the steps required to implement selected recommendations;and,andbullet; Development of an Assessment report detailing plans to designand implement the selected national/subnational statistical programs andto analyze and disseminate existing data. (It should be recognized thateach of the data collection activities which are selected for implementationwill likely proceed at a different pace through the next three stages ofdevelopment, depending on the specific nature of the activity.)<ITAG tagnum="81">Products</ITAG>The products to be completed during this stage are:1. Assessment Plan for carrying out the Program;2. Recommendations for prioritization of Statistics Assessment recommendations;3. Report specifying the resources, technology, agency cooperation, andthe implementation activities for each of the priority recommendations;4. Recommendations for assessing quality and utility of subnational statisticalsystems/networks for contributing to national information on juvenile justicesystem response;5. An Assessment Report summarizing the results of the assessment stage,including a plan for developing selected national/subnational statisticalprograms; and6. Dissemination strategy to inform the field of the development of theprogram, and the products and results of this stage.<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 2_Analysis and Dissemination</ITAG>Upon successful completion of stage one, the recipient will conduct thoseactivities in the plan developed during the assessment stage which involveanalysis and dissemination of existing national and/or subnational datasets to inform policy and program development. This will involve the developmentof a dissemination strategy to: (1) Make available to the field statisticalinformation from existing national and subnational data sets; and (2) toexamine the utility of existing data sets for addressing selected policyissues.The first task will be accomplished by preparing a national report on juvenileoffending and victimization, which will be updated bi-annually by the program.The second task will involve the preparation of papers based on analysisof one or, more data sets to address particular policy or program issuesin juvenile justice. The topics will be selected by OJJDP in consultationwith the recipient and the program advisory committee. The analysis willalso include an examination of the utility of a particular data set formeeting information needs in the field.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities</ITAG>The major activities of this stage are:andbullet; Development of a plan for the analysis and dissemination activities;andbullet; Selection of topics for issue papers;andbullet; Preparation of a draft and final national report on results ofjuvenile offending and victimization;andbullet; Preparation of issue papers based on analysis of existing datasets; and,andbullet; Development and implementation of a dissemination strategy.ProductsThe products to be completed during this stage are:1. Plan for conducting the analysis and dissemination activities;2. Draft and final national report on juvenile offending and victimization;3. A minimum of three papers on selected policy or program issues;<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 3_New Survey Design and Feasibility Studies</ITAG>During this stage, the recipient will initiate the design of new data collectionactivities included in the plan developed during the assessment stage.These may consist of revisions to existing national data collection efforts,or the design and implementation of new efforts. This stage will involvethree steps as appropriate. For those data collection efforts that areto be revised, the first step consists of secondary analysis of the relevantnational data set. For new data collection initiatives, the first stepwill consist of evaluating existing data collection efforts and conductingsecondary analyses of these, if available, to determine the potential forcollecting the desired information through an existing survey mechanism.The second step will be the conduct of feasibility studies to develop moredefinitive information on the viability of particular approaches to datacollection for addressing a particular issue.Third, based upon the results of the secondary analyses and/or feasibilitystudies, the recipient will prepare a recommendation regarding the viabilityof the proposed new or revised data collection activity. As appropriate,the recommendation should include a proposed survey design, specifyingthe substantive, strategic costs and methodological requirements, and projectedcosts for full implementation of the data collection activity. It mustprovide an indepth statement of the rationale for each effort; an articulationof the specific policy, programmatic, and/or research purposes that theparticular effort is designed to address; and a justification for the proposeddesign based on the experience of the secondary analyses phase and/or thefeasibility studies.Should OJJDP choose to implement a new national data collection effort,most likely it will be supported through an interagency agreement, or acompetitively awarded cooperative agreement or contract. For the latteroptions, it is anticipated that the recipient will be excluded from competition.The recipient will however, provide the necessary consultation to assurethat the survey(s) is implemented in a manner consistent with the proposeddesign and the direction of the project advisory board.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities</ITAG>The major activities to be conducted during this stage are:andbullet; Development of a plan for the design of new data collection efforts;including the steps for each effort;andbullet; Conduct of secondary analyses of existing relevant data sets andwrite reports;andbullet; Conduct of feasibility studies;andbullet; Coordination of the design of new national activities with thelocal systems;andbullet; Preparation of draft and final recommendations for each new datacollection effort; andandbullet; Development and implementation of a dissemination strategy.<ITAG tagnum="81">Products</ITAG>The products to be completed during this stage are:1. Plan for the design of new data collection efforts;2. Draft and final recommendations for new data collection efforts; and,3. Dissemination strategy to inform the field of the development of theprogram and products of this stage.<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 4_Implementation of New Data Collection Efforts</ITAG>During this stage the recipient will provide methodological advice andoversight of newly initiated data collection efforts. Program staff andconsultants who have been involved in the design stage will serve in aconsultant capacity to organizations selected to conduct these efforts.The program's Advisory Committee will also review these efforts as appropriate.Additional ongoing activities under this stage include the refinement ofplans, re-analysis of relevant data sets for policy or program developmentpurposes, conduct of additional feasibility or pilot tests, as needed,and the production and dissemination of recurring and ad hoc reports resultingfrom the program's work.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities</ITAG>The major activities of this stage are:andbullet; Development of a plan for implementation of new data collectionefforts;andbullet; Technical Assistance to new data collection activities;andbullet; Advisory Committee review of new data collection activities, andon-going OJJDP data collection projects;andbullet; Preparation of reports based on existing and new data collectionactivities; and,andbullet; Identification of new priorities.<ITAG tagnum="81">Products</ITAG>1. Plan for implementation of new data collection efforts;2. Reports on the status of new data collection activities; and3. Recommendations for new priority areas.Systems Development Track<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 1_Assessment</ITAG>The recipient will be responsible for designing and conducting an assessmentof selected state and local decision making systems; existing managementinformation systems and the current or potential analytical uses of operationaldata for juvenile justice system management, policy development, planningand evaluation; and the potential of local data collection activities forcontributing to a national data collection program on juvenile justicesystem response. The assessment must be designed to provide OJJDP withspecific recommendations for optimal operation of both decision makingand complementary management information systems that will be the basisfor the prototype development activities occurring in the next stage aswell as the development of a strategy for a national program for collectionof data on juvenile justice system response.During this stage the recipient will conduct a review of the literatureon juvenile justice decision making policies, procedures and practicesat the system as well as the individual agency level, and on managementinformation systems that gather and analyze data that are designed to supportdecision making activities. Based on the review, and the guidance fromthe advisory committee and OJJDP, the recipient will develop criteria toselect and conduct onsite assessments of existing state and local agencydecision making and management information systems.The assessment will focus on system design and operation, by examiningthe decision making and information activities of the individual componentagencies as well as activities involved in referring youth from one componentof the system to another. It will examine who makes decisions regardingthe handling of different types of youthful offenders and nonoffenders,what types of decisions are made, and the subsequent resources expendedin responding to those decisions. It will also examine the type of informationthat is collected by component agencies, who collect it, how it is collected,how it is analyzed and how it is used. This will include a review of thepurpose and usefulness of output reports generated for use by juvenilejustice agencies. In order to monitor trends and to make critical managementdecisions on an agency and systemwide basis in the areas of planning, policyformulation, program development, resources allocation, research evaluationand budget development and control. Particular attention will be paid tothe potential contribution of various management information systems toa national data collection system.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities </ITAG>The major activities of this stage are:andbullet; Convening the project advisory committee;andbullet; Development of an assessment plan specifying the approach foreach step of the assessment stage;andbullet; Review of the literature;andbullet; Development of the criteria for site assessment activities;andbullet; Implementation of the site assessment;andbullet; Development of preliminary testing design guidelines;andbullet; Development of recommendations for the national reporting programon juvenile justice system response based on an assessment of existingmanagement information systems;andbullet; Development of a draft and final assessment report; andandbullet; Development of a dissemination strategy.<ITAG tagnum="81">Products</ITAG>The products to be completed during this stage are:1. Project Advisory Committee Recommendations;2. Assessment Plan;3. Literature Review;4. Criteria for Site Assessment Activities;5. Recommendations with regard to Preliminary Guideline for Test Design;6. Preliminary strategy for developing a national reporting program onjuvenile justice system response based on local/state reporting units;7. Draft and Final Assessment Report; and8. Dissemination strategy to inform the field of the development of theprogram and products and results of this stage.<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 2_Prototype Development</ITAG>Upon successful completion of stage one, the recipient will develop oneor more prototypes of a juvenile justice decision making and complementarymanagement information system for implementation at the state and locallevel. The prototypes will explain how to operationalize and assess agencypolicy through the implementation of a well-defined decision making systemand a supportive management information system. The prototype informationwill be detailed in operational manuals which contain detailed specificationsfor the development, implementation and operation of the prototypical stateand local decision making and management information systems. The prototypeswill describe, for each component agency of the juvenile justice system,how to define policy and implement it through the establishment of decisionmaking criteria, practices and procedures for processing juveniles; andthe establishment of a management information system that will providethe information specified by the decision criteria, as well as data onthe flow of juveniles through the system.In developing the prototype management information systems, the requirementsof a natural data system must be addressed. This must include recommendationsregarding: the scope of initial program, sampling issues related to implementation,identification of both incentives and necessary assurances regarding theuse and disclosure of data in order to ensure participation in the program,and the identification of specific products or reports that the systemwould be capable of generating for national purposes.Because of the need to demonstrate the potential utility of both the decisionmaking model and the management information system, the prototypes mustinclude the identification of the practical uses and potential benefitsto an agency as well as to the overall juvenile justice system that mayadopt the prototype system. Model output reports that would result fromthe implementation of the prototypes should be designed. The recipientwill prepare examples of such reports and include those for: planning (e.g.,development of population or personnel projections); policy formulation(e.g., establishing criteria for use of secure detention, or for settingdispositional/release guidelines); program development (e.g., determiningthe need for a urinalysis program to monitor probationers, or the needfor runaway shelter); budgeting (e.g., setting per diem rates for contractservices, determining juvenile justice system annual expenditures by agency);program and policy evaluation (e.g., determining the effectiveness of jailremoval policies and alternatives, or the impact of a truancy reductionprogram on reported daytime burglaries); and research (e.g., documentingtrends in the percentage of personal crimes involving juvenile gangs, orthe percentage of violent crimes in which kidnapping of a juvenile wasa corollary offense). This will involve identifying necessary decisionmaking activities and corresponding data elements, minimum requirementsregarding the data collection procedures, for each use.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities</ITAG>The major activities of this stage are:andbullet; Participation of the Advisory Committee;andbullet; Development of a plan for prototype development;andbullet; Development of the decision making and information system prototypesand related materials;andbullet; Development of recommendations regarding the scope, content andapproach to developing a national reporting program on juvenile justicesystem response based on data generated by the management information systemprototypes; and,andbullet; Development of a dissemination strategy.<ITAG tagnum="81">Products</ITAG>1. Prototype Development Plan;2. Dissemination Strategy to inform the field of the development of theprogram, and the products and results of this stage;3. Draft and Final Prototype Designs and Operation Manuals; and4. Draft and Final Design for the National Reporting Program on JuvenileJustice System Response.<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 3_Training, and Technical Assistance</ITAG>While a decision to develop training and technical assistance materialsand to test the prototype design(s) will be made during or following thecompletion of the prototype system development stage, the applicant isexpected to explain the methods and approaches that would be employed toimplement all of the stages. As noted, funds for this stage will be providedin the initial award period. Funds for the testing stage will be providedthrough noncompetitive continuation awards. In order to ensure the applicant'sunderstanding of the entire development effort, however, the initial applicationmust address and explain the implementation and coordination of all fourstages of the initiative (i.e., assessment, prototype development, trainingand technical assistance development, and testing).Upon successful completion of stage 3 and with the approval of OJJDP, thegrantee will transfer the prototype decision making and management informationsystem design(s), including policies and procedures, into a training andtechnical assistance package. A comprehensive training manual which outlinesthe major issues that need to be addressed in developing programs for stateand local subnational policy level decision makers, and detail programprototypes, must be developed to encourage and facilitate implementationof prototypes. The training manual should be the focal point of the entiretraining and technical assistance package. The major audience will be policymakers and practitioners involved in resource allocation and program developmentat the state and local subnational levels. The manual must be designedfor a formal training setting, and for independent use in jurisdictionsthat do not participate in formal training sessions. Therefore, the manualshould include a complete description of the decision making prototypeand incorporate related policies and procedures to operationalize the prototypes.The manual should contain instructions and supplementary materials fortrainers to facilitate presentation, and ensure understanding and successfuladaptation and implementation of the prototypes.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities</ITAG>The major activities of this stage are:andbullet; Preparation of a plan for developing the training and technicalassistance package;andbullet; Development of the training and technical assistance materials;andbullet; Recruitment and preparation of the training and technical assistancepersonnel;andbullet; Testing of the training curriculum manual;andbullet; Participation and review by the advisory committee; and,andbullet; development and implementation of a dissemination strategy whichmay include workshops or seminars for national and subnational level decisionmarkers.<ITAG tagnum="81">Products</ITAG>The products to be completed during this stage are:1. Plan for the development of the training and technical assistance package;2. Identification of training and technical assistance personnel;3. Draft and final training and technical assistance package-includingthe training curriculum manual and information materials; and,4. Dissemination strategy to inform the field of the development of theprogram, and the products and results of this stage.<ITAG tagnum="81">Stage 4_Prototype Implementation and Testing</ITAG>This stage of the program consists of a test, in selected jurisdictions,of the prototypes developed in Stage II. The recipient will be requiredto assist the OJJDP in developing a solicitation to make awards to testsites. It will also be required to provide intensive training and technicalassistance to help test sites implement the decision making and managementinformation system prototypes on an experimental basis. Finally, the granteewill be expected to work cooperatively with an independent evaluator toensure the integrity of the data collection and feedback activities.<ITAG tagnum="81">Activities</ITAG>The major activities of this stage are:andbullet; Develop recommendations for a program announcement to select testsites;andbullet; Assist OJJDP in review and selection of test sites;andbullet; Provide intensive training and technical assistance to test sitesregarding the implementation of prototypes on an experimental basis;andbullet; Develop procedures for working cooperatively with the programevaluator, particularly in the areas of data collection and feedback; andandbullet; Develop and implement a dissemination strategy.<ITAG tagnum="81">Products</ITAG>The major products for this stage are:1. Recommendations for the program announcement for test sites;2. Plan for providing training and technical assistance to test sites;and,3. Dissemination strategy to inform the field of the development of theprogram, and the products and results of this stage.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Dollar Amount and Duration</ITAG>A cooperative agreement will be awarded to the successful applicant. Theproject period is five (5) years. OJJDP has allocated up to $800,000 forthe first budget period of 18 months. Funds for noncompeting continuationawards within the approved five-year project period may be withheld forjustifiable reasons. They include, but are not limited to:1. There is no continued need for program activity;2. Failure to comply with agency fiscal integrity requirements, includingbut not limited to:(a) The grantee is delinquent in submitting required reports;(b) Adequate funds of the grantor agency are not available to support theproject;(c) The grantee has failed to show satisfactory progress in achieving theobjectives of the project or otherwise failed to meet the terms and conditionsof award;(d) A grantee's management practices have failed to provide adequate stewardshipof grantor agency's funds;(c) Outstanding audit exceptions have not been cleared; or3. Any other reason which indicates that continued funding would not bein the best interest of the Federal government.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Eligibility Requirements</ITAG>Applications are invited from public agencies and private organizations.Applicant organizations may choose to submit joint proposals with othereligible organizations as long as one organization is designated in theapplication as the applicant and any coapplicants are designated as such.Coapplicants must demonstrate they have the capability to work togethereffectively in order to be considered as co-applicants for this program.In order to expand the pool of eligible candidates, applications will beaccepted from for-profit agencies as long as they agree to waive theirprofit fee and accept only actual allowable costs. Applicants and co-applicantsmust demonstrate that they have prior experience in the design, conductand implementation of multijurisdictional surveys; demonstrated knowledgeof issues associated with juvenile justice statistics; prior experiencein the development and delivery of training or technical assistance; andresearch and evaluation of the juvenile justice system.Applicants must also demonstrate that they have the management capability,fiscal integrity and financial responsibility, including but not limitedto and acceptable accounting system and internal controls, compliance withgrant fiscal requirements, such capability to effectively implement a projectof this size and scope. Applicants who fail to demonstrate that they havethe capability to manage this program will be ineligible for funding consideration.Applicant organizations may choose to submit proposals with other eligibleorganizations, as long as one organization is designated in the applicationas the applicant and any coapplicants are designated as such. In orderto be eligible for consideration the applicant, together with any co-applicant,must have experience in each of the following areas specified in A-C below.A. Design, development, or implementation of national or subnational (multijurisdictional)data collection efforts regarding crime and delinquency or the criminalor juvenile justice system; or, the maintenance of a data archive for thepromotion of secondary analysis of data for research, policy or programevaluation;B. Applied research or policy analysis regarding crime, delinquency, orthe criminal/juvenile justice system; and,C. The development of decision making and management information systems,and the development and delivery of training and technical assistance tostate and local criminal or juvenile justice agencies.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Application Requirements</ITAG>All applicants must submit a completed Standard Form 424, Application forFederal Assistance (SF-424), including a program narrative, a detailedbudget, and budget narrative. All applications must include the informationoutlined in this section of the solicitation (section VI) in part IV, ProgramNarrative of the application (SF-424).In accordance with Executive Order 12549, 28 CFR 67.510, applicants mustalso provide a certification they have not been debarred (voluntarily orinvoluntarily) from the receipt of Federal funds. Form 4662/2 which willbe supplied with the application package must be submitted with the application.Pursuant to the regulations implementing the Drug-Free Workplace Act of1988, 28 CFR part 67, subpart F, applicants must submit a certificationregarding Drug-Free Workplace Requirements. The certification form willbe provided in the application kit.In submitting applications that contain more than one organization, therelationships among the parties must be set forth in the application. Asa general rule, organizations that describe their working relationshipin the development of products and the delivery of services as primarilycooperative or collaborative in nature will be considered co-applicant's.In the event of a co-applicant submission, one co-applicant must be designatedas the payee to receive and imburse project funds and be responsible forthe supervision and coordination of the activities of the other co-applicant.Under this arrangement, each organization would agree to be jointly andseverally responsible for all project funds and services. Each co-applicantmust sign the SF-424 and indicate their acceptance of the conditions ofjoint and several responsibility with the other co-applicant.Applications that include non-competitive contracts for the provision ofspecific services must include a sole source justification for any procurementin excess of $25,000. The following information must be included in theapplication (SF-424) part IV Program Narrative:A. Organizational CapabilityApplicants must demonstrate that they are eligible to compete for thiscooperative agreement on the basis of eligibility criteria establishedin section VI. of this solicitation.<ITAG tagnum="81"> 1. Organizational Experience</ITAG>Applicants must concisely describe their organizational experience withrespect to the eligibility criteria specified in Section VI. above. Applicantsmust demonstrate how their organizational experience and current capabilitieswill enable them to achieve the goals and objectives of this initiative.Applicants should highlight significant organizational accomplishmentswhich demonstrate their responsiveness to the needs of the field, reliabilityin terms of producing quality products in a timely fashion, and havingthe ability to work effectively with operational justice agencies.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Project Staffing</ITAG>Applicants must provide a list of key personnel responsible for managingand implementing the program. Applicants must present detailed positiondescriptions, qualifications and selection criteria for each position,whether they are salaried or staff, hired by contractor(s) of the grantee.In addition, if key functions or services are to be provided by consultantson a contractual basis, the applicant must indicate the individuals tobe hired for specific tasks, or the specific skills that would be neededto perform these tasks and the means of acquiring them. Resumes must beprovided and may be submitted as appendices to the application. Applicantsmust demonstrate that the proposed staff complement have the requisitebackground and experience to accomplish the major responsibilities outlinedin Section IV above. Applicants should highlight significant accomplishmentsof the proposed staff in relation to their respective roles in the project.In addition, the percentage of each staff person's time committed to theproject must be clearly indicated in the budget narrative.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Financial Capability</ITAG>In addition to the assurances provided in Part V, Assurances (SF424), applicantsmust also demonstrate that their organization has or can establish fiscalcontrols and accounting procedures which assure that Federal funds availableunder this agreement are disbursed and accounted for properly. Applicantswho have not previously received federal funds will be asked to submita copy to the Office of Justice Assistance, Research and Statistics (OJARS)Accounting System and Financial Capability Questionnaire (OJARS From 7120/1).Other applicants may be requested to submit this form. All questions areto be answered regardless of instructions (Section C.I.B. note). The CPAcertification is required only of those applicants who have not previouslyreceived Federal funding.B. Program Strategy and GoalsApplicants must demonstrate their understanding of the goals and objectivesof the overall program as well as each track. They must also articulatetheir specific approaches to implementing the program strategy outlinedin the solicitation. They must explain how they will address all the activitiesand develop all of the products for each stage contained in both tracksand propose a strategy for coordinating the activities of both tracks.C. Program Implementation PlanApplicants must prepare a plan that outlines the major activities involvedin implementing the program, describe how they will allocate availableresources to implement the program, and how the program will be managed.1. The plan must include:a. An annotated organizational chart depicting the roles and describingthe responsibilities of key organizational/functional components relatedto the National Statistics and Systems Development Tracks and their respectivephases.b. The implementation plan must clearly indicate how staff and other resources(such as consultants, project advisory board) will be utilized for eachof the major activities.c. A concise discussion of the coordination and administration issues relatedto the program strategy and how the grantee's organizational structureand management strategy would address these issues.2. Applicants must develop a detailed time-task plan for the first 18 monthbudget period, clearly identifying major milestones related to each phase.This must include designation of organizational and staff responsibility,and a schedule for the completion of the tasks and products identifiedin Section IV. In preparing the time task plan, applicants should be mindfulof the OMB Clearance procedures pursuant to 5 CFR part 1320, ControllingPaperwork Burdens on the Public.D. Program BudgetApplicants shall provide an 18-month budget with a detailed justificationfor the first budget period for all costs by object class category as specifiedin the SF 424. Costs must be reasonable and the bases for these costs mustbe well documented in the budget narrative. Applications submitted by co-applicantsand/or those containing contract(s) must include detailed budgets and budgetnarratives for each organization's expenses. The applicant must also budgetfor the costs of convening at least three project advisory board meetingsduring the initial budget period.Applicants must also estimate the costs to complete the remaining stagesof the program (and any recurring activities, such as preparing the bi-annualReport to the Nation on Juveniles as Victims and Offenders) by stage foreach track. Cost estimates should be broken down into two subsequent budgetperiods of 18 months and 24 months each. These estimates must be recordedon Section E, Budget Estimates of Federal Funds, on the SF 424.<ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Procedures and Criteria for Selection</ITAG>In general, all applications received will be reviewed in terms of theirresponsiveness to this solicitation and the specific program applicationrequirements set forth in Section VII. Applications will be evaluated bya peer review panel in a meeting according to the OJJDP Competition andPeer Review Policy, 28 CFR part 34, subpart B, published August 2, 1985,at 50 FR 31366-31367. Site visits may be conducted by peer review panelistsand/or OJJDP staff to verify information provided by the applicant(s) rankedthrough peer review as best qualified for further consideration.Specifically, applications will be rated according to the following criteriaand point values (weights):A. The Problem to be Addressed by the Project is Clearly Stated. This criterionincludes a clear, concise, well justified statement of the problem, andevidence of knowledge of relevant literature, potential impediments toand opportunities for establishing a national statistical program on juvenilesas victims and offenders and the justice system response. The applicantdemonstrates knowledge of the need for, as well as the problems and issuesrelated to, the development of statistical programs and prototypical decision-makingand management information systems. (10 Points) B. The Objectives of the Proposed Project are Clearly Defined. This criterionincludes a clear and definitive statement of applicant's understandingof the goals and objectives of the overall program as well as both thenational statistics and the systems development tracks. Special attentionwill be paid to the applicant's articulation of the anticipated benefitsof this program for the field. (10 Points) C. The Project Design is Sound and Contains Program Elements Directly Linkedto the Achievement of Project Objectives. This criterion includes_appropriateness,conceptual clarity and technical adequacy of the approach to the activitiesand products of each stage of the program for meeting the goals and objectives;and potential utility of proposed products. (30 Points) D. The Project Management Structure is Adequate to the Successful Conductof the Project. (Total 30 Points) This criterion includes: (1) adequacy and appropriateness of the project management structure andactivities specified in the project implementation plan, and the feasibilityof the time-task plan. (15 Points) (2) the qualifications of staff identified to manage and implement theprogram including research team staff, project advisory board members,and working group members. This criterion also includes the clarity andappropriateness of position descriptions, required qualifications and staffselection criteria relative to the specific functions set out in the projectimplementation plan. (15 Points) E. Organizational Capability is Demonstrated at a Level Sufficient to SuccessfullySupport the Project. This criterion includes the extent and quality oforganizational experience in juvenile justice research and statistics andin the development, delivery and coordination of large, multi-site programsto improve the efficiency and effectiveness of juvenile justice decision-making.(10 Points) F. Budgeted Costs are Reasonable, Allowable and Cost Effective for theActivities Proposed to be Undertaken. This criterion includes completeness,reasonableness, appropriateness and cost-effectiveness of the proposedcosts, in relationship to the proposed strategy and tasks to be accomplished.(10 Points) Applications will be evaluated by a peer review panel. The results of peerreview will be a relative aggregate ranking of applications in the formof ``Summary of Ratings.'' These will be based on numerical values assignedby individual peer reviewers. Peer review recommendations, in conjunctionwith the results of internal review and any necessary supplementary reviews,will assist the Administrator in considering competing applications andin selection of the application for funding. The final award decision willbe made by the OJJDP Administrator.<ITAG tagnum="84">IX. Submission of Applications </ITAG>All applicants responding to this solicitation should be aware of the followingrequirements for submission: 1. Organizations which plan to respond to this announcement are requestedto submit written notification of their intent to apply to OJJDP by October15, 1989. Such notification should specify: the name of the applicationorganization, mailing address, telephone number, and primary contact person.In the event that organizations intend to apply as co-applicants, eachof the coapplicants are to provide the above information. The submissionof this notification is requested to assist OJJDP in estimating the workloadassociated with the review of applications and for notifying potentialapplications of any supplemental information related to the preparationof their applications. OJJDP plans to convene an applicant's conferenceto provide guidance to prospective applicants on any aspect of this programand notification of meeting will be mailed to those who have submitteda letter of intent to apply. 2. Applicants must submit the original signed application and four copiesto OJJDP. The necessary forms for applications (Standard Form 424) willbe provided upon request. Applications must be received by mail or handdelivered to the OJJDP by 5:00 p.m. e.s.t. on January 15, 1990. Those applicationssent by mail should be addressed to Research and Development Program: JuvenileJustice Statistics Resource and Development Program, Office of JuvenileJustice and Delinquency Prevention, U.S. Department of Justice, 633 IndianaAvenue, NW., Washington, DC 20531. Hand delivered applications must betaken to the OJJDP, Room 782, 633 Indiana Avenue, NW., Washington, DC betweenthe hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays or Federalholidays. No application materials that are delivered after the deadlinedate will be considered.<ITAG tagnum="84">X. Civil Rights Compliance </ITAG>A. All recipients of OJJDP assistance including any contractors, must complywith the non-discrimination requirements of the Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention Act of 1974 as amended: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of1964; Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended; Title IXof the Education Amendments of 1972; the Age Discrimination Act of 1975;and the Department of Justice Non-Discrimination Regulations (28 CFR part42, subparts C, D, E, and G). B. In the event a Federal or State court or Federal or State administrativeagency makes a finding of discrimination after a due process hearing onthe grounds of race, color, religion, national origin or sex against arecipient of funds, the recipient will forward a copy of the finding tothe Office of Civil Rights Compliance (OCRC) of the Office of Justice Programs.C. Applicants shall maintain such records and submit to the OJJDP uponrequest timely, complete and accurate data establishing the fact that noperson or persons will be or have been denied or prohibited from participationin benefits of, or denied or prohibited from obtaining employment in connectionwith any program activity funded in whole or in part with funds made availableunder this program because of their race, national origin, sex, religion,handicap or age. In the case of any program under which a primary recipientof Federal funds extend financial assistance to any other recipient orcontracts with any other person(s) or group(s), such other recipient, person(s)or group(s) shall also submit such compliance reports to the primary recipientas may be necessary to enable the primary recipient to assure its civilrights compliance obligations under any award.<ITAG tagnum="6">Terrence S. Donahue,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-23229 Filed 9-28-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-18-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>