<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891025-0003 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-25-89.f2.A1002</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Aviation Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Part 21 and 23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 061CE, Special Conditions 23-ACE-44]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Special Conditions; Dornier Seastar CD-2 Series Airplanes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final Special Conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>These special conditions are being issued to become partof the type certification basis for the Claudius Dornier Seastar GmbH andCompany Model CD-2 Series amphibian airplanes. These airplanes will havenovel and unusual design features when compared to the state of technologyenvisaged in the applicable airworthiness standards for normal, utility,acrobatic, and commuter category airplanes. The novel and unusual designfeatures include the use of advanced composite materials for primary flightstructure, the location of the engines and propellers, protection fromlightning and high energy radio frequency, and emergency flotation equipmentfor which the regulations do not contain adequate or appropriate safetystandards. These special conditions contain the additional safety standardswhich the Administrator finds necessary to establish a level of safetyequivalent to that envisioned in the applicable regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>November 24, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Ervin Dvorak, Aerospace Engineer,Standards Office (ACE-110), Small Airplane Directorate, Aircraft CertificationService, Federal Aviation Administration, 601 E. 12th Street, Kansas City,Missouri 64106; telephone (816) 426-5688.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>On November 18, 1986, Claudius Dornier Seastar GmbH and Company made applicationfor a type certificate through the Luftfahrt Bundesamt (LBA) to the FAABrussels Office for the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane. At the time of application,commuter airworthiness requirements were not incorporated into part 23and certification for 12 passenger airplanes would require part 25 airworthinessstandards. The commuter category airworthiness requirement which permits a seatingconfiguration, excluding pilot seats, of 19 or less, was incorporated intopart 23 by amendment 23-34, which became effective February 17, 1987. ClaudiusDornier then made a new application for U.S. type certificate on July 31,1987 for part 23 commuter category. The Dornier Seastar Model CD-2 is a high wing twin-engine amphibian airplanewith turboprop engines that are mounted on the center-top of the parasolwing in a tandem push-pull arrangement. The airframe structure utilizescomposite materials. The maximum gross weight is 10,141 lbs. with a seatingconfiguration of 12 passengers. <ITAG tagnum="84">Type Certification Basis </ITAG>The type certification basis for the Dornier Seastar Model CD-2 airplaneis as follows: Part 21 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), andSection;21.29; Part 23 of the FAR, effective February 1, 1965, including amendments23-1 through 23-34; Special Federal Aviation Regulation (SFAR) No. 27,effective February 1, 1974, as amended by amendments 27-1 through 27-6;Part 36 of the FAR, effective December 1, 1969, as amended by amendments36-1 through amendment effective on the date of type certification; exemptions,if any; and the special conditions adopted by this rulemaking action. <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion </ITAG>Special conditions may be issued and amended, as necessary, as part ofthe type certification basis if the Administrator finds that the airworthinessstandards designated in accordance with andSection; 21.17(a)(1) do not containadequate or appropriate safety standards because of novel or unusual designfeatures of an airplane. Special conditions, as appropriate, are issuedin accordance with andSection; 11.49, after public notice as required byandSection;andSection; 11.28 and 11.29(b), effective October 14, 1980, andwill become part of the type certification basis, andSection; 21.17(a)(2).The proposed type design of the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane contains anumber of novel or unusual design features not envisaged by the applicablepart 23 airworthiness standards. Special conditions are considered necessarybecause the airworthiness requirements of Part 23 do not contain adequateor appropriate safety standards for the novel and unusual design featuresof the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane. <ITAG tagnum="84">Composite Structure </ITAG>The airframe of the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane is made of composite materialand is assembled differently from the typical semi-monocoque aluminum airframesthat have been predominant since the early 1940's. Composite materialsof the type used on the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane are generally not susceptibleto initiation of fatigue cracks by the application of repetitive loads,but are susceptible to damage in the form of cracks, breaks, and delaminationsfrom intrinsic and discrete sources growing under application of repetitiveloads. Because of this and other factors, the FAA has determined that thefatigue requirements of andSection; 23.572 are inadequate to assure thatcomposite material structure can withstand the repeated loads of variablemagnitude expected in service. The use of advanced composite materials and extensive bonding of thesematerials in primary flight structure is a novel and unusual design featurewith respect to the type of airplane construction envisaged by the existingairworthiness standards of Part 23. Because the requirements of part 23do not require the level of substantiation necessary for composite materialstructure, a special condition is being issued to include the necessaryairworthiness standards as a part of the type certification basis for theSeastar Model CD-2 airplane. This special condition is being issued toensure that a level of safety exists for airplanes made from bonded compositematerials equivalent to those existing for aluminum airplanes. The special condition will require composite structural components criticalto safe flight be evaluated by damage tolerance criteria. The damage toleranceconsideration includes principal structural elements, such as the fuselage,and the vertical and horizontal stabilizers, and their carry-through structure,since failure of these structures could have catastrophic results. Whendamage tolerance is shown to be impractical, the special condition is wordedto permit approval, based on safe-life testing. Metal detail designs maycontinue to be evaluated to the fatigue requirements of andSection; 23.572.Damage tolerance criteria for composite structure, in combination withthe existing material requirements of part 23, such as andSection;andSection;23.603 and 23.613, will provide a level of safety for the composite materialairframe structure used in the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane equivalent tothat required by the airworthiness standards of part 23.In addition to those components requiring fatigue/damage tolerance evaluations,other components that are critical to flight safety, such as movable controlsurfaces and wing flaps, must also be protected against loss of strengthor stiffness. Protection conventionally is provided through design andinspection. Since composite material strength is susceptible to manufacturingdefects and damage from discrete sources, including lightning strikes,process controls and inspectability are limited; therefore, structuresdesign must provide for these limits with adequate protection allowances.The lack of adequate service experience with composite material structuresin airplanes type certificated to the airworthiness standards of part 23,the unusual mechanical properties characteristics, and the experience withcomposite material structural bonding, to date, necessitate issuing specialconditions to assure an appropriate level of safety for the Model CD-2airframe structure. This special condition is intended to require: (1)Accounting for environmental effects, i.e., temperature and humidity onmaterial mechanical properties in all structural substantiation analysesand tests; (2) limit load residual strength with impact damage from discretesources; (3) ability to carry ultimate load with realistic intrinsic anddiscrete impact damage at the threshold of detectability; and (4) designfeatures to prevent disbonds greater than the disbonds for which limitload capability has been shown. Proof-testing of each production componentto limit load and reliance on manufacturing quality control proceduresbetween limit and ultimate load may be used in lieu of design featuresprovided each bonded joint is subjected to its critical design limit loadduring the proof-testing. Acceptable non-destructive testing techniquesdo not yet exist in state-of-the-art composite technology to reliably identifyweak bonds. However, proof-testing of each production article may be discontinuedif such tests are developed and accepted by the FAA.Because the composite material and bonding may require preventive maintenanceand inspection procedures different from those commonly utilized for existingaluminum airframes, this special condition requires that instructions forcontinued airworthiness be established in addition to those required byandSection; 23.1529.<ITAG tagnum="84">Lightning Protection</ITAG>The regulations incorporated by reference include standards for protectionfrom damage to the structure of the airplane by lightning (andSection; 23.867)and from ignition of fuel vapor (andSection; 23.954). These standards donot provide the level of safety for the electronic system installed incomposite airframe structures which provide less electromagnetic shieldingthan metal skins. For airplanes employing the extensive use of compositematerials, the lightning produced voltage and currents could increase substantiallyand additional protecting design features should be installed. These systemscan be susceptible to disruption to both the command/response signals andthe operational modes as a result of direct lightning strike attachmentor electrical and magnetic interference. To ensure that a level of safetyis achieved equivalent to that of existing aircraft that utilize a metalstructure, a special condition is being proposed which requires that thesecomponents be designed and installed to preclude component damage and interruptionof function due to both direct and indirect effects of lightning.<ITAG tagnum="85">Protection from Unwanted Effect of High Energy Radio Frequency (RF)Fields</ITAG>Traditional airplane designs which utilize metal skins and mechanical controlsystems had inherent design features which provided protection and wereless susceptible to the effects of RF energy from ground-based transmitters.There is a trend toward increased use of composite structures that do notprovide the RF shielding normally provided by metal skins and electricaland electronic systems to perform critical and essential airplane functions.Therefore, the effective measures against the effects of high energy radiofrequency fields must be provided for by the design and installation ofthese systems. The primary factors that have contributed to this increasedconcern are: (1) The increasing use of sensitive electronics that performcritical and essential functions; (2) the reduced electromagnetic shieldingafforded airplane systems by advanced technology airframe materials; (3)the adverse service experience of military airplanes which use these technologies;and (4) the increased number and power of radio frequency emitters andexpected future increases.In showing compliance with the regulations for protection against hazardscaused by the exposure to high energy radio frequency fields, electricaland electronics systems which perform critical and essential functionsmust be considered. The hazards addressed include those which would resultin a catastrophic failure condition to the airplane. Failures that wouldbe a hazard to the airplane, but not catastrophic, are considered underandSection; 23.1309. To prevent this occurrence, airplane systems which performcritical functions must be designed and installed to ensure that the operationand operational capabilities of these critical functions are not adverselyaffected when the airplane is exposed to high energy radio fields. Airplanesystems which perform essential functions must be protected to ensure thatessential functions can be recovered after the airplane has been exposedto the high energy radio frequency fields. Manual mode reversion is consideredan acceptable method of retaining the essential functions. Reliance onredundancy as a means of protection against the effects of external RFfields is generally insufficient since all elements of a redundant systemare likely to be exposed to the fields concurrently.No universally accepted guidance to define the maximum energy level inwhich civilian airplane system installations must be capable of operatingsafely has been established. At this time, the FAA and other airworthinessauthorities are working to establish an agreed RF energy level representativeof that to which the airplane will be exposed in service. This specialcondition requires that the airplane be evaluated under an interim standardfor the protection of the electronic system and its associated wiring harness.<ITAG tagnum="84">Location of the Engines and Propellers</ITAG>Part 23 envisions propellers located forward of the wing and other aircraftsurfaces that may shed ice. On the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane, the propellersare located above and aft of the forward portion of the fuselage and oneis a pusher propeller located aft behind the parasol wing and both engineexhaust systems. Ice shed by the wing, wing struts, forward fuselage, orother parts of the airplane may have adverse effects on the propellers.In addition, the effects of exhaust gases impinging on the aft propellermust be evaluated. A special condition is being issued requiring propellerice and exhaust gas impingement protection.Since the location of the propellers on the Model CD-2 is an unusual designfeature, passengers, crew, and ground personnel may be less aware of theproximity of the propeller blades. Propeller disc conspicuity is of concernduring ground operation. Therefore, a special condition is proposed torequire the necessary visibility of the propeller discs.The location of the engines on the Seastar Model CD-2 airplane will preventthe pilot from quickly visually determining if an engine is operating.A special condition is being issued to require a positive means to indicateto the pilot when an engine is inoperative.<ITAG tagnum="84">Effects of Water in Hull Compartments</ITAG>The Seastar Model CD-2 is an amphibian airplane with several watertightcompartments in the hull area. To ensure that the proper weight and centerof gravity is maintained, it is necessary to provide a means for determiningthe amount of water in the watertight compartments. The Airplane FlightManual or other approved manual material must describe the means for determiningthe effects of the water in the compartments for safe operation of theairplane. A special condition is being issued requiring means to determinethe presence and quantity of water in the hull compartments.<ITAG tagnum="84">Emergency Flotation Equipment</ITAG>The commuter category requirements did not envision an amphibian airplanedesigned to operate a considerable time near or over water areas. For thelevel of safety envisioned for the commuter category, such airplanes mustinclude emergency flotation means for each occupant, unless the airplaneis restricted to operating over water bodies of such size and depth thatlife preservers or other flotation means would not be required for survivalof occupants during emergency landing and emergency evacuation.The Seastar Model CD-2 airplane is expected to operate extensively overlakes, rivers, and other bodies of water. In the case of an emergency,this may lead to an inadvertent water landing in water too deep to safelyevacuate without appropriate emergency flotation equipment.In response to Public Law (Pub. L.) 100-223, entitled ``Airport and AirwaySafety and Capacity Enhancement Act of 1987'', enacted December 30, 1987,the FAA published a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) entitled ``ImprovedSurvival Equipment for Inadvertent Water Landings'' (53 FR 24890; June30, 1988). This NPRM proposes to amend FAR parts 121 and 135 to require,among other things, adequate life preservers and flotation devices forpassengers, including small children and infants, on flights of an aircarrier which the Secretary of Transportation determines will occur partlyover water.The FAA anticipates that these proposals will be adopted essentially asproposed and has determined it is appropriate to issue a special conditionfor the Seastar to require flotation equipment that will provide the levelof safety expected for a commuter category amphibian airplane in over wateroperation.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Comments</ITAG>Notice of Proposed Special Conditions, Notice No. 23-ACE-44, Docket No.061CE, was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on May 1, 1989 (54 FR 18530) and the commentperiod closed August 29, 1989. The FAA received one comment in responseto Notice No. 23-ACE-44. The comment was received from Airbus Industrie,31707 Blagnac Cedex, France. The special conditions for the protectionof systems against high energy radio frequency (HERF) fields are applicableto systems that perform critical and essential functions as defined inthe special conditions. The commenter stated that past special conditionson HERF for transport category and normal category were only applicableto critical systems. The commenter recommended that this special conditionbe consistent with previous special conditions, that is, only be applicableto critical system.The FAA does not agree that for part 23 airplanes, this special conditionshould only be applicable to critical systems. The protection of aircraftelectrical and electronic systems against the effects of external highenergy radio frequency may also be required to include essential systemswhose failure or malfunction due to HERF could result in a hazard, or affectother systems whose failure or degradation would result in a hazard. Theactual determination of what systems should be evaluated against HERF wouldbe made by the applicant preparing a preliminary hazard assessment. Engineeringand operational judgment would be on a case-by-case basis jointly by theapplicant and the responsible aircraft certification office. Systems suchas electronic flap control are normally classified as essential systemsbut their failure modes under the HERF environment may have a hazardousfailure condition to the extent there is a significant reduction in safety.Under the special condition criteria, the essential functions are not requiredto operate during the HERF exposure, but the essential function must berecoverable after the HERF exposure. These requirements for the protectionagainst external high energy radio frequency are consistent to the requirementsfor lightning. The existing airworthiness standards of part 23 do not includerequirements for complex and safety-critical systems and are based on single-faultor fail-safe concepts. Also, part 23 is different than part 25 or 29 airworthinessstandards because part 23 does not have a requirement that the installedequipment meet the applicable Technical Standard Order (TSO). This actionis not a rule of general applicability and affects only the model/seriesof airplane identified in these special conditions. Accordingly, thesespecial conditions are adopted as proposed.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 14 CFR Parts 21 and 23</ITAG>Aircraft, Air transportation, Aviation safety, and Safety.The authority citation for these special conditions is as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 313(a), 601, and 603 of the Federal AviationAct of 1958; as amended (49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1421, and 1423); 49 U.S.C.106(g). (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983); 14 CFR 21.16 and 21.101;and 14 CFR 11.28 and 11.49. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Adoption of Special Conditions </ITAG>In consideration of the foregoing the following special conditions areissued as part of the type certification basis for the Dornier SeastarModel CD-2 Series amphibian airplanes and future changes to those airplanes:1. Evaluation of Composite Structure In lieu of complying with andSection; 23.572 and in addition to the requirementsof andSection;andSection; 23.603 and 23.613, airframe structure, the failureof which would result in catastrophic loss of the airplane, the wing, horizontalstabilizer, horizontal stabilizer carry-through and attaching structure,fuselage, vertical stabilizer, vertical stabilizer attaching structureand all movable control surfaces and their attaching structure, must beevaluated to damage tolerance criteria prescribed in paragraphs (a) through(j) of this special condition, unless shown to be impractical. In casesshown to be impractical, the aforementioned structure must be evaluatedin accordance with the criteria of paragraphs (a) and (k) of this specialcondition. Where bonded joints are used, the structure must also be evaluatedin accordance with the residual strength criteria in paragraph (h) of thisspecial condition. (a) It must be demonstrated by tests, or by analysis supported by tests,that the structure is capable of carrying ultimate load with impact damage.The level of impact damage considered need not be more than the establishedthreshold of detectability considering the inspection procedures employed.(b) The growth rate of damage that may occur from fatigue, corrosion, intrinsicdefects, manufacturing defects; e.g., bond defects, or damage from discretesources under repeated loads expected in service; i.e., between the timeat which damage becomes initially detectable and the time at which theextent of damage reaches the value selected by the applicant for residualstrength demonstration, must be established by tests or by analysis supportedby tests. (c) The damage growth, between initial detectability and the value selectedfor residual strength demonstration, factored to obtain inspection intervals,must permit development of an inspection program suitable for applicationby operations and maintenance personnel. (d) Instructions for continued airworthiness for the airframe must be establishedconsistent with the results of the damage tolerance evaluations. Inspectionintervals must be set so that after the damage initially becomes detectableby the inspection method specified, the damage will be detected beforeit exceeds the extent of damage for which residual strength is demonstrated.(e) Loads spectra, load truncation, and the locations and types of damageconsidered in the damage tolerance evaluations must be documented in testproposals. (f) The structure of the fuselage must be shown by residual strength tests,or by analysis supported by residual strength tests, to be able to withstandcritical limit flight and water loads, considered as ultimate loads, withdamage consistent with the results of the damage tolerance evaluations.(g) The wing, horizontal stabilizer, horizontal stabilizer carry-throughand attaching structure, vertical stabilizer and vertical stabilizer attachingstructure, and all movable control surfaces and their attaching structuremust be shown by residual strength tests, or analysis supported by residualstrength tests, to be able to withstand critical limit flight loads, consideredas ultimate loads, with the extent of damage consistent with the resultsof the damage tolerance evaluations. (h) In lieu of a nondestructive inspection technique which ensures ultimatestrength of each bonded joint, the limit load capacity of each bonded jointcritical to safe flight must be substantiated by either of the followingmethods used singly or in combination; (1) The maximum disbonds of each bonded joint consistent with the capabilityto withstand the loads in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this special conditionmust be determined by analysis, tests, or both. Disbonds of each bondedjoint greater than this must be prevented by design features. (2) Proof-testing must be conducted on each production article which willapply the critical limit design load to each critical bonded joint. (i) The effects of material variability and environmental conditions mustbe accounted for in the damage tolerance evaluations and in the residualstrength tests; e.g., exposure to temperature, humidity, erosion, ultravioletradiation, and/or chemicals, on the strength and durability propertiesof the composite materials. (j) The airplane must be shown by analysis to be free from flutter to V<T2>D</T2> with the extent of damage for which residual strength is demonstrated.(k) For those structures where the damage tolerance method is shown tobe impractical, the strength of such structures must be demonstrated bytests, or analysis supported by tests, to be able to withstand the repeatedloads of variable magnitude expected in service. Sufficient component,subcomponent, element, or coupon tests must be performed to establish thefatigue scatter and the environmental effects. Impact damage in compositematerial components which may occur must be considered in the demonstration.The impact damage level considered must be consistent with detectabilityby the inspection procedures employed. 2. Protection of Systems From Lightning and High Energy Radio Frequency(RF) Fields (a) Each system which performs critical functions must be designed andinstalled to ensure that the operation and operational capabilities ofthese critical functions are not adversely affected when the airplane isexposed to: (1) lightning and (2) high energy radio frequency fields externalto the airplane. (b) Each essential function of the system must be protected to ensure thatthe essential function can be recovered after the airplane has been exposedto: (1) Lightning and (2) high energy radio frequency fields external tothe airplane. (c) For the purposes of the above, the following definitions apply: (1) Critical Functions. Functions whose failure would contribute to orcause a failure condition which would prevent the continued safe flightand landing of the airplane. (2) Essential Functions. Functions whose failure would contribute to orwould cause a hazardous failure condition which would significantly impactthe safety of the airplane or the ability of the flight crew to cope withadverse operating conditions.3. Location of the Engines and PropellersIn the absence of requirements for propellers, the following is required:(a) <T3>Ice impingement on the propeller.</T3> All areas of the airplane forwardof the propellers that are likely to accumulate and shed ice into the propellerdisc during any operating conditions for which the airplane is certificatedmust be suitably protected to prevent ice formation, or it must be shownthat any ice shed into the propeller disc will not create a hazardous condition.(b) <T3>Exhaust gas impingement on propeller.</T3> If the engine exhaust gasesare discharged into the propeller disc, it must be shown by tests, or analysissupported by tests, that the propeller material is capable of continuoussafe operation.(c) <T3>Propeller marking.</T3> The propellers must be marked so that theirdiscs are conspicuous under normal daylight ground conditions.(d) <T3>Engine inoperative warning.</T3> A positive means must be providedto indicate an engine is inoperative, or it must be determined that requiredinstruments will readily alert the pilot when an engine is inoperative.4. Effects of Water in Hull CompartmentIn the absence of specific regulations, the hull watertight compartmentsrequired by andSection; 23.755 must be equipped with means to determine thepresence of water and the effects of any accumulated water on the weightand center of gravity of the airplane in accordance with andSection; 23.1519.5. Emergency Flotation EquipmentIn addition to the requirements of andSection; 23.1415, the emergency flotationequipment installed in the airplane must include an approved life preserverwith an approved survivor locator light for each occupant of the airplane,including an approved life preserver for each infant and child. The approvedlife preserver must be located at the passenger seat, or in the case ofthe infant and child life preservers, in the immediate vicinity of theseat occupied by the individual responsible for the infant or child. Provisionsfor storage of each life preserver must be approved by the Administrator.Each approved survivor locator light must activate automatically upon contactwith water.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Kansas City, Missouri, on October 2, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Don C. Jacobsen, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Manager, Aircraft Certification Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-25078 Filed 10-24-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>