<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89426-0074 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-26-89.f2.A1073</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7598 et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Exemptions; Separate Mortgage and Real Estate Account ofNew England Mutual Life Insurance Co. et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefits Programs,U.S. Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type required to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Separate Mortgage and Real Estate Account (the Separate Account) ofNew England Mutual Life Insurance Company Located in Boston, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7598]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsections 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the sale ofcertain mortgage and real estate investments by the Separate Account tothe general account of New England Mutual Life Insurance Company (the Company),a party in interest with respect to the plans participating in the SeparateAccount (the Plans), provided that the terms of sale are not less favorableto the Separate Account than those terms obtainable in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated party at the time the transaction is executed.<T3>Effective Date: </T3>If granted, this exemption will be effective fora 12-month period from the date of grant.<T3>Summary of Facts and Representations  </T3>1. The Company's Separate Account was established in 1969 by vote of theCompany's Board of Directors. The Separate Account is a pooled separateaccount maintained in accordance with the insurance laws of the Commonwealthof Massachusetts. There are eight Plans currently participating in theSeparate Account. As of December 31, 1987, the assets of the Separate Accountwere valued at approximately $6.3 million.  2. The Separate Account is composed of seventeen commercial mortgage investmentsand two ground leases. The seventeen mortgages encumber sixteen real estateproperties in sixteen separate locations. The Separate Account has varyinginterests in each of the mortgages ranging 1.544% to 66.667%. The partialinterest in each mortgage gives the respective owner the right to receivea proportionate share of the contracted monthly debt service payment aswell as a proportionate share of the loan proceeds at the loan call date.The two ground leases cover a 277,040 square foot warehouse facility locatedin Bellwood, Illinois and a 511 space mobile home park located in Dominguez,California.  3. The group annuity contracts issued with respect to the Separate Accountprovide the Plans with the right to request the distribution of all orpart of their interests in the Separate Account. At the time the SeparateAccount was established, the Company planned that any needed liquiditywould be provided by cash contributions from other plans, by maturing investments,and in the instance of large withdrawal requests, by transferring a sufficientnumber of mortgage interests or other investments from the Separate Accountto the Company's general account in exchange for cash. The passage of theAct, however, rendered this last alternative originally contemplated forguaranteeing Separate Account liquidity illegal absent administrative relief. 4. One of the Plans participating in the Separate Account, Retirement Plansof Alumax, Inc. (Alumax), whose interest in the Separate Account represent41% of the total assets of the Separate Account, has requested distributionof its interest in the Separate Account. Both the Company and Alumax wouldlike a cash payment of its interest in the Separate Account to be madeas soon as possible.  5. It is represented that none of the other Plans participating in theSeparate Account have any desire to purchase Alumax's interest. In addition,in the Company's opinion, it would not be in the best interests of thePlans to sell the Separate Account's investments to unrelated third parties.The transaction costs to the Separate Account in finding such purchaserswould be high, involving such items as updated title coverage, underwriting,physical inspections and possible guarantees from the Separate Accountor the Company.  6. In order to meet its obligations to Alumax and to the other Plans thatare expected to request withdrawal from the Separate Account, the Companyrequests that it be allowed to sell the assets of the Separate Accountto its general account on an ongoing basis over a twelve month period,until the Separate Account assets are liquidated.  7. In connection with its proposal to sell the Separate Account assetsto the general account, the Company has retained American Appraisal Associates,Inc. (American Appraisal), to act as an Independent Fiduciary for the SeparateAccount with respect to the proposed sale of the investments. AmericanAppraisal is the world's largest evaluation consulting firm with clientsthat include banks, insurance companies, pension funds, savings and loanassociations, investment bankers, and developers. American Appraisal isnot affiliated with the Company and at no time has more than 1% of itsannual billings been received from the Company. Each Plan participatingin the Separate Account will be informed of the appointment of AmericanAppraisal and its role in the transactions.  Before any sale from the Separate Account to the Company's general accountis consummated, American Appraisal will review the sale transaction andsubmit a written report summarizing its investigation, both with respectto the specific investment to be sold by the Separate Account and to theprice to be paid by the Company's general account. No sale will be madeuntil the Independent Fiduciary has concluded that the valuation of theinvestment is consistent with current market values, and that the proposedsale is equitable to the Plans participating in the Separate Account. The valuation process for commercial loans will involve an analysis byAmerican Appraisal of each asset, taking into account, loan amount, remainingloan term, likely holding period, property type, and the interest rate.Due to the differences in interest rates of various assets and currentmarket rates, the pricing analysis will compare loan yields with the mostrecent average yield of commercial mortgages priced with comparable holdingperiods. The value of the ground leases was determined by American Appraisalafter completing a personal inspection of the two properties.  American Appraisal further represents that as part of its function as independentfiduciary, it has determined the order in which investments will be soldfrom the Separate Account to the Company's general account. The order ofdisposition has been developed to maintain the current portfolio characteristicsfor the remaining contract holders, specifically, the average yield ofapproximately 10%.  8. In summary, the applicant represents that the transaction will satisfythe statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because:  a. The sale of the Separate Account investments, including the considerationpaid, will be reviewed and approved by American Appraisal acting on behalfof the Plans participating in the Separate Account;  b. These sales will provide the Separate Account with the liquidity tosatisfy the withdrawal requests of the Plans; and  c. There will be no sales commission or similar consideration paid by theSeparate Account to the general account.<T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Alan H. Levitas of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)  <ITAG tagnum="85">Joseph K. Newsom, M.D., P.A. Money Purchase Pension Plan and Trust(the Plan) Located in Cheraw, South Carolina </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7844] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b)(1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the sale of aparcel of real property (the Property) from the Plan to Joseph K. Newsom(Newsom), a party in interest with respect to the Plan, provided the Planreceives no less than the greater of $203,000 or fair market value forthe Property at the time of sale. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. Joseph K. Newsom, M.D., P.A., (the Employer) is a South Carolina professionalassociation engaged in the practice of family medicine. The Plan is a moneypurchase plan for the benefit of the employees of the Employer. As of September30, 1987, the Plan had approximately 14 participants and total assets of$1,474,830. Newsom is the sole owner of the Employer as well as the Plantrustee and a participant in the Plan. 2. The assets of the Plan include a parcel of real property (the Property)located in Cheraw, South Carolina. The Property consists of approximately6.7 acres of undeveloped land. The Property is located in an area thatis designated as commercial and is situated between two major shoppingcenters. The Property was bought from an unrelated party for cash in twotracts (in 1981 and 1984) for a total purchase price of $133,000. A smallportion (0.23) of the original purchase, which is not part of the subjecttransaction, was developed into a dental office and is now rented to anotherparty. The Property has not been used by any party in interest with respectto the Plan since the time of purchase. 3. The Plan obtained an appriasal on the Property from C. Lock McKinnon(McKinnon), a real estate appraiser in Lancaster, South Carolina. The applicantrepresents that McKinnon is independent of the Plan and the Employer. Placingemphasis on the comparable sales approach to value, McKinnon estimatedthat as of November 7, 1988, the fair market value of the Property was$203,000. 4. The Plan originally purchased the Property for investment purposes.However, the ages and length of service of several of the participantsare now such that greater liquidity with respect to Plan investment isneeded. The Plan trustee believes that a sale of the Property would providemore liquidity to the Plan and would enhance the diversification of Planassets. Accordingly, the Plan proposes to sell the Property to Newsom.Newsom will pay no less than fair market value for the Property at thetime of sale, based on an updated independent appraisal. The transactionwill be entirely for cash and the Plan will pay no fees or commissionsin regard to the sale. 5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (1)The fair market value of the Property will be established by a real estateappraiser who is independent of the Employer; (2) Newsom will pay no lessthan fair market value for the Property at the time of sale; (3) the saleof the Property will be entirely for cash; and (4) the transaction willprovide greater liquidity to the Plan and will enhance the diversificationof the investments of the Plan. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Paul Kelty of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Dr. Sam W. McCalla, P.A. Profit Sharing Plan (the Profit Sharing Plan)and the Dr. Sam W. McCalla, P.A. Pension Plan (the Pension Plan; collectively,the Plans) Located in Greenville, SC </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7889] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code. If the exemption is granted, the sanctionsresulting from the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason ofsection 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedsale by the Plans of certain real property (Parcel A and Parcel B), forthe total cash consideration of $170,200, to Sam W. McCalla, M.D. (Dr.McCalla), a disqualified person with respect to the Plans, provided theamount paid for Parcel A and Parcel B is not less than fair market valueon the date the transaction is consummated. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plans, which are not disqualified persons with respect to each other,consist of the Profit Sharing Plan and the Pension Plan. Dr. McCalla, anorthopedic surgeon, is the sole participant in each Plan. As of August31, 1988, the Profit Sharing Plan and the Pension Plan had total assetshaving fair market values of $196,436 and $118,615, respectively. The trusteeof the Plans and the decisionmaker with respect to the Plans' investmentis Dr. McCalla. 2. In July 1985, the Plans became inactive. At that time, Dr. McCalla,the sole shareholder of Sam W. McCalla, P.A. (the Employer), decided todissolve his professional association due to a change in his personal goals.The Employer had been engaged in the practice of medicine in Greenville,South Carolina. As a result of the dissolution of the Employer, two vestedemployees who participated in the Plans elected to roll their benefitsinto individual retirement accounts. Although the Employer no longer existsas a legal entity, Dr. McCalla remains in the Plans as their sole participant.\1\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Because Dr. McCalla is the only participant in the Plansand the Employer is wholly-owned by Dr. McCalla, there is no jurisdictionunder Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, thereis jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975 of theCode. 3. Among the assets of the Plans are two parcels of mostly unimproved,contiguous real property that are located on McConnell Road in GreenvilleCounty near the City of Greer, South Carolina. Parcel A is owned by theProfit Sharing Plan. It consists of 51.48 acres of land that have beenimproved with a 1200 square foot framed house, a horse stable and a smallstorage barn. Since 1979, the house and stable on Parcel A have been leased,on a month-to-month basis, to Ms. Jennifer Jones, an unrelated party, for$500 per month. Parcel B is owned by the Pension Plan. It consists of 53.6acres of unimproved land. Both Parcel A and Parcel B are adjacent to otherreal property owned by Dr. McCalla. The applicant represents that neitherParcel A nor Parcel B have been used by or leased to disqualified personswith respect to the Plans. 4. The Plans purchased Parcel A and Parcel B as cotenants of a single tractof land (the Property) in December 1973. The seller of the Property wasthe Loftis Estate, an unrelated party. The Plans paid $106,162 for theProperty. To acquire the Property, the Plans made a total downpayment tothe seller of $27,150. Of this amount, $15,260 was paid by the Profit SharingPlan and $11,890 was paid by the Pension Plan. The Plans financed the remainderof the acquisition price by obtaining a first mortgage loan in the originalprincipal amount of $79,012 from the Bank of Greer located in Greer, SouthCarolina. The lender was also an unrelated party. The loan was for a durationof five years and it carried interest at the rate of six percent per annum.5. Between December 1977 and October 1979, the Profit Sharing Plan obtained,in connection with its interest in the Property, three additional loanshaving an aggregate principal amount of $62,000 from two unrelated banks.No such financing was obtained by the Pension Plan. The applicant representsthat all payments due under the original mortgage loan and the three subsequentloans were made by the Plan in a timely manner and there were never anydefaults or delinquencies. At present, the Property is unencumbered byoutstanding loan obligations of either Plan. 6. Although it was originally intended that the Profit Sharing Plan ownan undivided 60 percent interest in the Property and the Pension Plan,an undivided 40 percent interest, the deed to the Property failed to reflectthe Plans' respective holdings. In 1979, the Property was partitioned intoParcel A and Parcel B to correct the error in the deed. The value of acreagethen attributed to Parcel A and to Parcel B corresponded with the proportionateinterests of the Plans in the Property. A new deed evidencing the partitioningof the Property was duly recorded. The applicant states that the Propertywas also partitioned to facilitate its future development and to enableDr. McCalla to keep more accurate records.  7. Dr. McCalla believes it would be in the best interests of the ProfitSharing Plan and the Pension Plan to dispose of Parcel A and Parcel B.Dr. McCalla cites the following reasons for recommending this action: (a)The high percentage of the Plans' assets that are represented by ParcelA and Parcel B; (b) the possibility that the Plans' continued retentionof Parcel A and Parcel B could pose liquidity problems at the time of Dr.McCalla's retirement; and (c) the fact that Parcel A and Parcel B havenot appreciated greatly in value since 1973. Accordingly, Dr. McCalla requestsan administrative exemption from the Department in order to purchase ParcelA and Parcel B from the Plans. Dr. McCalla proposes to pay the Profit SharingPlan and the Pension Plan a sales price that will reflect the fair marketvalues of Parcel A and Parcel B as such values are determined by a qualifiedindependent appraiser. Neither Plan will be required to pay any real estatefees or commissions or incur any other expenses in connection with theproposed sale. 8. Parcel A and Parcel B have been appraised by Mr. John C. Kulze (Mr.Kulze), M.A.I., Executive Vice President of Wilkins Norwood and Companyof Greenville, South Carolina and an independent appraiser. In appraisalreports dated December 28, 1988, Mr. Kulze placed the fair market valueof Parcel A at $104,800 and the fair market value of Parcel B at $65,400.Mr. Kulze was also of the opinion that Parcel A and Parcel B were of nounique or special value to Dr. McCalla by reason of their proximity toother real property owned by Dr. McCalla and, as such, would not warrantDr. McCalla paying a higher purchase price. Thus, in accordance with Mr.Kulze's determinations, Dr. McCalla will pay the Plans the fair marketvalue of Parcel A and Parcel B on the date of sale. 9. In summary, it is represented that the proposed transaction will satisfythe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 4975(c)(2) of theCode because: (a) The sale will be a one-time transaction for cash; (b)the sales prices for Parcel A and Parcel B have been determined by a qualified,independent appraiser; (c) the Plans will not be required to pay any realestate fees or commissions or other expenses in connection with the proposedsale; and (d) Dr. McCalla is the only participant in the Plans who willbe affected by the proposed sale and he desires that such transaction beconsummated. Notice to Interested Persons Because Dr. McCalla is the only participant in the Plans who will be affectedby the proposed transaction, it has been determined that there is no needto distribute the notice of proposed exemption to interested persons. Writtencomments and requests for a public hearing are due thirty days followingthe date of publication of the notice of proposed exemption in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. <T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner andamp; Smith Inc. Prototype IndividualSelf-Employment Retirement Plan (the Plan) Located in Greensboro, NorthCarolina</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7899]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in Rev. Proc. 75-26 (1975-1 C.B. 722). If the exemption is grantedthe sanctions resulting from the application of section 4975 of the Code,by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not applyto the proposed cash sale to the Plan of 125 shares of stock (the Shares)in Precision Fabrics Group Inc. (the Company) by Charles H. Flynt, Jr.(Mr. Flynt), the sole participant in the Plan; provided that the sale pricefor the Shares is no greater than the fair market value of the Shares onthe date of the sale.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Because Mr. Flynt is the sole participant in the Plan,there is no jurisdiction under Title I of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However,there is jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975of the Code.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution Keogh plan which qualifies as a profitsharing plan for self-employed individuals under the Internal Revenue Code(I.R.C.) section 401(a) and 401(c). Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, andSmith, Inc. (Merrill Lynch) established the Plan and is the custodian ofthe Plan. On October 7, 1983, Mr. Flynt adopted the Plan, which has assetsof $665,655.71, as of December 30, 1988. The bulk of the assets in thePlan is attributable to a roll-over contribution from a distribution Mr.Flynt received upon termination of the profit sharing plan of Flynt, Inc.,a plan qualified under I.R.C. section 401(a).2. The Company, a North Carolina corporation, was formed early in 1988to acquire substantially all of the assets and business of the PrecisionFabrics Division of Burlington Industries, Inc. On February 16, 1988, Mr.Flynt acquired 125 Shares of common stock of the Company at a price of$1,000 per share for a total price of $125,000. The Shares are not publiclytraded. According to the shareholder's agreement with respect to the purchaseof Shares in the Company, dated April 15, 1988, sales, assignments andother transfers or encumbrances of the Shares are restricted, except thattransfers to members of the shareholder's immediate family and to othershareholders are permitted; provided certain conditions are met. In addition,the Company (and thereafter each of the other shareholders) has a rightof first refusal with respect to any Shares for which a shareholder receivesa bona fide offer to purchase such Shares.3. Brian T. Napier (Mr. Napier), President, A.S.A. of Capital AnalystsInc. Business Appraisals, located in Greensboro, North Carolina, performedan appraisal of the fair market value of the Shares. In a letter datedNovember 10, 1988, Mr. Napier originally established that the fair marketvalue of the Shares, as of September 30, 1988, fell within the range offrom $940 to $1,040 per share. Subsequently, Mr. Napier revised his November10 letter and established the value of the Shares to be $1,040 per sharebased upon approximately 10,639 shares of common stock issued and outstanding,as of September 30, 1988, on a fully-diluted basis. Mr. Napier representsthat he is independent in that he has no past, present, or intended ownershipor financial interest in the Company and that his fee was not contingentupon the conclusions of value stated in the appraisal. Mr. Napier is qualifiedin that he is a senior member of the American Society of Appraisers andhas nearly twenty (20) years experience in establishing opinions of valueof closely-held companies.4. An exemption is requested to allow the Plan to purchase the Shares fromMr. Flynt for $130,000 in cash; provided that such price is no greaterthan the fair market value of the Shares on the date of the sale. It isrepresented that certificates representing the Shares will be transferredto Merrill Lynch who will hold them as assets of the Plan. It is representedthat Merrill Lynch will not act as broker dealer in this matter and willreceive no compensation with respect to the transaction. After the exclusionof the sale, the Company will record the transfer of the Shares to thePlan on its stock transfer book and thereafter will recognize the Planas the legal owner of the Shares.It is estimated that the value of the Shares after the sale will constitute16.3% of the total assets of the Plan. The Plan will incur no transfercosts of any kind as a result of the sale.Mr. Flynt represents that based on his knowledge and experience and familiaritywith the operation and financial condition of the Company that the Shareswill be an ideal investment for the Plan in that the value of the Shareswill grow significantly over the long term and will provide him, as thesole participant, a retirement income greater than that which could beprovided by other investments. Mr. Flynt argues that the Company, whilefunctioning as a division of Burlington Industries for many years, wasa consistently superior performer. It is represented that because the managementteam of the Company, under its new ownership consists of the former presidentand other key executives of Burlington Industries, and because operationsof the Company have continued to the present without material change, thatthere is no reason to believe the Company will not continue to be profitable.Although the Shares are not publicly traded, Mr. Flynt represents thatthe Shares are nevertheless readily marketable, and that the restrictionson transferability of the Shares would not significantly reduce marketability.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction meetsthe statutory criteria of section 4975 of the Code because:(a) The Plan will pay the fair market value of the Shares of the Companyas determined by an independent qualified appraiser;(b) The Plan will incur no transfer costs of any kind in connection withthe acquisition of the Shares of the Company;(c) The sale is a one-time transaction for cash; and(d) Mr. Flynt is the only participant in the Plan, such that the transactionwill only affect Mr. Flynt.<T3>Notice to Interested Persons:</T3> Because Mr. Flynt is the only participantin the Plan, it has been determined by the Department that there is noneed to distribute the notice of pendency to interested persons. Commentsand requests for a hearing must be received by the Department within 30days of the date of publication of this notice of proposed exemption inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>.<T3>For Further Information Contact:</T3> Angelena C. Le Blanc of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Green Mountain Radiology, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan) Locatedin Montpelier, Vermont  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7904]  </ITAG>Proposed Exemption  The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to a proposed cashsale by the Plan of a certain parcel of unimproved land (the Property)to Dr. James R. Chandler (Dr. Chandler), a party in interest with respectto the Plan, provided that the Plan receives the greater of $16,000 orthe fair market value at the time of the sale.  Summary of Facts and Representations  1. The Plan, established on October 1, 1979, is a profit sharing plan with4 participants. As of September 30, 1988, the Plan had $1,304,409 in assets.As of the same date, Dr. Chandler's assets in his separate account (theAccount) in the Plan were $253,711. The Plan permits participants to directthe investments of their separate accounts. The current trustees are Dr.Chandler, Dr. J. Lorimer Holm, Dr. Robert Johnson, and Dr. Barnum Royal(the Trustees). All of the Trustees are participants in the Plan, as wellas employees, stockholders, and officers of Green Mountain Radiology, Inc.(the Employer). The employer is a medical corporation engaged in the practiceof radiology.  2. On July 23, 1986, the Account purchased the Property from an unrelatedthird party for $10,042.50. The Property consists of 4 acres of unimprovedvacant land located in Berlin, Vermont. The applicant represents that theProperty was acquired with the intent to plant 1500 Christmas trees onthe property and thereby produce income, but the trees were destroyed withinthe following two years by a ``Bedstraw'' weed. The applicant maintainsthat the cost of weed eradication would be prohibitive and environmentallyunsound. The applicant further maintains that the Property is currentlyunproductive, vacant and unused.  3. The applicant proposes to sell the Property to Dr. Chandler, a partyin interest with respect to the Plan. An appraisal of the Property wasprepared by Bruce C. Ellison, SRA (Mr. Ellison), a real estate appraiserand consultant with Ellison Appraisal Associates. The appraisal dated October27, 1988 estimates the fair market value of the Property to be $16,000.Mr. Ellison is independent of the Plan and the Employer. Mr. Ellison isa member of the Society of Real Estate Appraisers, and was twice Presidentof its Vermont chapter. He also represents that he is qualified becausehe has appraised approximately 200 parcels of land in the central Vermontarea. Mr. Ellison, in his appraisal, also addresses the question of whetherthe ownership of property adjacent to the Property by Dr. Chandler createsa special premium value to Dr. Chandler above a value which may be paidby third parties for the Property. Mr. Ellison maintains that because Dr.Chandler already owns 35 acres, the acquisition of an additional four isnot a highly motivating factor for the purchase. However, because his ownershipof adjacent land allows Dr. Chandler legal access to the otherwise landlockedProperty, Mr. Ellison concludes that some premium should be placed on thevalue of the Property. The appraisal incorporates such a premium.  4. The applicant represents that the transaction is desirable for the Plan.The transaction would involve 1.2% of the total Plan's assets and 6.2%of Dr. Chandler's separate account. The applicant further represents thatthe transaction is administratively feasible because the purchase pricewill be paid completely in cash at the time of the sale and the plan willpay no costs asociated with the sale. Also, the transaction is in the Plan'sinterest as the proposed sale will provide cash for productive reinvestment.It is also protective of the Plan as the fair market value of the Propertyhas been determined by an independent appraiser. There are no outstandingdebts or mortgages on the Property. The Property is completely free ofliens. The applicant represents that economic hardship will result if theproposed transaction is denied. The Plan will continue to hold an unproductiveand illiquid asset that does not yield income. There has been no attemptof sale to another party. The applicant believes that because the Propertyis landlocked with no right of access it is unmarketable to a third party.The applicant maintains that there is no other purchaser presently availablewho is ready, willing and able to purchase the Property for its fair marketvalue.  5. In summary, the applicant represents that the transaction satisfiesthe statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2)of the Code because:  (a) The proposed sale will be a one-time cash transaction;  (b) The price paid to the plan will be the greater of $16,000 as establishedby an independent appraisal or the fair market value of the Property atthe time of the sale;  (c) The Plan will pay no expenses associated with the sale;  (d) The sale will allow the Plan to liquidate its investment portfolioand will provide cash for income yielding investment.  <T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Ekaterina A. Uzlyan of the Departmentat (202) 523-8194 (this is not a toll-free number).<ITAG tagnum="85">White River Diagnostic Clinic, P.A. Retirement Plan (the Plan) Locatedin Batesville, Arkansas </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7907]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975).\3\<NOTE/> If the exemption is granted the sanctions resulting fromthe application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposed sale for cashby the Plan of certain real property (the Real Property) to Paul Baxley,M.D., (Dr. Baxley) a disqualified person with respect to the Plan, providedthat the price paid be no less than the fair market value of the Real Propertyas of the date of sale as determined by an independent and qualified appraiser.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The applicant represents that Paul Baxley, M.D., is thesole shareholder, officer and director of White River Diagnostic Clinic,P.A., the Plan sponsor, and that Paul Baxley, M.D. and his wife, SheilaBaxley, are the sole participants in the Plan. Accordingly, there is nojurisdiction under Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However,there is jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975of the Code.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a money purchase pension plan sponsored by White River DiagnosticClinic, P.A. (the Clinic). Dr. Baxley is the sole shareholder, officerand director of the Clinic. Dr. Baxley and his wife, Sheila Baxley, arethe only participants in the Plan. As of June 30, 1988 the Plan had $206,746.09in assets.2. On April 20, 1982 the Plan acquired the Real Property, a detached frametwo-bedroom residence located at 1301 Sidney Street in Batesville, Arkansas,from Dale E. Anderson and his wife, Fionnula Anderson, and Paul T. Waylandand his wife, Vivian Wayland, unrelated third parties, for $26,000 in cash.The applicant represents that the Real Property was acquired as an investmentand to produce rental income, but that since 1982 local property valueshave declined considerably, that the Real Property is currently unrented,and that the Real Property has remained on the market for over thirty-sixmonths without attracting a buyer. The applicant represents that the RealProperty has never been rented to or otherwise used by any disqualifiedperson with respect to the Plan.3. On August 11, 1988, R.L. Carpenter, Jr., an independent and qualifiedreal estate appraiser practicing in Batesville, Arkansas, stated that thefair market value of the Real Property was $22,000.4. Accordingly, the Plan proposes to sell the Real Property to Dr. Baxleyfor cash at its fair market value at the date of sale as determined byan independent and qualified appraiser. No commissions, fees, or taxesin connection with the sale will be paid by the Plan.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the criteria of section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because: (a) theReal Property will be sold for its fair market value as of the date ofthe sale as determined by an independent and qualified appraiser; (b) thesale represents a one-time transaction for cash which can be easily verified;(c) the sale will not require the payment by the Plan of any commissions,fees, or taxes; (d) the Plan will be able to divest itself of propertywhich is declining in value; and (e) Dr. Baxley, the trustee of the Plan,and his wife, the only participants in the Plan, and the only persons affectedby the proposed transaction, desire that the transaction be consummated.<T3>Notice to Interest Persons: </T3>Because Dr. Baxley and his wife arethe only participants in the Plan, it has been determined that there isno need to distribute the notice of pendency to interested persons. Commentsand requests for a hearing must be received by the Department within 30days of the date of publication of this notice of proposed exemption inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>.<T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Joseph L. Roberts III of theDepartment, telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Pennfield Precision, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan) Located inSellersville, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7917]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions section406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting fromthe application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A)through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposed sale by the Planof certain unimproved real property (the Property), for the total cashconsideration of $70,000, to the John F. Matczak and Carl F. Tate GeneralPartnership (the Partnership), a party in interest with respect to thePlan, provided the amount paid by the Partnership for the Property is notless than fair market value at the time the transaction is consummated.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan with 58 participants and total assetsof approximately $591,177 as of October 12, 1988. The Plan is sponsoredby Pennfield Precision, Inc. (the Employer), a Pennsylvania corporationwhich operates a precision machine shop in Sellersville, Pennsylvania.The trustees of the Plan are Messrs. John F. Matczak and Carl F. Tate (Messrs.Matczak and Tate), both of whom are officers and shareholders of the Employer.Mr. Matczak makes investment decisions for the Plan.2. The Partnership is a general partnership in which Mr., Matczak holdsa 60 percent interest and Mr. Tate, a 40 percent interest. The Partnershipwas formed in June 1974 for the purpose of real estate development. ThePartnership is located in Sellersville, Pennsylvania.3. Among the assets of the Plan is the Property, a parcel containing 59.4acres of unimproved and unencumbered land located in rural Charleston Township,Tioga County, Pennsylvania. The Property adjoins several parcels of landthat are owned by Messrs. Masczak and Tate. The Plan purchased the Propertyon December 20, 1973 for investment purposes from Mr. and Mrs. Robert J.Patierno, Jr., who were unrelated parties. The Plan paid $29,000 for theProperty. The purchase was not financed by any indebtedness. In additionto paying the purchase price, the Plan's only expenditures incurred inconnection with its ownership of the Property have been expenses relatedto the 1973 purchase totaling $469 and real estate taxes of approximately$2,000. The applicant represents that since the time of acquisition bythe Plan, the Property has not been used by or leased to parties in interestwith respect to the Plan.4. To provide the Plan with liquidity and the ability to invest in higherincome-producing assets, the Partnership requests an administrative exemptionfrom the Department in order that it may purchase the Property from thePlan. The Plan proposes to sell the Property to the Partnership for a totalsales price of $70,000. The consideration for the Property will be paidby the Partnership in cash. In addition, all fees and other expenses coincidentwith the sale will be borne entirely by the Partnership.5. The Property was valued by Mr. Al Stoltzfus (Mr. Stoltzfus), a licensedreal estate broker and an independent appraiser affiliated with StoltzfusAppraisal Service of Wellsboro, Pennsylvania. As of November 16, 1988,Mr. Stoltzfus placed the fair market value of the Property at $64,000.Mr. Stoltzfus opined that the value placed on the Property took into accountits potential for future development. In addition, by letter dated March7, 1989, Mr. Stoltzfus stated that, as neighboring owners, Messrs. Matczakand Tate would be expected to pay an additional premium that would notexceed $5,000. Thus, the proposed purchase price of $70,000 is in excessof the fair market value of the Property and the premium that would bepaid by an adjacent property owner.6. In summary, it is represented that the proposed transaction will satisfythe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) The proposed sale of the Property will be a one-time transactionfor cash; (b) the sales price for the Property, which will be greater thanits fair market value as determined by an independent appraiser and willmore than compensate the Plan for all expenses it has incurred in connectionwith the acquisition and holding of the Property; (c) the Plan will notincur any real estate fees or other expenses in connection therewith; and(d) the proposed sale will allow the Plan to invest the cash proceeds fromthe Property in higher income-yielding investments.<T3>For Further Information Contact:</T3> Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Ralph Wilson Plastics Employees Retirement Plan (the Plan) Locatedin Temple, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7921]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposed cashsale by the Plan of a certain parcel of unimproved real property (the Property)to Ralph Wilson Plastics Company (the Company), a party in interest, providedthe sales price for the Property is not less than the greater of: (a) thethe fair market value of such Property on the date of sale; or (b) thePlan's total acquisition and holding costs with respect to the Property.Summary of Facts and Representations1. Premark International, Inc. (Premark), the sponsor of the Plan is aDelaware corporation engaged in the manufacture and marketing of consumerand commercial products under widely-recognized brand names including Tupperware,Wilsonart, Hobart, West Bend, Vulcan and Precor. Premark maintains itsprincipal place of business in Deerfield, Illinois. The Company, a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of Premark, is engaged in the manufacture of decorative laminateremodeling products for residential and commercial use. The Company islocated at 600 Bruce Drive, Temple, Texas.2. The Plan is a defined contribution plan that was established by theCompany in 1959. Since March 31, 1976, the assets of the Plan hve beenfrozen and the Company has made no further contributions. The Plan, however,continues to qualify as a tax-exempt plan. Employees of the Company whowere participants in the Plan at the time it was frozen, still participatein the Plan. As of the plan year ended December 31, 1987, the Plan hadtotal assets of approximately $6,938,541. As of the plan year ended December31, 1988, the Plan had 388 participants. The Plan presently has twelvetrustees (the Trustees), six of whom are permanent and six of whom rotate.The rotating Trustees are appointed by Premark's Management Committee forEmployee Benefits for a one year term. The Trustees are officers and employeesof Premark and the Company and they have discretionary control over theinvestment of the Plan's assets.3. On July 17, 1985, the Trustees met to discuss the possibility of purchasing,on behalf of the Plan, 37.786 acres of unimproved real property that wasadjacent to the Company's plant and located directly north of the Temple,Texas Industrial Park on the east of Wendland Road. In accordance withthe terms of the Trust Agreement, which authorized the Trustees to makesuch investments, the Trustees purchased the Property on August 15, 1985from the Michelin Tire and Rubber Company, an unrelated party, for $340,131.The Trustees believed the Property would be a good investment for the Planand that it would appreciate in value.4. The Property is the only real property ever owned by the Plan. Sincethe date of its acquisition, the Plan has paid a total of $6,351 in realestate taxes, levies and assessments. In addition, the Plan has not leasedthe Property to Premark, the Company or any party in interest nor has thePlan, Premark, or the Company utilized the Property. Currently, the Propertyremains unimproved and it is not subject to any lease. Through the 1987growing season, the Property was leased on an unrelated third party asfarmland.5. On December 4, 1985, the Plan granted a 10 foot right of way easementto the Texas Power and Light Company (Texas Power), an unrelated party.The purpose of the easement was to enable Texas Power to install multiplepoles and guy-wire anchorages located along the southeast border of theProperty. On April 29, 1988, the Plan deeded a 15 foot public utility easement,a 20 foot right of way easement along the Property's western boundary anda 15 foot right of way easement along the Property's northern boundaryto the City of Temple, Texas) the City). These additional easements weregranted by the Plan to enable the City to contruct sewer, water, gas andtelephone lines on the Property. The Plan was paid $18,000 as considerationfor the granting of the easements to the City. 6. Due to a slowing of the economy in central Texas and the availabilityto prospective purchasers of less expensive property located in the industrialpark directly south of the Property, the investment return for the Propertythat was expected has not been realized. Although the Trustees have consideredvarious options that are available to the Plan with respect to the Property,including practicality of advertising it for sale to the general public,they believe the most appropriate course of action to take is to sell theProperty to the Company. In this way, the Trustees believe the sale proceedscan be placed in higher-yielding investment vehicles for the Plan. Therefore,an administrative exemption is requested from the Department.7. The Company proposes to purchase the Property from the Plan for cashfor a sales price that will be no less than the higher of: (a) The fairmarket value of the Property on the date of the sale; or (b) the Plan'soriginal acquisition cost for the Property, plus all fees, taxes, leviesand assessments on the Property and other expenses incurred by and paidby the Plan since August 15, 1985. The Company will pay all costs incurredwith respect to the sale of the Property including any fees, commissionsor expenses incident to such sale.8. The Property was appraised by Messrs. Clemo L. Ray, Jr., M.A.I. andCurtis E. Ginnow, Associate (Messrs. Ray and Ginnow), independent appraisesaffiliated with the appraisal firm of Central Texas Appraisal Company ofTemple, Texas. In an appraisal report dated December 15, 1988, Messrs.Ray and Ginnow placed the fair market value of the Property at $342,000as of December 9, 1988. The appraisal report did not include approximately.853 acres of land that were subject to two of the easements because Messrs.Ray and Ginnow determined that these tracts were not part of the unsableparcel.By letter dated February 27, 1989, Mr. Ray acknowledged that the excludedacreage could still be considered part of the Plan's fee simple estate.As such, he concluded that the fair market value of the Property wouldbe increased to $348,000. Mr. Ray further certified that the Property wouldhave no unique or special value to the Company warranting the payment ofa higher purchase price by reason of its proximity to other property ownedby the Company. Messrs. Ray and Ginnow will provide the Company with anupdated valuation of the Property that will be effective as of the dateof the proposed sale.9. In summary, it is represented that the proposed transaction will satisfythe statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) The sale will be a one-time transaction by the Plan for cash;(b) the Plan will sell the Property at the greater of its fair market valueas determined by qualified independent appraisers or its total acquisitionand holding costs; (c) the Plan will not pay any real estate fees or commissionsor other expenses in connection with the sale; (d) the sale will allowthe Trustees to invest, on behalf of the Plan, the sale proceeds in higher-yieldinginvestment vehicles; and (e) the Trustees have determined that the saleof the Property is in the best interests of the Plan and is protectiveof the Plan's participants and beneficiaries.<T3>For Further Information Contact:</T3> Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)General InformationThe attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 21st day of April, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-9998 Filed 4-25-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>