<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89518-0073 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-18-89.f2.A1072</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority;Region IX-San Francisco</ITAG>Part F. of the Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations ofAuthority for the Department of Health and Human Services, Health CareFinancing Administration, (HCFA), (<T4>Federal Register</T4>, Vol. 46, No. 223, pp. 56927-56929, dated Thursday,November 19, 1981; Vol. 48, No. 196, pp. 46446-46447, dated Wednesday,October 12, 1983; and Vol. 53, No. 195, pp. 39525-39526, dated Friday,October 7, 1988) is amended to reflect a reorganization within Region IX(San Francisco), Office of the Associate Administrator for Operations (AAO).The regional office is reorganizing from a functional structure to a programmaticstructure with respect to the administration of the Medicare and Medicaidprograms. The reorganization abolishes the current Division of ProgramOperations and Division of Financial Operations and replaces them withthe Division of Medicare and the Division of Medicaid. Although this organizationalchange affects Region IX, all functional statements for the Office of theRegional Administrator (FPD(I-X)) are republished by this notice so thatthey will appear in the same location in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>The specific amendments to Part F. are described below:andbullet; Section FP.10.D., Office of the Regional Administrator (FPD(I-X))(Organization)The Office of the Regional Administrator, under the leadership of the RegionalAdministrator, is comprised of the following organizational components:<ITAG tagnum="15">1. Division of Health Standards and Quality (FPD(I-X)A)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">2. Division of Financial Operations (FPD(II, V, VI, and X)C)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">3. Division of Program Operations (FPD(II, V, VI, and X)D)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">4. Division of Medicaid (FPD(I, III, IV, VII-IX)E)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">5. Division of Medicare (FPD(I, III, IV, VII-IX)F)</ITAG>andbullet; Section FP.20.D., Office of the Regional Administrator (FPD(I-X))(Functions), is depleted in its entirety and replaced by a new set of functionalstatements. The new set of statements read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="84">D. Office of the Regional Administrator (FPD(I-X))</ITAG>The Office of the Regional Administrator is the principal official forregional operations of the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA).Provides executive leadership and guidance on behalf of the Associate Administrator,Operations, HCFA, to all components at the regional level. Implements nationalpolicy at the regional level. Assures the effective administration of allHCFA programs including Medicare, Medicaid, peer review organizations (PROs),quality control, and certification of institutional providers in a majorgeographical area. Participates in the formulation of new policy and recommendschanges in existing national policy for all HCFA programs. Develops andimplements a professional relations program within the region for all HCFAprograms and serves as the principal HCFA contact for all professionalorganizations such as hospital and medical associations. At the regionallevel, takes action to implement HCFA national initiatives undertaken tointegrate HCFA program operations and is responsible for coordination ofHCFA programs with other departmental components and Federal agencies.Coordinates with the Department's Principal Regional Official to assureeffective relationships with State and local governments. Manages all administrativeactivities for HCFA components and coordinates such activities with theRegional Administrative Support Center. Initiates and directs the implementationof special regional and headquarters projects affecting all HCFA programs.Directs regional responsibilities relating to experimental and demonstrationprojects. Oversees a beneficiary services program within the region forall HCFA programs. Provides regional perspective to the Administrator,Associate Administrators, Bureau Directors, and Staff Office Directorsin the development of HCFA policies, programs, and objectives.1. Division of Health Standards and Quality (FPD(I-X)A)Under the direction of the HCFA Regional Administrator, the Division ofHealth Standards and Quality assures that health care services providedunder Medicare and Medicaid are furnished in the most effective and efficientmanner consistent with recognized professional standards of care. Servesas the regional focus for assuring accountability to health care consumersfor the quality of health care services. Participates in the formulationand development of health standards and quality policies and programs;interprets and implements health safety standards and evaluates their impacton the utilization and quality of health care services. Ensures appropriatereview and application of conditions of participation for providers andsuppliers of health services under Medicare and Medicaid and other relatedFederal programs. Exercises authority for approval, denial, and terminationof all provider/supplier certification actions under the Medicare program.Makes final determination on all initial budget requests submitted by Statesurvey agencies. Exercises authority on all fiscal matters relating tosection 1864, Medicare State Survey Agency Agreements. Resolves conflictsinvolving the State survey agency and professional review and medical revieworganizations. Oversees, monitors and evaluates the Medicaid State agency,State survey agencies, and professional review and medical review organizations.Maintains liaison with organizations representing health care professionals,providers of health care services, and program beneficiaries. Participatesin the conduct of national studies and conducts comprehensive regionalreviews by selectively evaluating indicators of policy or operational weaknessesto provide information concerning the effectiveness and cost implicationsof HCFA policy and operational decisions. Coordinates State and contractorresponsibilities and activities related to sanctions, civil money penalties,and other Office of the Inspector General (OIG) activities. Recommendscorrective action within functional areas of responsibility including Federal/Statestatutory and regulatory changes to central office and States respectively.Interprets and implements policies and procedures for review and utilizationcontrol programs under the Social Security Act and other Federal programs.Oversees the negotiation and award of grants and the operation of localprofessional review and medical review organizations. Performs regionalresponsibilities relating to experimental and demonstration projects. Developsand implements a program of liaison with organizations representing healthcare professionals and providers of health care services and assumes responsibilityfor associated program training. Provides current feedback to central officeon operations, activities, and problems. Provides regional perspectivein the development of central office policies, objectives, and work plans.Monitors and assesses performance and provides technical assistance toend-stage renal disease (ESRD) networks by overseeing financial managementand compliance with program policies and regulations and ensures coordinationwith States and local planning agencies and peer review organizations (PROs).<T3>2. Division of Financial Operations (FPD (II, V, VI, and X) C)</T3>Under the direction of the HCFA Regional Administrator, the Division ofFinancial Operations is responsible for financial management, institutionalreimbursement, and automated data processing (ADP) systems of Medicarecontractors and Medicaid State Agencies. Assures continuing surveillanceand appraisal of Medicare contractors regarding the implementation of Medicareinstitutional reimbursement policy and procedures. Monitors contractoroverpayment identifications and collection activities; prepares overpaymentcases for submissions to the General Accounting Office (GAO) for collectionand/or to the Department of Justice and possible litigation. Identifiesproblems and initiates action to ensure contractor adherence to nationalMedicare financial management policy and procedures. Directs Medicare regionalfinancial management activities. Directs a program of in-depth surveysto evaluate the effectiveness of the Medicare program with respect to thedivision's areas of responsibility. Conducts Part A quality assurance programand on-site performance appraisals. Negotiates and approves contractorbudgets, modifications to budget allotments, and final cost settlements.Coordinates day-to-day contractor financial management activities; reviewsand evaluates the cost procedures of contractors. Plans, manages, and providesFederal leadership and assistance to Medicaid State agencies in implementation,maintenance, and regulatory review of Medicaid State agency activitieswith respect to institutional reimbursement, financial management, andADP systems. Interprets Medicaid program and financial policy with respectto institutional reimbursement, financial management, and ADP activities.With respect to areas of the division's responsibility, maintains day-to-dayliaison with Medicaid State agencies and monitors their Medicaid programactivities and practices by conducting periodic comprehensive on-site programmanagement and financial reviews to assure State adherence to Federal lawand regulations. Reviews, approves, and monitors Medicaid State agencyinstitutional reimbursement plan. Reviews cost allocation plans, determineswhether such plans are approvable from the Medicaid standpoint, and advisesRegional Administrative Support Centers of such determinations. Reviews,analyzes, and approves Medicaid State agency expenditures for Medicaidcontracts. Resolves audits with States. Reviews States' quarterly estimatesof expenditures under the Medicaid program and recommends the estimatedamount to be approved by HCFA in the quarterly grants. Reviews States'quarterly statements of expenditures and recommends appropriate actionon amounts claimed. Defers reimbursement action on questionable claims,reviews the claims for allowability, and recommends appropriate action.Issues orders suspending Federal financial participation in State paymentsto ineligible Title XIX provider institutions and revokes such suspensionorders. Advises, provides technical assistance, supports, and evaluatesState management information and claims payment systems. Operates systematicMedicare and Medicaid quality control programs in a variety of areas, includingMedicaid claims payment, Medicaid eligibility, third-party liability, Medicaidutilization control, and Medicare Part B end-of-line bill review. Makesrecommendations to the Regional Administrator regarding financial penaltiesand final decisions regarding Federal/State quality control differences.Assists Medicaid State agencies and Medicare contractors in improving themanagement of federally required quality control programs. Recommends correctiveaction by contractors and State agencies. Provides for State and regionalinput to operational plans, policy, regulations, legislation, and budgetformulation with respect to areas of responsibility. Provides current feedbackto central office counterparts on operations, activities, and problems.Provides regional perspective in the development of central policy, objectives,and work plans related to areas of responsibility.3. Division of Program Operations (FPD (II, V, VI, and X) D)Under the direction of the HCFA Regional Administrator, the Division ofProgram Operations serves as a principal point of contact between the regionaloffice and Medicare contractors and Medicaid State agencies within theregion. Directs the conduct of liaison and working relationships with theseorganizations. Directs a program of surveillance and appraisal of MedicaidState agencies and Medicare contractors to ensure compliance with the MedicaidState plan and the Medicare contract (respectively). When deficiences arenoted, ensures that corrective action is taken is appropriate. Throughthe review and approval of Medicaid State plan material, assures the appropriateuse of funds under established policies and conformance with planned objectivesof the program. Assures uniformity in plan changes among assigned States.Directs Title XVIII and Title XIX program coordination to achieve greateruniformity and consistency in assigned contractor and State agency practicesand to eliminate unnecessary duplication of effort and cost between thetwo programs. Provides support to the Medicaid State agencies, Medicarecontractors, and other HCFA components with respect to Medicare/Medicaidpolicy interpretation and specialized technical assistance. Serves as aState agency and contractor review and resource point for interpretationof Federal regulations, program objectives, and policies. Provides significantrecommendations and contributions to national policy development and revision.Provides consultation and assistance to central office in the developmentof new and revised legislation, policy, regulations, and guidelines. Participatesin the development of long and short range goals and objectives of theAgency as well as its policies and directives. Monitors and assesses theperformance of Medicaid State agencies and Medicare contractors in thearea of Medicaid and Medicare policy, procedures, and instructions. Makesrecommendations where appropriate and ensures corrective action is takenwhen deficiencies are identified. Develops and implements a program ofliaison with organizations representing program beneficiaries. Providesdirection and guidance to State agencies and Medicare contractors concerningservices to beneficiaries. In addition, maintains a program of surveillanceand appraisal to assure that appropriate standards are met. Where deficienciesare noted, ensures that appropriate corrective action is taken. Monitorsbeneficiary overpayment identification and collection activities for amountsup to $20,000; prepares overpayment cases for submissions to the GeneralAccounting Office (GAO) for collection and/or to the Department of Justicefor possible litigation. Provides Medicare orientation, training, and day-to-dayliaison with direct-dealing providers and comprehensive health centers(CHCs). Conducts on-site review of all direct-dealing providers and CHCson a regular basis. Individually or in concert with other HCFA representatives,represents HCFA in conferring and negotiating with regional and nationalofficials of other departmental agencies and representatives of privateand public organizations, in matters of the administration of the Medicareand Medicaid programs and the impact of these programs on beneficiaries.Coordinates with the Social Security district offices concerning the Medicareentitlement, post-entitlement, and beneficiary education functions theyperform under agreement with HCFA. Monitors the performance of these functionsand makes appropriate recommendations.4. Division of Medicaid (FPD (I, III, IV, VII-IX)E)Under the direction of the HCFA Regional Administrator, plans, manages,and provides Federal leadership to State agencies in program implementation,maintenance, and the regulatory review of State Medicaid program managementactivities under Title XIX of the Social Security Act and assures the proprietyof Federal expenditures. Provides consultation and guidance to States onappropriate matters including interpretation of Federal requirements, optionsavailable to States under these requirements, and information on practicesin other States. Maintains day-to-day liaison with State agencies and monitorstheir Medicaid program activities and practices by conducting periodicprogram management and financial reviews to assure State adherence to Federallaw and regulations. Reviews, approves, and maintains official State plansand plan amendments for medical assistance. Provides consultation to Statesin the administration of the amount, duration, scope, and reimbursementof health services available under the State program. Reviews, approves,and monitors State reimbursement systems and determines the allowabilityor non-allowability of claims for Federal financial participation (FFP);and where State expenditures have not been in accordance with Federal requirements,takes action to disallow such claims. Stimulates State action toward achievementof selected program objectives and monitors their progress. Reviews States'quarterly statements of expenditures and recommends appropriate actionon amounts claimed. Defers reimbursement action on questionable State claims,reviews the claims for allowability, and recommends appropriate action.Issues orders suspending FFP on behalf of State payments to Title XIX providerinstitutions and the revocation of such suspension orders. Supports, evaluates,and provides advice on State management information and claims paymentsystems. Implements Title XIX special initiatives, such as prepaid healthplans, health maintenance organizations, and other special or experimentalprograms; and operates major management initiatives such as quality control.Where appropriate, provides opportunity for State input to operationalplans, policy, regulations, legislation, and budget formulation. Respondsto beneficiary, congressional, provider, and public inquiries concerningMedicaid issues and takes appropriate action on individual case situations.Accepts and responds to Freedom of Information Act requests and on mattersconcerning the Privacy Act. Supports HCFA headquarters in activities concerningresearch and demonstration projects.5. Division of Medicare (FPD (I, III, IV, VII-IX)F)Under the direction of the HCFA Regional Administrator, assures the effectiveadministration of the Medicare program through the day-to-day working relationshipwith Medicare contractors, providers, physicians, the Social Security Administration(SSA) regional office and district office personnel, elements of the Officeof the Inspector General (OIG), and other organizations and individualsconcerned with program operations. Assures the continuing surveillanceand appraisal of Medicare contractors in the administration of health insuranceprovisions. Monitors contractor overpayment identification and collectionactivities. Monitors beneficiary overpayment identification and collectionactivities for amounts up to $20,000; prepares overpayment cases for submissionto the General Accounting Office (GAO) for collection and/or to the Departmentof Justice for possible litigation. Identifies problems and initiates actionto ensure contractor adherence to national Medicare policy and procedures.Directs Medicare regional financial management activities. Directs a programof in-depth reviews to evaluate the effectiveness of the Medicare program.Conducts quality assurance programs and onsite performance appraisals andanalyzes statistical performance reports. Negotiates and approves contractorsbudget modifications to budget allotments and final cost settlements. Coordinatesday-to-day contractor financial management activities. Reviews and approvescertain subcontracts and leases, monitors banking activities, and evaluatesthe cost allocation procedures of contractors. Conducts contractor appraisals.Interprets HCFA's insitutional reimbursement policies. Relates appropriatelyto elements of SSA, providing consultation on Medicare program mattersand any other activity necessary to achieve progrm objectives. Providesdirection to Medicare contractors in carrying out their responsibilitiesfor interfacing with peer review organizations (PROs). Establishes andmaintains liaison with organizations representing health care professionals,providers of health care services, and program beneficiaries. Takes necessaryaction on matters relating to the Freedom of Information Act and the PrivacyAct. Performs regional responsibilities relating to experimental and demonstrationprojects. Assumes responsibility for program training and assures timelyresponses to congressional and public inquiries. Relates appropriatelyto central office components, such as providing feedback on operations,activities, and problems; and provides regional perspectives in the developmentof Agency policies, objectives, and work plans. In coordination with theDivision of Medicaid, handles inter-program activities such as the Medicarebuy-in for Medicaid beneficiaries.<ITAG tagnum="6">Joseph R. Antos,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Associate Administrator for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-11846 Filed 5-17-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>