<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89524-0016 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-24-89.f2.A1015</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4> Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 24, 1989/ Rules and Regulations <ITAG tagnum="52">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR Part 302 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRL-3352_6] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Reportable Quantity Adjustment_Radionuclides </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Sections 103(a) and 103(b) of the Comprehensive EnvironmentalResponse, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended,require that persons in charge of vessels or facilities from which a hazardoussubstance has been released within a 24-hour period in a quantity equalto or greater than its reportable quantity (RQ) immediately notify theNational Response Center of the release. Section 102(b) of CERCLA establishesRQs at one pound for releases of designated hazardous substances, exceptthose substances for which RQs have been established pursuant to section311(b)(4) of the Clean Water Act (CWA). The RQ for radionuclides establishedby CERCLA is one pound.  Section 102(a) authorizes the Administrator of the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA) to adjust RQs for hazardous substances and to designateas hazardous substances those substances that, when released into the environment,may present substantial danger to the public health or welfare or the environment.EPA recognizes that an RQ of one pound for radionuclides may not be appropriatebecause releases of much less than one pound of radionuclides may presenta substantial threat to public health or welfare or the environment. Thisfinal rule adjusts the RQ for radionuclides established under section 102(b)and administratively exempts from reporting certain radionuclide releasesfor which reporting would serve no useful purpose. This RQ adjustment isintended to allow EPA to focus its resources on the most serious releasesand to protect public health and welfare and the environment more effectively.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>July 24, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>The toll-free telephone number of the National ResponseCenter is 1-800/424-8802; in the Washington, DC metropolitan area 1-202/267-2675.The record supporting this rulemaking is available for public inspectionat the Superfund Docket in Room 2427, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency(OS-240), 401 M Street, SW, Washington, DC 20460 (Docket Number 102RQ-RN).The docket may be inspected between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. Monday through Friday.To review docket materials, you may make an appointment by calling 1-202/382-3046. The public may copy a maximum of 50 pages from any regulatory docketat no cost. Additional copies cost $0.20 per page.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Ms. Pamela Harris, Project Officer,Response Standards and Criteria Branch, Emergency Response Division (WH-548B),U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC20460, or the RCRA/Superfund Hotline, 1-800/424-9346; in the Washington,DC metropolitan area, 1-202/382-3000.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The contents of today's preamble arelisted in the following outline: <ITAG tagnum="74">I. Introduction. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A. Statutory Authority. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">B. Background of this Rulemaking. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">C. Organization of the Final Rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">II. Coverage. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A. Hazardous Substances Subject to this Final Rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">B. Releases Subject to this Final Rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">C. Regulatory Reporting Exemptions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">D. Duplicate Reporting/Regulatory Consistency. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">III. Discussion of NPRM Methodology. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A. General. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">B. Inhalation Pathway. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">C. Ingestion Pathway. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">D. Direct Exposure Pathway. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">E. Establishing the RQ. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">F. Alternative Approaches. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">G. Reporting Requirements for Mixtures of Radionuclides Only. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">H. Reporting Requirements for Compounds and Mixtures of Radionuclidesand Other Hazardous Substances. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">IV. Summary of Supporting Analyses. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A. Executive Order No. 12291. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">B. Regulatory Flexibility Act. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">C. Paperwork Reduction Act. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Introduction </ITAG>A. Statutory Authority The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act(CERCLA or Superfund) of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-510), 42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.,as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of1986 (Pub. L. 99-499), establishes broad federal authority to respond toreleases or threats of releases of hazardous substances from vessels andfacilities. Section 101(14) of CERCLA defines the term ``hazardous substances''by reference to other environmental statutes. Section 102 of CERCLA givesthe U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) authority to designate additionalhazardous substances. Currently there are 719 CERCLA hazardous substances.Section 103 of CERCLA requires the person in charge of a vessel or facility\1\<NOTE/> to notify the National Response Center immediately when thereis a release of a hazardous substance in an amount equal to or greaterthan the reportable quantity (RQ) for that substance. As established byEPA in an earlier RQ rulemaking (50 FR 13463, April 4, 1985), a 24-hourperiod is used for measuring whether the RQ of a substance has been released(i.e., only releases of an RQ or more within 24 hours need to be reported).Section 102(b) of CERCLA establishes RQs at one pound for releases of hazardoussubstances, except for those substances for which RQs were establishedpursuant to section 311 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). Section 102(a) ofCERCLA authorizes EPA to adjust all of these RQs by regulation.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ For this final rule on radionuclides, it is importantto consider the CERCLA definition of ``facility'' in section 101(9). Anumber of consumer products may contain (and at some point release) radionuclides.Because the CERCLA definition of ``facility'' specifically excludes anyconsumer product in consumer use, any releases of radionuclides from suchproducts when in consumer use are not subject to the notification requirementsdiscussed in this final rule. Examples of such consumer products are smokedetectors, radon mitigation systems (for reducing indoor radon levels inhomes), and home water purification systems used to reduce radon levelsin drinking water. Any smoke detector, radon mitigation system, or homewater purification system commercially purchased and used by a consumerwould be excluded from the CERCLA definition of ``facility,''and thus radionuclidereleases from such systems would not be subject to this rule's notificationrequirements. A major purpose of the section 103 (a) and (b) notification requirementsis to alert the appropriate government officials to releases of hazardoussubstances that may require a response to protect public health or welfareor the environment. EPA emphasizes that a hazardous substance RQ is merelya   trigger for informing the government of a release so that the appropriategovernment personnel can evaluate the need for a response action and canundertake any necessary action in a timely fashion. Federal personnel willevaluate all reported releases, but will not necessarily initiate a responsebecause the release of an RQ will not necessarily pose a hazard in allcircumstances. Government personnel will assess each reported release ona case-by-case basis to determine the appropriate response action, if any.In certain limited situations, when direct reporting to the National ResponseCenter is impracticable, the person in charge may report to the nearestCoast Guard- or EPA-predesignated On-Scene Coordinator (OSC). If it isnot possible to notify the National Response Center or predesignated OSCimmediately, reports may be made immediately to the nearest Coast Guardunit, provided that the person in charge of the facility notifies the NationalResponse Center as soon as possible (40 CFR 300.63(b) and 33 CFR 153.203).Section 103(b) of CERCLA authorizes EPA to seek criminal penalties frompersons in charge of vessels or facilities who knowingly fail to reportreleases of hazardous substances that equal or exceed RQs. SARA amendedsection 103(b) of CERCLA by increasing the maximum penalties and yearsof imprisonment for failure to report. Any person who, as soon as he orshe knows of a reportable release, fails to report the release immediatelypursuant to section 103(b) or who submits in such a notification any informationthat she or he knows to be false or misleading, shall, upon conviction,be fined in accordance with the applicable provisions of Title 18, UnitedStates Code, or imprisoned for not more than three years (or not more thanfive years for second and subsequent convictions), or both. Notificationsreceived under section 103(b), or information obtained by exploitationof such notifications, cannot be used against any reporting person in anycriminal case, except a prosecution for perjury or for giving a false statement.Section 109 of CERCLA authorizes EPA to assess civil penalties for violationsof CERCLA section 103(b), enforced through administrative or judicial civilproceedings. In addition, section 310 of CERCLA authorizes citizen suitsagainst persons who violate the notification requirements of section 103(b).In addition to the reporting requirements established by CERCLA, section304 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (SARATitle III) requires the owner or operator of certain facilities to reportreleases of CERCLA hazardous substances to state and local entities. SARAsection 304 notification must be given as soon as the owner or operatorof a facility has knowledge of a release of an RQ or more (one pound ormore if a reporting trigger is not established by regulation). The notificationis to be given to the community emergency coordinator for each local emergencyplanning committee for any area likely to be affected by the release andto the state commission of any state likely to be affected by the release.Through this notification, state or local officials can assess whethera response to the release is appropriate, regardless of whether the federalgovernment intends to respond. SARA section 304 notification requirementsapply only to releases that have the potential for off-site exposure andthat are from facilities that produce, use, or store a ``hazardous chemical,''as defined by regulations promulgated under the Occupational Safety andHealth Act of 1970 (29 CFR 1910.1200(c)) and by section 311 of SARA. Section 325 of SARA authorizes EPA to seek penalties, including criminalpenalties for willful and knowing violations, against facility owners andoperators who fail to report releases of hazardous substances pursuantto section 304. In addition, SARA section 326 authorizes citizen suitsagainst facility owners and operators for failure to submit a follow-upemergency notice of the release pursuant to SARA section 304(c). B. Background of this Rulemaking On May 25, 1983, EPA proposed a rule (48 FR 23552) to clarify proceduresfor reporting releases and to adjust RQs for 387 of the then 696 CERCLAhazardous substances. That Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) also listed,for the first time, the ``hazardous substances'' designated by section101(14) of CERCLA. The NPRM discussed in detail the CERCLA notificationprovisions, including the persons required to notify the National ResponseCenter of a release, the substances for which notification is required,the types of releases subject to the notification requirements, the exemptionsfrom these notification requirements, the methodology and criteria usedto adjust the RQ levels, and the adjustments proposed under section 102of CERCLA and under section 311 of CWA. These issues were discussed furtherin the preamble to a rulemaking finalizing 340 of the 387 proposed RQs,published on April 4, 1985 (50 FR 13456). They will be discussed againin this preamble only to the extent that EPA needs to provide additionalexplanation of these issues in the specific context of adjusting RQs forreleases of radionuclides.On March 16, 1987, EPA published an NPRM concerning the adjustment of RQsfor radionuclide releases (52 FR 8172), with the comment period endingon May 15, 1987. A total of 28 comment letters were received, five of whichwere after the comment deadline, totaling about 150 pages. The commentsreceived, together with the Agency's responses, are contained in the Responsesto Comments on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on the Adjustment of ReportableQuantities for Radionuclides (Responses to Comments), which is availablefor inspection in the Superfund Docket in Room 2427, U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency (OS-240), 401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460 (DocketNumber 102RQ-RN). Today, the Agency is promulgating this final rule to adjust the RQs forall (approximately 1,500) radionuclides. In preparing the final rule, EPAhas considered carefully all of the public comments submitted on the proposalsmade in the March 16, 1987 NPRM. Section II of this preamble describesthe radionuclides and the releases subject to this final rule, while SectionIII describes the NPRM methodology and how that methodology has been alteredin response to comments. Section IV provides a summary of the analysessupporting the rule. It should be noted that other provisions of CERCLA may apply even wherethe statute does not require notification. Therefore, nothing in this rulemakingshould be interpreted as reflecting Agency policy or the applicable lawwith respect to other provisions of CERCLA. For example, unless specificallyexempted under CERCLA, a party responsible for a release is liable forthe costs of cleaning up the release and for any natural resource damagescaused by the release, even if the release is not subject to the notificationrequirements of sections 103 (a) and (b). Similarly, proper reporting ofa release in accordance with sections 103 (a) and (b) does not precludeliability for cleanup costs. The fact that a release of a hazardous substanceis reported properly or that it is not subject to the notification requirementsof sections 103 (a) and (b) will not prevent EPA or other government agenciesfrom taking response actions under section 104, seeking reimbursement fromresponsible parties under section 107, or pursuing an enforcement actionagainst responsible parties under section 106. Note also that this finalrule does not affect hazardous substance reporting requirements imposedby other regulations and statutes. C. Organization of the Final Rule Today's final rule amends 40 CFR by revising the footnote at the end ofTable 302.4 referencing radionuclides. This Table 302.4 footnote now willindicate that the adjusted RQs for radionuclides are listed in AppendixB to the table, which has been added by this final rule. Section 302.5is being amended to explain which RQ to use when two RQs are applicableto a single hazardous substance, one based on chemical toxicity and theother based on potential radiation hazards. In addition, andSection; 302.6is being amended to revise the method for determining RQs for mixturesof hazardous substances and to incorporate the notification exemptionsestablished in today's rulemaking. Finally, andSection; 302.6 also is beingamended to clarify that releases of radionuclides in quantities that equalor exceed the applicable RQ are reportable regardless of the particle sizeof the released radionuclide. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Coverage </ITAG>A. Hazardous Substances Subject to this Final Rule Congress incorporated, in the definition of hazardous substances undersection 101(14) of CERCLA, six lists of substances identified primarilyunder other environmental statutes. Radionuclides, the subject of thisfinal rule, are considered a hazardous substance under CERCLA because EPAdesignated them generically as a hazardous air pollutant pursuant to section112 of the Clean Air Act (CAA). Even though the source of their listingis the CAA, releases of radionuclides to all media are covered under section103 of CERCLA and the provisions of this rule. There are approximately1,500 different radionuclides and, because the Agency has listed radionuclidesgenerically as a hazardous air pollutant under the CAA, all 1,500 are considereda CERCLA hazardous substance.The final RQs being adjusted in this rulemaking are for radionuclides,which are species of atoms defined by their atomic number and mass. TheseRQs are applicable to all chemical and physical forms in which the radionuclidesmay exist. The radionuclide RQs also are applicable to all particle sizesthat may be released to the air. The particle size of a released substanceis a critical factor in determining the potential for that substance tocause adverse health effects through the inhalation pathway. Based in parton this fact, 40 CFR 302.6 had specified that releases of an RQ or moreof solid particles of antimony, arsenic, cadmium, and other elements werenot reportable if the mean diameter of the particles released is largerthan 100 micrometers. However, because radionuclides in a particle sizegreater than 100 micrometers can cause adverse health effects through otherexposure pathways (e.g., direct exposure and ingestion), andSection; 302.6is being amended today to clarify that the radionuclide RQs are applicableto all particle sizes. <T3>B. Releases Subject to This Final Rule </T3>Congress defined the term ``release'' to include within its scope virtuallyall ways that substances may enter the environment:<ITAG tagnum="20">``release'' means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposinginto the environment (including the abandonment or discarding of barrels,containers, and other closed receptacles containing any hazardous substanceor pollutant or contaminant) [section 101(22) as amended by section 101(c)of SARA].\2\</ITAG><NOTE/>   <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ A release of a radionuclide must be reported immediatelyto the National Response Center if that radionuclide can decay into anothersubstance (i.e., a daughter product) in such a time and amount that anRQ or more of the daughter would be released within a 24-hour period afterthe time of release of the parent. Several commenters addressed the issue of when, under the above definition,radionuclides are released into the environment. One commenter asked thatthe Agency clarify whether the radiation emitted by radionuclides is considereda ``release'' <T3>per se</T3>. The emission of radiation from radionuclides, apart fromthe release of the radionuclides themselves, does not constitute a releaseunder CERCLA. Some radionuclides may be emitted in a gaseous form, however,and this would constitute a release. The emission of a radionuclide ina gaseous form is distinct from the emission of radiation from a radionuclide;the latter is not considered a release under section 103. On a related issue, this commenter, as well as several others, stated theywere unclear whether the stockpiling, outside a building, of materialscontaining radionuclides constitutes a release of radionuclides under CERCLA,and thus might be subject to the notification requirements. The Agencyconsiders the stockpiling of an RQ of a hazardous substance to be a releasebecause any activity that involves the placement of a hazardous substanceinto any unenclosed containment structure wherein the hazardous substanceis exposed to the environment is considered a release.\3\<NOTE/> An unenclosed containment structure may allow the hazardoussubstance to emit, escape, or leach into the air, water, or soil. Thus,the placement of an RQ of a hazardous substance in an unenclosed structurewould constitute a ``release'' regardless of whether an RQ of the substanceactually volatilizes into the air or migrates into surrounding water orsoil. This same rule applies to the placement of material containing radionuclidesin tanks or other containment structures outside a building. If the tankor containment structure is not totally sealed off from the environment,the placement into the containment structure of an amount of a hazardoussubstance that equals or exceeds an RQ constitutes a reportable release.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The Agency wishes to clarify that, for the purpose ofthis discussion, an unenclosed containment structure means any surfaceimpoundment, lagoon, tank, or other holding device that has an open sidewith the contained materials directly exposed to the ambient environment.An unenclosed containment structure does not include industrial tanks thathave vents or piping systems to prevent over-pressurization or to providefor material transfer or treatment. This same commenter argued that the temporary placement of raw materialsor products containing radionuclides in tanks or piles at a manufacturingfacility is not spilling, leaking, dumping, or disposing them into theenvironment because it is an intentional method of managing the substancesand because the substances will be used. Whether the material stockpiledor placed in a tank or other containment structure is intended for usein an industrial process is irrelevant to whether that placement constitutesa reportable release. Under CERCLA, whether the hazardous substances areused after a release is not relevant for reporting purposes, though itmight be highly relevant to the government's evaluation of whether it willrespond to the release. The purpose of the CERCLA reporting requirementsunder section 103 is to inform government agencies of the release so thatthey may evaluate whether governmental response is appropriate and to assessthe response measures taken by others (50 FR 13459, April 4, 1985). One commenter argued that radionuclides are a hazardous substance underCERCLA only to the extent that radionuclides are a hazardous air pollutantunder the CAA. Thus, this commenter argued that only radionuclide releasesto the air, and not to other media, would be subject to CERCLA requirements.EPA disagrees with this logic. There is no support in CERCLA for the notionthat anything designated as a CERCLA hazardous substance due to its listingby one or more of the environmental statutes referenced in CERCLA section101(14) is so designated only for releases occurring in the same mediumaddressed in the referenced statute. In fact, several CERCLA provisionsindicate that the statutory authority extends to all media to which a hazardoussubstance can be released. For example, the CERCLA release reporting requirementin section 102(a), as well as the definition of ``release'' in section101(22), both concern hazardous substances released into the ``environment,''which is defined in section 101(8) to constitute all media. Furthermore,CERCLA section 102(a) states that the EPA Administrator ``may determinethat one single quantity shall be the reportable quantity for any hazardoussubstance, regardless of the medium into which the substance is released.''This authority was referenced in the first RQ rulemaking (48 FR 23562,May 25, 1983) and all subsequent RQ rulemakings. Several types of releases specifically are excluded from the definitionof release in CERCLA section 101(22) and thus do not need to be reportedunder section 103. One exclusion is for releases of source, byproduct,or special nuclear material \4\<NOTE/> from a nuclear incident \5\<NOTE/> subject to requirements of the Nuclear Regulatory Commissionfor financial protection under section 170 of the Atomic Energy Act (AEA).Nuclear reactors are the primary type of facility subject to AEA section170. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ Source material is defined as (1) natural uranium, thorium,or any combination thereof or (2) ores which contain 0.05 percent or more(by weight) of uranium or thorium (section 11(z) of the Atomic Energy Act(AEA), and Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulations in 10 CFR Part 40).Byproduct material is (1) any material made radioactive by exposure toradiation in the process of producing or using special nuclear materialor (2) the wastes produced by the extraction or concentration of uraniumor thorium from ore (section 11(e) of the AEA). Special nuclear materialis defined as plutonium, or uranium enriched in the U-235 or U-233 isotope(AEA section 11(aa)). All of these materials are licensed by the NuclearRegulatory Commission and its Agreement States. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ A nuclear incident means any occurrence of bodily injury,sickness, disease, death, loss of or damage to property, or loss of useof property resulting from the radioactive, toxic, explosive, or otherhazardous properties of source, special nuclear, or byproduct material.In addition, CERCLA contains exemptions from the notification and liabilityrequirements for certain releases of hazardous substances. The exemptionmost likely to be of greatest importance for radionuclides is that forfederally permitted releases as defined in section 101(10). In particular,section 101(10)(K) exempts from reporting ``any release of source, specialnuclear, or byproduct material * * * in compliance with a legally enforceablelicense, permit, regulation, or order issued pursuant to the * * * [AEA].'' Under the AEA, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is responsible for issuinglicenses for the possession and use of source, byproduct, and special nuclearmaterial. States who have entered into an agreement with the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission (i.e., Agreement States) are also authorized under the AEA toissue licenses for the possession and use of source, byproduct, or specialnuclear material. Releases of source, byproduct, or special nuclear materialin compliance with licenses issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commissionor Agreement States are federally permitted releases under CERCLA section101(10)(K). Regulations issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission specificallyexempt certain facilities from the Commission's licensing and regulatoryrequirements. Because of these specific regulatory exemptions, the Agencydoes not consider releases of source, byproduct, or special nuclear materialfrom these exempted facilities to be ``federally permitted'' under section101(10)(K), unless the exemptions apply to operations conducted by theDepartment of Defense or Department of Energy (DOE) as explained below.To the extent releases of source, byproduct, and special nuclear materialare in accordance with licenses, permits, orders, or regulations issuedunder the AEA through provisions not administered by the Commission orits Agreement States, they also would be considered federally permittedreleases. For example, DOE governs its radiation protection activitiesunder the AEA by a series of internal orders. When such orders are issuedunder DOE's AEA  authority and releases of source, byproduct, or specialnuclear material are in compliance with the applicable order(s), thesereleases are federally permitted under section 101(10)(K). The Departmentof Defense issues regulations under the AEA governing weapons and reactorswithin its jurisdiction and EPA has issued regulations under the AEA forcertain operations involving radioactive material (e.g., 40 CFR Parts 190,191, and 192); releases of source, byproduct, or special nuclear materialin compliance with these regulations are also federally permitted undersection 101(10)(K). Any release that is an RQ or more above any of thesefederally permitted levels, however, would be subject to the CERCLA notificationrequirements. CERCLA section 101(10)(H) defines federally permitted releases to include``any emission into the air subject to a permit or control regulation under* * * section 112 * * * of the Clean Air Act.'' Pursuant to section 112of the CAA, EPA has issued final standards for radionuclide emissions tothe air as part of the National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants(NESHAPs). These standards currently apply to the following source categories:(1) DOE facilities; (2) Nuclear Regulatory Commission-licensed facilitiesand non-DOE federal facilities (including facilities licensed by AgreementStates); (3) elemental phosphorus plants; (4) underground uranium mines;and (5) licensed uranium mill tailings. Any release of a radionuclide tothe air from these sources, if the release is in compliance with NESHAPs,is ``federally permitted'' under section 101(10)(H) and thus exempt fromCERCLA reporting. It is important to clarify that NESHAPs apply only tothe emission of certain (not all) radionuclides. Specifically, the NESHAPscurrently do not apply to emissions of radon-220, radon-222, and theirrespective decay products from the first two source categories noted above;and apply only to emissions of  polonium-210 from elemental phosphorusplants.\6\<NOTE/> An airborne release of radionuclides not covered under NESHAPsis not considered federally permitted under section 101(10)(H). Furthermore,several source categories presently are exempted from regulation underNESHAPs (e.g., low energy accelerators not operated by DOE, coal-firedboilers, and mineral extraction industries). Radionuclide emissions fromthese facilities exempted under NESHAPs also are not considered federallypermitted under section 101(10)(H). This issue may be relevant to an NPRMon federally permitted releases (53 FR 27268, July 19, 1988).  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ The NESHAPs for underground uranium mines and licenseduranium mill tailings do not specify emission limits, but rather establishwork practices to limit the emission of radon-222 from those types of facilities.The Agency is currently revising the radionuclide NESHAPs. Until thesenew standards are finalized, the existing radionuclide NESHAPs as describedabove should be used in determining whether airborne emissions are federallypermitted under CERCLA section 101(10)(H). The NESHAPs limits for radionuclides are health-based annual limits, whereasradionuclide RQs are reporting triggers based on 24-hour releases. TheAgency will require a report if an RQ above any annual NESHAPs limit isreleased in a 24-hour period. Some of the NESHAPs limits, such as thosefor DOE facilities and Nuclear Regulatory Commission licensees, are annualdose-equivalent limits (e.g., 25 millirem/year to the whole body). In thesecases, after it is known that an individual near the facility has receivedmore than 25 millirem within a one-year period, any radionuclide releasethat equals or exceeds an RQ within 24 hours must be reported to the NationalResponse Center. This issue may also be relevant to an NPRM on federallypermitted releases (53 FR 27268, July 19, 1988).Further clarification is needed for releases of naturally occurring andaccelerator-produced radioactive material (NARM) and the definition offederally permitted releases under sections 101(10)(H) and 101(10)(K).Only air releases of NARM that are in compliance with NESHAPs are consideredfederally permitted. The AEA gives DOE broad authority to control its radiation-relatedactivities and to protect public health and safety and the environment.This authority applies to activities involving NARM, as well as activitiesinvolving source, byproduct, and special nuclear material. However, becausesection 101(10)(K) refers only to releases of source, byproduct, and specialnuclear material, the only basis for exempting DOE's NARM releases fromCERCLA's reporting and liability provisions is section 101(10)(H), whichis limited only to airborne emissions in compliance with the regulationsissued pursuant to the CAA. Furthermore, although Agreement States mayregulate NARM, their authority to regulate NARM is not federally derived(under the AEA, the only authority that can be relinquished to states bythe Nuclear Regulatory Commission is the authority to license source, byproduct,and special nuclear material). As a result, the only NARM releases fromAgreement State licensees that are considered federally permitted are thosethat comply with the NESHAPs applicable to that source category. EPA publishedan NPRM on federally permitted releases (53 FR 27268, July 19, 1988); theseissues, and any comments received related to these issues, will be addressedin that rulemaking. Although the preamble to the proposed rule noted that EPA was planningto clarify the provisions of CERCLA sections 101(10) in a separate rulemaking,several commenters sought clarification or reassurance concerning the applicabilityto some radionuclide releases of the federally permitted release exemptions.Two commenters desired reassurance that releases from commercial nuclearreactors and power plants, respectively, are federally permitted releasesand thus are exempt from the CERCLA notification requirements. EPA agreesthat releases of source, special nuclear, or byproduct material that arein compliance with applicable federal licenses, permits, regulations, ororders issued pursuant to the AEA do not need to be reported to the NationalResponses Center. Additionally, releases that are not in compliance, andthus are not federally permitted, do not need to be reported unless theyexceed the federally permitted level by an RQ or more. In addition to the statutory exemptions from the RQ notification requirementsfor releases of hazardous substances, section 103(f)(2) of CERCLA providesa reduced reporting requirement for releases that are ``continuous'' and``stable in quantity and rate.'' Such releases need only be reported annuallyand when there is a statistically significant increase in the quantityof the hazardous substance released. Releases of radionuclides that are``continuous'' and ``stable in quantity and rate'' may qualify for thisreduced reporting provision. EPA has published an NPRM (53 FR 12868, April19, 1988) regarding continuous releases. That proposed regulation, ratherthan today's rule, resolve all remaining issues pertaining to this provision.One commenter stated that the definition of ``release'' did not appearto encompass a lost sealed source, even though its radioactivity may behazardous. Another commenter suggested that radionuclides in certain formsor shipping containers that are unlikely to result in releases should beexempted from the RQ notification requirements. EPA wishes to clarify thata lost sealed source containing radionuclides in an amount equal to orabove an RQ constitutes a release that must be reported to the NationalResponse Center. The reporting requirements triggered by the release ofan RQ are relevant if a hazardous substance is released into the environment.Under the CERCLA definition, radionuclides are released when they are exposedto the environment or when they are enclosed in barrels, containers, orother closed receptacles that are discarded, lost, or abandoned. Thus,if only the containers are exposed to the environment, but not the radionuclidesthat they contain, no report under CERCLA is necessary, unless those containershave been lost, discarded, or abandoned. Moreover, as discussed previouslyin Section II.A. of this preamble, the radionuclide RQs are applicableto all chemical and physical forms in which the radionuclides may exist.Therefore, the same RQ for a given radionuclide will apply regardless ofwhether the radionuclide exists in a so-called ``special form'' (i.e.,the radionuclide is a single solid piece or is contained in a sealed capsulewith at least one dimension greater than five millimeters) or a ``normalform'' (i.e., any form that has not been demonstrated to qualify as a specialform). Finally, as part of the proposed rule, EPA sought comments on whether aconcentration cutoff (expressed in curies per gram), below which the RQsfor radionuclides would not apply, would be appropriate to eliminate unnecessaryand excessive reporting. Such a cutoff would be similar in concept to oneused by the Department of Transportation, which defines radioactive materialas material containing greater than 0.002 microcuries per gram. All commenterswho addressed this issue (i.e., slightly over half of all commenters) favoreda concentration cutoff. The commenters stated that such a cutoff wouldeliminate the need for many CERCLA reports involving releases that do nottruly pose a danger to the public or the environment, particularly releasesof radon from naturally occurring materials in large mining operations,land holdings, irrigation systems, and mineral stockpiles. EPA considered a cutoff because there may be no benefit in requiring reportsof releases of radioactive materials in such low concentrations. Afterevaluating this issue and reviewing the public's comments, however, EPAhas decided not to pursue a concentration cutoff through this rule. Althoughthe Agency realizes that there is some concentration of radionuclides belowwhich the hazards are so low that a government response is unnecessary,determination of that precise level is a complex task. EPA does not havea sufficient basis at this time for determining the appropriate concentrationcutoff level and, furthermore, does not believe that an RQ adjustment regulationis an appropriate forum in which to make such a determination. The Agencybelieves that a rulemaking designed to limit public health risks causedby radiation exposure, rather than release reporting requirements, is amore appropriate forum. The Agency is currently developing two rules relatedto <T3>de minimis/</T3>exemption/below regulatory concern levels and residualradioactivity criteria that may have a bearing on this issue. If sufficientinformation is provided in the future to enable the Agency to make a findingthat a certain radionuclide concentration would pose a hazard only rarelyand under circumstances that would not likely result in any action beingtaken to respond to the hazard, then the Agency will consider a concentrationcutoff at that time. C. Regulatory Reporting Exemptions In response to numerous comments received on the proposed rule, the Agencyhas decided to exempt from the CERCLA notification requirements for radionuclidereleases three release sources. First, the Agency is exempting releasesof naturally occurring radionuclides from large, generally undisturbedland holdings, such as golf courses and parks, along with those activitiesthat involve the disturbance of large areas of land, such as farming orbuilding construction. Second, the Agency is exempting the dumping of coaland coal ash, as well as radionuclide releases to all media from coal andcoal ash piles, at utility and industrial facilities with coal-fired boilers.In granting these exemptions, the Agency considered the risks posed bythe sources and activity within the context of the purposes of the CERCLAsection 103 reporting requirements. This purpose, as the Agency has previouslystated on numerous occasions, is to require ``notification of releasesso that the appropriate federal personnel can evaluate the need for a federalresponse action and undertake any necessary response (removal or remedialaction) in a timely fashion.'' (50 FR 13456, 13457, April 4, 1985). Thusif the Agency determines that the federal government would never, or wouldonly rarely, take a response action as a consequence of the harm posedby the release or because of the infeasibility of a federal response, abasis for an exemption from the section 103 reporting requirements mayexist. With respect to large undisturbed land holdings, as well as the disturbanceof large areas of land, some commenters noted that these sites and thisactivity would result in the release of an RQ or more of some naturallyoccurring radionuclides (radon in particular). The Agency concluded thatreleases from such land holdings and land disturbance activities rarelywould pose a hazard to public health or welfare or the environment becausereleases would be dispersed widely in the environment at levels not much(if at all) above natural background. Furthermore, the Agency does notbelieve that any action realistically could be taken to respond to suchreleases. Thus reports of radionuclide releases from generally undisturbedland holdings and land disturbance activities could divert National ResponseCenter resources unnecessarily, preventing timely responses to those releasesthat truly warrant a response. Releases of radionuclides from land holdingsand activities involving the disturbance of land for purposes other thanmining, therefore, are exempted from complying with the RQ notificationrequirements. Facility owners and operators still are subject to all otherprovisions under CERCLA, including all liability provisions. The Agency is also exempting radionuclide releases resulting from the dumpingof coal and coal ash, and radionuclide releases to all media from coaland coal ash piles, at utility and industrial facilities with coal-firedboilers. Like the exemption for large undisturbed land holdings and landdisturbing activities, this exemption is based both upon the risks posedby such releases and the appropriateness of a federal response to suchreleases under CERCLA. Based upon information supplied by commenters and upon other readily availableinformation, the EPA Office of Radiation Programs (ORP) performed a riskassessment of utility and industrial facilities with coal-fired boilersto determine if a technical basis exists to exempt these facilities fromreporting under CERCLA for radionuclide releases from coal and coal ashpiles. The ORP risk assessment used reasonably conservative models to estimatethe radiation doses and resulting health risks to residents and workersliving or working near or on coal and coal ash piles. In particular, fornearby residents, ORP estimated doses and risks via the following potentialexposure pathways: (1) Direct radiation; (2) various pathways of exposureto particulates released to the air, including inhalation, immersion inan airborne plume, direct radiation from particulates deposited on theground, and ingestion of crops contaminated by airborne deposition; (3)inhalation of radon; (4) ingestion of contaminated ground water, as wellas ingestion of crops and livestock assumed to be contaminated by the groundwater; and (5) ingestion of contaminated surface water, as well as ingestionof crops and livestock assumed to be contaminated by the surface water.The critical exposure pathway for nearby residents (i.e., the one yieldingthe highest dose and risk estimates) was found to be the inhalation ofradon from the coal and coal ash piles. For workers, ORP estimated radiation doses and resulting health risks viafour potential exposure pathways: (1) Direct radiation when standing nextto (i.e., 10 meters from) a coal or ash pile; (2) direct radiation whenstanding on a coal or ash pile; (3) various pathways of exposure to airborneparticulates, including inhalation, immersion in an airborne plume, anddirect radiation from particulates deposited on the ground; and (4) inhalationof radon. The critical exposure pathway for workers was found to be directradiation, especially when standing on a coal or coal ash pile. (See TechnicalBackground Supplement in Support of Rulemaking Adjustment Activities forReportable Quantities of Radionuclides, available in the Superfund Docket,for more detail on the modeling assumptions used in this analysis.) According to the analysis completed by ORP, the estimated health risksposed by the radiation releases from coal and coal ash piles are withinthe range generally acceptable under the Superfund program. The estimatedhealth risk posed to nearby residents and to workers are all within thegeneral range of 10^\4\ to 10^\7\ individual lifetime excess cancer risk.In addition, the Agency believes that the submission of individual reportsfrom each industrial and utility facility with coal and coal ash pilesmay not be consistent with the purposes of the section 103 reporting requirement.In the case of radiation releases from coal and coal ash piles, the amountand rate of radiation released is extremely similar across all industrialand utility facilities with coal-fired boilers. For example, all coal andcoal ash piles will contain the same radionuclides in low concentrations.The radiation emitted from these piles, therefore, will always be emittedcontinuously at low levels spread over large areas_it never will be emittedat a high rate or in an unusually large amount as the result of a sudden,episodic release. EPA is already aware of the amount and concentrationof these radiation releases. Because of these two factors, submission ofindividual notifications of these releases is not necessary for the governmentto assess whether a response action is needed under CERCLA. Perhaps more importantly, however, a response action (i.e., removal orremedial action) under CERCLA does not appear to be the most appropriatefederal regulatory response to radiation releases that are (1) similarin amount and concentration across an entire sector of industry; (2) poseacceptable exposure risks; and (3) disperse quickly in the environmentsuch that a response is not necessary to cleanup the accumulation of whathas already been released. Whereas CERCLA is designed to enable the governmentto respond on a case-by-case basis where each site or release poses differenthazards and requires a different type of response, other federal regulatoryprograms and mechanisms are more appropriately designed to address thehazards of releases that uniformly occur across an entire industry. Insummary, because the health risks from radiation releases from coal andcoal ash piles from industrial and utility facilities with coal-fired boilersare generally acceptable and because it is extremely unlikely that theAgency would take a response action to such releases, the Agency is exemptingthese releases from the CERCLA Section 103 reporting requirements. D. Duplicate Reporting/Regulatory Consistency Several federal agencies, including the Nuclear Regulatory Commission andthe Departments of Transportation and Energy, have existing requirementsto report radionuclide releases under certain conditions. EPA also mayrequire reporting under the Toxic Substances Control Act. Nearly half of all commenters stated that the CERCLA notification requirementsfor radionuclide releases were an unnecessary duplication or contradictionof existing reporting requirements. EPA points out, however, that the statutorylanguage of CERCLA (section 103(a)) requires that a facility's owner oroperator immediately report to the National Response Center releases fromthe facility that equal or exceed an RQ. One exemption to this reportingrequirement, however, is for releases that constitute a nuclear incidentas defined by section 170 of the Atomic Energy Act (see CERCLA section101(22)). For the most hazardous releases, therefore, notification of theNational Response Center is not required. The statute provides no otherexceptions for situations in which other government agencies also mustbe informed of radionuclide releases pursuant to the directives of otherstatutes or regulations.\7\<NOTE/> CERCLA notification requirements, however, are not intendedto supercede or supplant notification to state and local authorities inthe event of a release. These notifications may occur as they have in thepast; the requirement to report immediately to the National Response Centermay be interpreted on a case-by-case basis, depending on the exigenciesof the situation.  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ While the authority to respond to radiological releasesoutside a building within a federal facility has been delegated by ExecutiveOrder No. 12580, sections 2 (d) and (e)(1), to the federal agency withcustody of or jurisdiction or control over that facility, such releasesstill must be reported to the National Response Center if the release isone RQ or more greater than the permitted release.While EPA understands that some additional burden would be imposed uponfacility owners and operators who would need to file reports with morethan one government agency, one purpose of alerting the National ResponseCenter is to ensure a coordinated federal, state, and local response tothe release, if a response is needed. Additionally, as noted in the EconomicImpact Analysis accompanying this rule, EPA expects that only about 59additional notifications of episodic releases annually will result fromthe RQ adjustments. Thus, the incidence of duplicative reporting due tothis rule is relatively small. Two commenters also questioned how the CERCLA reporting requirement couldbe reconciled with the reporting provisions of the Federal RadiologicalEmergency Response Plan (FRERP). The Agency notes that the FRERP itselfstates that it is a framework for coordinating federal actions within statutoryor other authorities, rather than creating any new authorities itself.One such controlling statutory authority is CERCLA, with its requirementfor the reporting of releases to the National Response Center. Furthermore,the FRERP expressly allows facility owners or operators to contact directlyan appropriate federal agency for assistance, which in this case is theNational Response Center. Therefore, this rule has no bearing on the FRERP.The framework for coordinating federal actions established by the FRERPremains completely in place; the reports required by this rule simply willprovide added information. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Discussion of NPRM Methodology </ITAG>A. General Although radionuclides are potential carcinogens, there are several reasonswhy EPA could not adjust the radionuclide RQs using the existing methodologyfor adjusting RQs of potential chemical carcinogens (see 52 FR 8140, March16, 1987 for a detailed description of the potential carcinogen RQ adjustmentmethodology). First, direct application of the potential carcinogen RQadjustment methodology would result in adjusted RQs for radionuclides ofeither one or ten pounds. Each radionuclide has a different ``specificactivity'' (i.e., a certain number of curies per gram of the element) andone or ten pounds equates to a different number of curies of each nuclide.Neither one nor ten pounds is appropriate for radionuclide RQs becausethey equate to a large number of curies for most isotopes and, therefore,could present an undue hazard if released. In fact, as little as one-billionthof a pound of certain radionuclides could pose a threat to public healthor welfare or the environment. Second, the RQs that would be calculatedfor radionuclides using the potential carcinogen RQ adjustment methodology(one or ten pounds) would differ by only one order of magnitude. EPA believesthat this variation would not be appropriate for radionuclides, which presentlevels of hazard that differ by many orders of magnitude. Finally, establishingRQs in mass units such as pounds is entirely inappropriate because mostradiation measurements and standards in the U.S. are established in termsof curies or dose-equivalent limits (in units of rem). The approach that EPA selected and presented in the March 16, 1987 NPRMbegan with a decision to establish an RQ in terms of activity (measuredin units of curies) for individual radionuclides. To develop individualRQs in units of curies, the Agency relied heavily on the health data andhuman intake limits published by the International Commission on RadiologicalProtection (ICRP), particularly as reflected in its Publication 30 (Pergamon1982). Data were available for 757 radionuclides, and so analysis of individualradionuclides was limited to this universe. Although this list is not comprehensive(there are more than 1,500 known radionuclides), it does represent allradionuclides for which data needed by EPA to develop individual radionuclideRQs are available. Furthermore, the remaining radionuclides are generallyrare and short-lived, and most are of little practical significance. Thus,EPA today is establishing individual RQs for 757 radionuclides. Becauseof the inadequacy of available data for all other radionuclides, they aretreated as a generic class with a single RQ for the entire class. The individual RQs were calculated using the Annual Limits of Intake (ALIs)developed by the ICRP. The ALIs:<ITAG tagnum="20">are the annual intakes of given radionuclides by `Reference Man' whichwould result in either (1) a committed effective dose-equivalent \8\</ITAG><NOTE/> of 5 rem to the whole body (stochastic ALI), or (2) a committeddose-equivalent of 50 rem to any organ or tissue (non-stochastic ALI).\9\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ An effective dose-equivalent is a weighted average ofcommitted dose-equivalents for specific organs, with the weights determinedfrom risk factors associated with the respective organs. It provides ameasure of the overall (i.e., total body) carcinogenic and genetic riskresulting from a radionuclide exposure. The term ``committed dose-equivalent''means that this is the dose that will accrue from one year of intake ofradionuclides during the remaining lifetime (50 years) of the individual.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\9\ The total dose-equivalent averaged throughout a singleorgan or tissue (rather than the whole body) in the 50 years after intakeof a radionuclide into the body. ICRP has presented ALIs for both oral ingestion and inhalation. The ALIs,which are in units of becquerels, are considered to produce harm comparableto that of receiving a uniform whole body dose-equivalent of five rem.It is important to note that ALIs represent quantities of radionuclidestaken into the body, not quantities released to the environment. Thesecurie levels were adjusted by EPA to reflect (1) the difference betweenintake levels and release levels, and (2) a lower whole body dose-equivalentof 500 millirem (0.5 rem), a more protective limitation.  For purposes of this rulemaking, the Agency used conservative assumptionsregarding different releases to air and water, and analyzed exposure throughinhalation, ingestion, and direct exposure. The Agency then estimated thesmallest number of curies of a radionuclide that, if released into theenvironment over a 24-hour period, could result in a person located 30meters from the release point receiving an effective dose-equivalent of500 millirem. Only two commenters expressed a preference for an alternative approachfor adjusting the radionuclide RQs. Both indicated that establishing adose-equivalent level as the radionuclide RQ would be desirable under certaincircumstances. One commenter explained that nuclear power plants coulduse site-specific data to calculate potential exposures for a release,thereby enabling appropriate adjustments in RQs for site-specific application.EPA believes, however, that few other individuals and organizations thathandle radionuclides have this capability. Additionally, the Agency believesthat it is the government's proper role, and not that of a private party,to evaluate the release to determine whether government intervention isrequired. The Agency also believes that development of a special rule tocover releases from nuclear power plants would serve no useful purposeand would be more confusing and difficult to implement. This is particularlytrue because most releases from nuclear power plants would be exemptedfrom the CERCLA notification requirements because these releases are federallypermitted under CERCLA section 101(10)(K) or are excluded from the definitionof CERCLA releases under section 101(22)(C). The other commenter noted that radionuclide transport in some media, suchas ground water, is so slow that there would be time for facility ownersor operators to estimate the dose-equivalent released before public exposureoccurred. The Agency notes, though, that it is the intention of CERCLAthat the government be informed immediately of releases that may pose ahazard to public health or welfare or the environment. Further, the Agencyhas determined that it would be impractical from an implementation standpointto provide different RQs for releases to different media, and, in somemedia (e.g., air), transport of the release to a point of exposure couldoccur quickly, allowing minimal time for an evaluation. The Agency is convincedthat activity-level RQs will result in the most timely reporting. Two commenters argued that one of EPA's objections to a dose-equivalentRQ, the degree of variability in estimating whole body dose-equivalents,also was applicable to EPA's selected approach. EPA disagrees, however,because the curie is a clearly defined number for any given radionuclide.Unlike a dose-equivalent RQ, where determination of whether an RQ has beenreleased would be based at least partially on the exposure scenario associatedwith the release, a release in curies could be measured or estimated irrespectiveof the exposure conditions. By establishing the adjusted RQs in units ofcuries, the Agency has made assumptions about the circumstances surroundinga release, and thereby has reduced the number of assumptions that wouldbe required to be made by releasers to determine if the release equalsor exceeds an RQ. EPA believes that it will be assured of more timely reportingif the method for determining whether an RQ has been released is unambiguousand not open to judgment; measuring or estimating the number of curiesreleased is generally simpler and less open to judgment than estimatinga resulting dose-equivalent. The Agency believes that by making conservativeassumptions about release circumstances to derive activity level RQs, theAgency will be assured that the appropriate government authorities willhave an opportunity to evaluate the need for a response.In developing the proposed RQs, the Agency did not account for radioactivedecay explicitly in its models. After considering this issue further andafter reviewing the public's comments, radioactive decay has been incorporatedinto some of the models used to determine the final RQ adjustments. Forthe inhalation pathway model and the model used to evaluate direct exposuredue to submersion in an airborne cloud, the Agency has decided to continueto ignore the effects of radioactive decay. Both of these pathway modelsconsider exposures to an airborne plume of radionuclides; however, theperiod of release and exposure, and thus the extent of radioactive decayover these periods, cannot be defined. For example, a short-lived radionuclidecould undergo significant decay if the release and exposure periods wereone day, but decay would be much less if a time period of one hour wasconsidered. Because the models do not stipulate the release periods (exceptto assume that they do not exceed 24 hours), the Agency assumed conservativelythat no decay occurs over these periods. EPA also ignored decay over theperiod of radionuclide transport to the point of inhalation or submersionin a cloud. This approach was adopted because transport to a location 30meters from the point of release may occur in a matter of seconds, anddecay would be negligible for a large majority of radionuclides. In the model used to evaluate exposure by the ingestion of ground water,the release conservatively is assumed to be instantaneous to the saturatedzone, and it is assumed that no decay occurs over the period of the release.Decay over the period of transport and period of ingestion, however, hasbeen incorporated into the model. For the period of transport, the timethat it would take for a released radionuclide to travel to a drinkingwater well is first determined assuming conservative transport characteristicsthat take into account ground-water flow and sorption in an aquifer. Inorder to consider decay over the period of ingestion, it is recognizedthat an individual would ingest progressively smaller quantities of radionuclidesas the radionuclides decay over the period of ingestion. For a detailedexplanation of the mathematical calculations used to incorporate radioactivedecay into the ground-water ingestion model, see the Technical BackgroundDocument to Support the Final Rulemaking Pursuant to Section 102 of CERCLA:Radionuclides (Technical Background Document), Chapter 4 and Appendix Bof that report, available in the Superfund Docket. In the NPRM, ingestion of vegetables contaminated by the airborne depositionof radionuclides was considered as another exposure pathway, but it wasdetermined that it was not a critical pathway, largely because radioactivedecay was ignored. With the incorporation of radioactive decay into theexposure models, the results of the vegetable ingestion pathway model serveas the basis for the RQs for some radionuclides. In the model used to evaluatethe ingestion of vegetables contaminated by airborne deposition, it isnot possible to define the period of release and deposition. Followingthe same approach used in the inhalation and cloud submersion models, therefore,decay during release and deposition is ignored. Similarly, decay duringairborne transport to vegetation located 30 meters from the point of releaseis not considered because the transport occurs over a 30-second periodin the model and decay over this period would not be significant for thelarge majority of radionuclides. Once the initial quantity of radionuclidesis deposited upon the vegetation, however, a significant amount of decaymay occur before the radionuclides actually are consumed. Decay over theperiod of ingestion, therefore, is taken into account in the vegetableingestion model. Finally, for direct exposure to a point source of radionuclide, the Agencyhas decided to ignore decay during the period of release and transportand to assume instead that the release occurs instantaneously and thata person is exposed to radiation immediately after the radionuclide isreleased. Radioactive decay during the period of exposure, however, isfully accounted for in the model. See Chapter 4 and Appendix D of the TechnicalBackground Document for a detailed discussion on the methods for incorporatingradioactive decay into the direct exposure pathway model. In summary, the methodology to adjust the final radionuclide RQs uses fiveseparate equations to derive release values, in curies, that could resultin an individual 30 meters from the release point receiving an effectivedose-equivalent of 500 millirem. The five equations represent the followingroutes of exposure: inhalation, ground-water ingestion, vegetable ingestion,direct exposure to a point source, and direct exposure by submersion ina cloud of radioactive noble gas. A sixth pathway equation, which is describedlater in this preamble, is for the ingestion of surface water. AlthoughEPA calculated release values for this exposure pathway, they were neverlower than those calculated for the other pathways and, thus, never servedas the basis for RQs. Slightly over half of all commenters raised concerns about the appropriatenessof certain general assumptions used in the models. Four commenters arguedthat the 500 millirem whole body dose-equivalent was too conservative.EPA disagrees, and points out that Federal Radiation Protection Guidancerecommends 500 millirem as an upper bound on exposure to individual membersof the general public. RQs do not have to be set at such levels that reportswould be received only when there is a substantial danger to the publichealth or welfare or the environment. RQs are simply reporting triggersthat allow government authorities to evaluate a release to determine if,based on the circumstances of the release, there is a need for federal,state, or local action. In addition, alternative and even more conservativedose-equivalents of 25 and 100 millirem per year were noted in the NPRMas being considered by EPA for calculating radionuclide RQs. However, afterfurther examination and after reviewing the public's comments, EPA hasconcluded that, for the time being, the 500 millirem assumption is sufficientlyprotective of the general public and the environment. Furthermore, EPAemphasizes that, due to the conservatism of the exposure pathway modelsnoted above, it is likely that the release of an RQ will result in dosesthat are less than 500 millirem. However, if the Federal Radiation ProtectionGuidance recommendation for exposure limits for the general public changesfrom 500 millirem to 100 millirem, or any other level, the Agency willconsider adjusting the radionuclide RQs accordingly in a future technicalupdate. Another commenter stated that ALIs were developed to protect workers fromradiological hazards, and that RQs should be protective of critically exposedindividuals, such as children, rather than workers. The Agency agrees thatRQs are reporting triggers to protect the public health and welfare andthe environment from the hazards associated with releases of hazardoussubstances. The ALIs used in the exposure models, therefore, are dividedby a factor of 10 to reflect a whole body dose-equivalent of 500 millirem(0.5 rem), as opposed to the occupational exposure limit of 5 rem. TheAgency does not agree, however, that the most critical member of the generalpublic should be used in determining RQs. EPA believes that the final RQsadjusted today are low enough to assure timely reporting for most releasesituations, but not so low as to result in numerous release reports towhich the government would be unlikely to respond. If the Agency determines,however, that RQs for particular radionuclides are inappropriate, thoseRQs will be adjusted in a future technical update. Six commenters argued that the selection of an exposure point 30 metersfrom the release was too conservative. The Agency, however, does not agree.The Agency developed release scenarios that it believes are conservativebut reasonable representations of potential release events. Because themodels derive RQs applicable to releases from a wide variety of facilities,it is likely that the models do not represent accurately all potentialrelease events. However, due to the administrative complexity involvedin developing different RQs for different types of facilities, the Agencyrelies first on conservative models and then on the appropriate governmentofficial to evaluate the risks and the need for a response once notificationoccurs. Although 30 meters was selected as the assumed distance between the pointof release and the point of exposure, a longer or shorter distance, inreality, could be relevant. Most nuclear power plants have restricted areasaround a facility much greater than 30 meters; many facilities, such ashospitals, have no restricted area and 30 meters arguably could be toofar. The Department of Transportation's (DOT) Emergency Response Guidebookrecommends a range of isolation distances for releases of hazardous chemicals(not radionuclides), and 30 meters is within the range of recommended distances.For small leaks of hazardous chemicals, the DOT-recommended initial isolationdistances range from 9 meters to 180 meters, and for large spills the recommendedinitial isolation distances range from 20 meters to 380 meters. Approximately44 percent of the initial isolation distances recommended for releasesof hazardous chemicals is in the zero to 30-meter range. The 30-meter distanceassumed in the exposure models, therefore, does not conflict with the DOTGuidebook and is not unrealistic.Two commenters claimed that the 24-hour period of exposure for some modelsis too conservative and that releases are unlikely to last that long. EPAagrees that it may be unlikely for exposure to last 24 hours for some pathways;however, no shorter period could be determined that was shown to be sufficientlyprotective. The release scenarios were developed to ensure that timelyreporting occurs; without such reports, a release may continue unabatedfor at least 24 hours, and a proper response may not occur. EPA pointsout that all releases must be measured over a 24-hour period to determineif the RQ has been exceeded. Releases can occur over a shorter period oftime; however, as soon as an RQ is released (within a 24-hour period),the release needs to be reported to the National Response Center. B. Inhalation Pathway The inhalation equation derives a release value for each radionuclide.Inhalation release values are in units of curies and represent the activitylevel of each radionuclide that, if released under the assumed set of modelingconditions, could result in an exposed individual receiving a whole bodydose-equivalent of 500 millirem (0.5 rem). Critical assumptions that arebuilt into the equation are that the release occurs from a point sourceat ground level and that the hypothetically exposed individual is 30 metersdownwind from the point of release. The release values are derived by dividingthe ALI for inhalation presented in ICRP Publication 30 by the productof several factors that account for the dispersion in air, the fractionof each radionuclide that could become airborne, the breathing rate ofman, and other factors described in detail in the Technical BackgroundDocument, Chapter 4. Where more than one inhalation ALI is given by ICRPfor a particular radionuclide, the lowest one was used. This approach assuresthat the possible release of the most hazardous chemical form is takeninto consideration. The inhalation model was not used for noble gases other than radon (e.g.,argon, krypton, and xenon). According to ICRP Publication 30, the effectsof inhaling a noble gas are negligible compared to the effects of externalirradiation from a person being submerged in a gas cloud of these radionuclides.Thus, a separate model, described later, was used to determine the directexposure release values for noble gas radionuclides. Inhalation of radonwas considered because the critical health effect associated with exposureto radon is caused by inhalation of radon's short-lived decay products.Five commenters expressed concerns that certain aspects of the inhalationpathway model were unreasonable. One commenter argued that, for radionuclideswith multiple ALIs, the ALI of the specific chemical form should be used,rather than the lowest ALI value for that radionuclide. EPA does not agreewith this commenter. Using multiple ALIs would result in multiple RQs foreach radionuclide; EPA believes that a single reporting trigger is lessconfusing and more likely to assure timely reporting. Four commenters argued that the assumption of a point source release foruniform emissions over large areas was inapplicable, and two other commentersclaimed that the assumption of a ground-level release was inapplicablefor emissions from piled materials or raised stacks. EPA realizes thatany single atmospheric dispersion model will not be applicable to all possiblerelease scenarios. The Agency believes, however, that multiple RQs fordifferent release configurations would add significant complications tothe rule and is unnecessary given the purpose of RQs. Even if the Agencyused many different models to develop RQs for numerous different releasescenarios, there would still be countless other scenarios for which themodels would not be fully applicable. For these reasons, the Agency developedexposure models to simulate release events at facilities that could releaseradionuclides and to calculate RQs that are applicable broadly. Another commenter cited several aspects of the inhalation model as overlyconservative. This commenter claimed that the release fractions used inthe model were of questionable applicability because they were developedfor uranium fuel cycle facilities; the dispersion coefficients were suspectbecause they were extrapolated to a distance shorter than the range ofstandard references; and the model failed to account for vertical dispersion,radioactive decay, plume washout, ground deposition, or ground effectson dispersion. First, the Agency notes that the release fractions werenot developed strictly for uranium fuel cycle facilities, but also fora variety of other radioactive material operations, and they are the onlyknown attempt to quantify in a consistent manner airborne release fractionsfor numerous radionuclides. Second, while the dispersion coefficients havebeen extrapolated to a distance shorter than published ranges, the resultsappear reasonable compared to documented values for distances of 100 metersor more. Finally, dispersion in vertical and horizontal directions wastaken into account but dispersion in the direction of flow was ignoredbecause, relative to the chosen wind velocity of one meter per second,it is insignificant; radioactive decay was not considered for reasons explainedearlier in this preamble; plume washout was ignored because it is unpredictableand because most days are rain-free; and ground deposition was not consideredbecause radionuclides of respirable diameter are unlikely to plate outon the ground significantly before reaching a receptor located only 30meters away.It also has come to EPA's attention that the release fraction used forbromine and chlorine isotopes in the inhalation model may be too low. TheAgency is examining whether a release fraction of 0.5, rather than 0.01,may be more appropriate for these isotopes. Such a change in the releasefraction would result in a lower RQ for four isotopes: Chlorine-36_newRQ would be 0.1 Ci; Bromine-77_new RQ would be 10 Ci; Bromine-80m_new RQwould be 100 Ci; and Bromine-83_new RQ would be 100 Ci. The Agency willbe considering readjusting these four RQs in a future rulemaking. C. Ingestion Pathway <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Ground-Water Ingestion </ITAG>One ingestion equation used for RQ development is based on a release ofa radionuclide to ground water. The maximum concentration in a plume 30meters downgradient from a point source release is calculated using ground-wateradvection-dispersion modeling equations that take into account sorptionof the radionuclides in the aquifer, ground-water flow velocities and otherhydrogeological parameters, and radioactive decay during transport andduring the exposure period. The details of this model are discussed inthe Technical Background Document, Chapter 4. Only two commenters referenced the ground-water ingestion model. One commenterclaimed that the model's ground-water velocity was unrealistically slowand that the model assumed that radionuclides would migrate upgradient.EPA obtained the velocity, however, from published studies that substantiateits appropriateness. Also, EPA emphasizes that only possible exposuresat a downgradient location were considered. The other commenter argued that by assuming that a person would ingestcontaminated ground water for a maximum period of only one year, the modelresults in release values that are too low for certain radionuclides. Additionally, this commenter stated that the use of a point source releaseis inappropriate when approximating the release of a radionuclide froma large area into an aquifer. First, contrary to what the commenter states,the one year exposure time results in higher RQs, not lower RQs. This isbecause the model assumes a maximum period of exposure of one year, eventhough it may take several years for a radionuclide plume to pass a drinkingwater well located 30 meters away (a longer exposure period would resultin a greater intake of radionuclides for a given release amount). By limitingthe exposure period to one year, a greater number of curies would needto be released before an exposed person receives 500 millirem. Additionally,the one year maximum time period is appropriate because ALIs are annualintake limits. Second, EPA agrees that the model's use of a point sourcerelease yields a lower release value than if an area source was assumed,as in the commenter's scenario. However, EPA prefers to use a single ground-waterdispersion model to calculate RQs and believes that the complications addedby having multiple RQs for different release configurations would outweighthe benefits to be gained by such an approach. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Vegetable Ingestion </ITAG>In its analyses for the proposed rule, the Agency evaluated each of the757 radionuclides for which ICRP developed ALIs and calculated releasevalues for two ingestion routes: ingestion of vegetables contaminated byairborne deposition and ingestion of contaminated ground water. For themajority of radionuclides, the ground-water exposure route resulted inlower release values (i.e., was a more critical route of exposure). Further,for the radionuclides for which the vegetable ingestion pathway producedlower release values, the Agency determined that in the vast majority ofcases either inhalation or direct exposure was even more critical thanvegetable ingestion. Therefore, in determining proposed RQs, the Agencychose to proceed with development of a release value for ingestion basedonly on the consumption of contaminated ground water. Decisions to include the effects of radioactive decay in models of otherpathways and to use a different, more conservative model for estimatingthe transfer of radionuclides from air to vegetation tend to exaggeratethe importance of the vegetable ingestion pathway relative to other pathways.Appendix C of the Technical Background Document supporting the NPRM describesthe two models considered for estimating airborne deposition of radionuclides,one presented by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the other presentedby the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP).The analysis of the vegetable ingestion route considered in support ofthe NPRM was based on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission model, which wasdetermined subsequently to be inappropriate for the release configurationsand distances considered for the development of RQs. The NCRP model, whichis very conservative when coupled with the atmospheric dispersion factorconsidered for the inhalation pathway, was determined to be the most straightforwardmethod for determining RQs for the vegetable ingestion pathway. AppendixC of the Technical Background Document supporting this final rule describesin detail the NCRP model. The equation that EPA has adopted for the calculation of release valuesbased on consumption of contaminated vegetables divides the lowest ALIfor ingestion by factors accounting for dilution from the point of releaseto the point of vegetable ingestion, the food consumption rate of man,the exposure period, and the airborne release fraction. The dilution factorrepresents the fraction of an airborne release of radionuclides that wouldbe deposited in and on vegetables located 30 meters downwind. This factorwas calculated using the same atmospheric dispersion factor used in theinhalation pathway equation, and the NCRP model which takes into accountradionuclide deposition from the air, radionuclide loss due to weatheringand radioactive decay, and radionuclide buildup in and uptake from soil.The Agency assumed that an individual ingests contaminated vegetables overthe entire length of the growing season, 60 days. For more details, seethe Technical Background Document, Chapter 4 and Appendix C of that report.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Surface Water Ingestion </ITAG>In support of the NPRM, EPA analyzed qualitatively the relative hazardsof radionuclide releases to ground water and surface water. It was concludedthat the mixing in surface water is more complete than in ground waterbecause of the higher flow rate and turbulence of surface water. Both ofthese factors suggested that, in general, there will be greater dilutionin surface water than in ground water. Based on this analysis, the Agencyconcluded that exposures via the consumption of ground water (under themodeling conditions assumed) would likely be more critical than those throughthe consumption of surface water and, therefore, that the calculation ofsurface water ingestion release values for each radionuclide was unnecessary.The previous analysis in the NPRM was valid as long as radioactive decaywas not incorporated into the various exposure pathway equations. Incorporatingthe effects of decay (as explained in the Technical Background Document,Chapter 4), however, increased the relative importance of the surface wateringestion pathway. In the adjustment of final RQs, therefore, EPA calculatedrelease values for the ingestion of surface water based on the lowest ingestionALI for each radionuclide, a generally conservative stream flow rate, andthe water consumption rate for standard man. Although some of the surfacewater release values calculated in this way were lower than those calculatedfor ground-water ingestion, the surface water release values were neverthe lowest when compared to those calculated for the other exposure pathways.Therefore, surface water ingestion release values were not used to deriveany of the final RQ adjustments. D. Direct Exposure Pathway An equation with the same parameters_the quantity of radiation interceptedby ``Reference Man'' (ICRP Publication 23, Pergamon, 1975) at a distanceof 30 meters from a release, with the exposure limited to 500 millirem_alsowas developed to calculate a value for a third route of exposure, directexposure to a point source of radiation. A separate direct exposure equationwas developed for submersion in a radioactive cloud of noble gas becausesubmersion in a radioactive cloud results in an integrated dose from alldirections at varying distances from the body, unlike direct exposure toa point source.\10\<NOTE/> These equations are discussed in more detail in the TechnicalBackground Document, Chapter 4 and Appendix D of that report.  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\10\ EPA recognizes that a cloud of non-noble gases can contributeto a dose through the submersion-in-a-cloud pathway, in the same manneras noble gases. However, it is generally recognized that, in this situation,the inhalation pathway is controlling. Therefore, direct exposure by submersionin a cloud was analyzed only for noble gases. Four commenters referred to the direct exposure models. Two of them stressedthe desirability of using gamma ray constants for all gamma emitting nuclides.EPA notes that the direct exposure pathway equation incorporates an acceptedequation for calculating gamma ray constants. Another commenter arguedthat it was implausible, in the model for submersion in a cloud of noblegas, for the gas concentration at a point 30 meters from the source toremain constant for 24 hours and for an exposed individual to remain inthat position for 24 hours. EPA agrees that these assumptions are unlikely,but   RQs are based on releases occurring over no more than a day, so themaximum period of exposure in this instance also is one day. The Agencycould not determine a shorter exposure period that it was certain wouldbe sufficiently protective. The final commenter stated that the point sourcerelease model is unrepresentative of area sources and that release valuesbased on a point source model may be too low. EPA agrees that the releasemodels are not perfect representations of all potential release situations,but the Agency prefers not to develop multiple RQs (or correction factors)to take into account many different release configurations because thiswould add more complications than benefits to the rule. Instead, EPA hasadopted a single model to calculate direct exposure release values thatis applicable broadly. E. Establishing the RQ For each of the 757 radionuclides listed in ICRP Publication 30, therefore,four release values were derived. The Agency selected the lowest of thefour values for each specific radionuclide, with the intent of choosingan RQ that is the most protective of human health and welfare and the environment.A detailed explanation of the methodology used to derive radionuclide RQsis in Chapter 4 of the Technical Background Document, available in theSuperfund Docket. To simplify administration and implementation of RQ reporting for the 757separate radionuclides, EPA decided to place each radionuclide in one ofseven groups, with each group assigned a single specific RQ. While theRQs for other CERCLA hazardous substances are divided into only five groups,the Agency decided to use seven groups for radionuclides so that the assignedRQ groups would not differ in magnitude by more than a factor of ten, asis the case for other hazardous substance RQ groups. The lowest releasevalue for each radionuclide was used to determine the group to which theradionuclide was assigned. The RQs for the seven radionuclide groups areas follows: <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L2,tp0,i1,5.3,r25,10 </C>  <H1>Adjusted RQ (in curies) </H1><H1>Lowest release value range (in curies)  </H1><H1>Number (and percent) of radionuclides</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">0.001 <D>0.001-0.0099 </D><D>7 ( 1%) </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">0.01 <D>0.01-0.099 .. ...... </D><D>29 ( 4%) </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">0.l <D>0.1-0.99 </D><D>29 ( 4%) </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1 <D>1-9.99 ... ... </D><D>32 ( 4%) </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10 <D>10-99.99 ... ....... </D><D>220 (29%) </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">100 <D>100-999.99 </D><D>235 (31%) </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">1000 <D>1000 and greater </D><D>205 (27%)</D></ITAG></ITAG>All radionuclides not listed by ICRP Publication 30 have been assigneda final RQ of one Ci. Available information on these radionuclides is insufficientto develop a specific RQ for individual radionuclides in this group. AnRQ of one Ci was selected because it is the middle RQ category, and themajority of radionuclides (91 percent) examined individually have RQs atleast at this level. The Agency believes, for two main reasons, that anRQ of one Ci for these ``remaining radionuclides'' is sufficiently lowto assure timely reporting for most release situations. First, most ofthe radionuclides that fall into this category are rare, both in termsof frequency of use and quantities used. Many of these radionuclides havebeen produced in only a few isolated research projects and many do notexist in the world in quantities that equal or exceed one Ci. Therefore,releases of the radionuclides not listed by ICRP Publication 30 are expectedto be infrequent and, if they occur, are expected to be released withinany 24-hour period in quantities smaller than one Ci. Second, many of theremaining radionuclides  have short half-lives and do not decay into otherradioactive isotopes. Under most realistic release situations, these radionuclideswould be expected to decay and virtually disappear before they could reachreceptor locations. EPA has set a group RQ for these remaining radionuclides at a level thatit believes is sufficiently protective of public health and welfare andthe environment, without posing an unreasonable burden on the regulatedcommunity. Nevertheless, EPA recognizes that an RQ of one Ci may not necessarilyassure timely reporting for a small number of remaining radionuclides.Also, an RQ of one Ci may result in unnecessary reporting of releases ofsome short-lived radionuclides. For example, more than one Ci of nitrogen-13and oxygen-15 can be released to the air within 24 hours from low energyaccelerators. Such a release, however, may not present a level of hazardworthy of a report because nitrogen-13 and oxygen-15 have short half-lives(10 minutes and 2 minutes, respectively) and likely would undergo significantdecay before reaching an exposure point. For these reasons, EPA is investigatingalternate methodologies for developing RQs for the radionuclides not listedby ICRP Publication 30. Any necessary revision to the one Ci RQ promulgatedtoday for these radionuclides will be made in a future technical update.Assignment of the individually calculated lowest release values to oneof seven groups and placement of other radionuclides in the generic RQgroup should not be interpreted to mean that all radionuclides in any givengroup represent the same threat or danger to public health and welfareand the environment. Two or more radionuclides with the same RQ do notreflect a determination that a release of one will be as hazardous as therelease of another, or even that the release of one will be hazardous ator above the RQ level and not hazardous below that level. The actual hazardwill vary with the unique circumstances of the release and the characteristicsof the  radionuclides, and extensive scientific data and analysis wouldbe necessary to determine the hazard presented by each substance undera number of possible circumstances. The RQs are designed to be a triggerfor notification and they reflect the Agency's judgment that the appropriategovernment agencies should be notified of certain releases to which a responsemight be necessary. The RQs represent a determination only of possibleor potential harm, not that releases of a particular amount of a hazardoussubstance necessarily will be harmful to public health or welfare or theenvironment. One commenter suggested that the RQs should not be rounded off into theseven groups, as this is no simpler than being set at their specific calculatedrelease values. EPA disagrees, and believes that seven different RQs for757 radionuclides is certainly simpler than 757 RQs for 757 radionuclides.Also, the model calculations are only approximate, and setting individualRQs at specific release values implies an unjustified precision. Another commenter argued for adherence to the one-pound RQ for radionuclidesnot listed in ICRP Publication 30 until EPA obtains meaningful data onthem. However, EPA has rejected measuring radionuclide RQs in terms ofpounds. Using one pound as the RQ might ensure reporting of very largereleases, but many releases much smaller than this may represent a serioushealth and environmental hazard. Additionally, a one-pound RQ does notconform to commonly accepted units of measurement for radionuclides. F. Alternative Approaches In addition to describing in the NPRM the method and assumptions used todevelop the proposed RQs, EPA solicited comments on other methodologiesfor developing RQs for radionuclides. Two commenters offered alternativeapproaches to the methodology described in the NPRM. One commenter suggestedusing EPA's Protective Action Guides (PAGs), or a multiple thereof, asthe  basis for RQs. PAGs are projected doses to individuals (ranging fromone to five rem) that might warrant taking protective action. EPA notesthat the final RQs were calculated based on 500 millirem, which is 0.5times the lowest PAG. There are several reasons why EPA chose not to use the PAGs directly foradjustment of the radionuclide RQs. First, the PAGs are projected doselevels; they do not specify (or provide guidance for calculating) quantitiesof specific radionuclides that, if released, could cause doses that exceedthe PAGs. As discussed in the NPRM, EPA rejected the option of using adose- equivalent level as the RQ for radionuclides, mainly because it issignificantly more complicated to estimate a dose than a quantity released,and because different releasers could estimate doses in different ways.This could result in untimely and inconsistent reporting. Second, the PAGsand RQs differ in their basic purpose. The PAGs are projected dose levelsthat might warrant protective action, while the RQs are simply reportingtriggers designed to give the government the opportunity to evaluate therelease and mount a response if necessary. Given these different purposes,EPA sees no reason why the PAGs and RQs should be based on the same doselevel. Finally, the ``protective actions'' that appear to be contemplatedby the PAGs are generally large-scale actions, such as emergency responseplanning and evacuation on a community-wide level. The government, however,may wish to take smaller-scale actions, such as cleaning up a release ormaking telephone calls to gather more information or to alert other governmentofficials. The 500 millirem level used to calculate the RQs is consideredlow enough to give the government the opportunity to carry out these small-scaleresponses, as well as any large-scale responses that might be necessary.The other commenter recommended using as RQs the DOT A<T2>2</T2> values, which define the content limits of ``normal form'' radioactivematerial for Type A packages. EPA believes, however, that the assumptionsand methodology used in calculating such values are not applicable to thecalculation of RQs because they assume situations and conditions incompatiblewith determining the size of releases that should trigger a notificationto the National Response Center. For example, the A<T2>2</T2> values were calculated based on the following assumptions: aperson in the vicinity of a failed transportation package receiving theannual dose limit for radiation workers (five rem); the distance from thepoint of release to point of exposure is one meter; the period of exposureis 30 minutes; and subjective assumptions regarding the extent of packagedamage and releases of the package's contents. RQs, on the other hand,are: Applicable for all types of release situations (not just those involvinga damaged package); based on 500 millirem, the Federal Radiation ProtectionGuidance for members of the general public; based, in general, on a longerexposure period; and based on a longer distance to point of exposure (30meters) because they are designed to assure timely reporting in the eventof public exposures, not occupational exposures that might occur at a distanceof one meter. Furthermore, A<T2>2</T2> values are only available for about 250 radionuclides. G. Reporting Requirements for Mixtures of Radionuclides Only <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Mixtures of Known Composition </ITAG>Reporting requirements for releases involving mixtures of known compositioncan be obtained directly from the RQs for individual constituents of themixture. If the identity and quantity (in curies) of each radionuclideinvolved in a release event is known, the decision whether to report arelease must be made in the following manner: for each radionuclide inthe mixture, determine the ratio between the quantity released in curiesand the RQ for the radionuclide. If the sum of the ratios for all radionuclidesis less than one, the release need not be reported. If the sum is equalto or greater than one, the release must be reported to the National ResponseCenter. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Mixtures of Unknown Composition </ITAG>Reporting requirements for mixtures, where either the amount or identityof the individual radionuclides in the mixture is unknown, cannot be basedon the determination of quantities released. There are three possibilities:(1) The identities of the radionuclides involved are known, but the amountreleased of each is unknown; (2) the identities of the radionuclides (orone of the radionuclides) in the mixture are unknown, but the amount releasedis known in total curies per unit volume or weight; or (3) the identitiesof the radionuclides involved are unknown and the amount of some of theradionuclides released in the mixture is unknown (but the total quantityis known). For these cases, the decision to report a release shall be madeas follows: a. <T3>Identity known, but amount unknown</T3>If the identity of each radionuclide in the mixture is known but the amountof one or more of the radionuclides is unknown, the RQ for the mixtureshall be the lowest RQ of any radionuclide in the mixture. One commenter suggested that when comparing the RQ of the unquantifiedisotope to the total release, the latter should be reduced by the known(isotope and quantity) releases, with the remainder of the release thenassumed to be the isotope with the most restrictive RQ. EPA agrees that,in theory, it would be sensible to separate the released quantity intothe known and unknown isotopes and quantities. However, EPA believes thatthis would add considerable complication to determining RQs and, hence,could prevent timely reporting of releases to the government. This commenteralso urged that some <T3>de minimis </T3>level be applied to the determination that an isotopeis known to be present, to prevent trace quantities from being considered.However, EPA disagrees that trace quantities of radionuclides, if knownto the person-in-charge, should be ignored in assessing mixtures. b. <T3>Identity of radionuclide(s) in the release is unknown</T3>If the identity of a radionuclide in a release is unknown or if the identityof one or more radionuclides in the release of a mixture of radionuclidesis unknown, the release must be reported to the National Response Centerif the total release is equal to or greater than one Ci, or if the totalrelease is equal to or greater than the lowest RQ of any known radionuclidein the mixture, whichever is lower. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Common Radionuclide Mixtures </ITAG>In response to comments on the NPRM, the Agency today has calculated RQsfor four common radionuclide mixtures: radium-226 in secular equilibriumwith its daughters (an RQ of 0.053 Ci), natural uranium (an RQ of 0.1 Ci),natural uranium in secular equilibrium with its daughters (an RQ of 0.052Ci), and thorium in secular equilibrium with its daughters (an RQ of 0.011Ci). The Agency has calculated these RQs for the convenience of personsfrequently handling these hazardous substances and these RQs are listedin a footnote in Appendix B to Table 302.4. The RQs are developed directlyfrom the mixture rule discussed above. One commenter endorsed an RQ of 0.1 Ci for natural uranium so long as itwas not meant to apply to natural uranium in secular equilibrium with itsdaughters. The Agency today has clarified that the 0.1 Ci RQ is applicableto natural uranium not in secular equilibrium with its daughters; naturaluranium in secular equilibrium with its daughters has an RQ of 0.052 Ci.H. Reporting Requirements for Compounds and Mixtures of Radionuclides andOther Hazardous Substances One commenter noted that the RQs of several radionuclides (e.g., Cd-113,Be-10, Cl-36, In-115, and Pb-205) should be based upon chemical toxicityrather than radiological hazard. EPA agrees that for some relatively long-livedand naturally occurring radioactive materials, the chemical toxicity mayexceed the radiotoxicity. Two RQs may apply to the release of a substancecontaining radionuclides_one RQ being based on chemical toxicity and theother being based on radiotoxicity. In such situations, the lowest applicableRQ for a substance governs when the owner or operator must report the releaseto the National Response Center. In this way, the RQs reflect the relativechemical toxicity and radiation hazard of a substance. For example, naturally occurring cadmium consists of roughly 12 percentcadmium-113, a radioactive isotope, and several other isotopes of cadmiumthat are not radioactive. The RQ for cadmium based on potential carcinogenicitywill be finalized in a future rulemaking; the RQ for cadmium-113, justone component of naturally occurring cadmium, is finalized in today's rulemakingat 0.1 Ci. A releaser of cadmium metal is required to report if eitherthe RQ of the metal (if the diameters of the particles of the releasedmetal are less than or equal to 100 micrometers) or 0.1 Ci of cadmium-113(regardless of the particle size of the cadmium-113) is released. The RQfor cadmium based on chemical toxicity may be more limiting than the RQbased on radiotoxicity, however, for other materials, the RQ based on radiotoxicitymay be more limiting than the RQ based on chemical toxicity. In both situations,the lowest RQ applicable to the substance released would be the reportingtrigger. Uranyl acetate and uranyl nitrate are additional examples of substanceswith two applicable RQs, one based on chemical toxicity and the other basedon radiation hazard. Both substances are specifically listed as CERCLAhazardous substances because they are included under section 311 of theCWA; however, they both consist of about 60 percent uranium-238, a radionuclide.Based on their chemical toxicity, uranyl acetate and uranyl nitrate havea final adjusted RQ of 100 pounds (51 FR 34534, September 29, 1986). Thefinal RQ for uranium-238, based upon radiological hazard, is 0.1 Ci, whichis equivalent to roughly 660 pounds of uranium-238. Both the 0.1 Ci RQfor uranium-238 and the 100 pound RQ are applicable to releases of uranylacetate and uranyl nitrate, but the 100-pound RQ will always trigger reportingfirst because it is the lower, more protective level. The RQ of 100 poundswill assure timely reporting of releases of uranyl acetate and uranyl nitratefrom both a radiological hazard and chemical toxicity standpoint. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Summary of Supporting Analyses </ITAG>A. Executive Order No. 12291 Rulemaking protocol under Executive Order (E.O.) No. 12291 requires thatregulations be classified as major or non-major for purposes of reviewby the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). According to E.O. No. 12291,major rules and regulations that are likely to result in: (1) An annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; or (2) A major increase in costs or prices for consumers, individual industries,federal, state, or local government agencies, or geographic regions; or(3) Significant adverse effects on competition, employment, investment,productivity, innovation, or on the ability of United States-based enterprisesto compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets.The Economic Impact Analysis for the Final Reportable Quantity Adjustmentsfor Radionuclides under section 102 of CERCLA (Economic Impact Analysis)is available for inspection in the Superfund Docket in Room 2427, U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (OS-240), 401 M Street, SW., Washington,DC 20460. The Economic Impact Analysis shows that today's final regulationis non-major, because adoption of the rule will result in an estimatedtotal annual cost of $1.6 million to the government and the regulated community,with the latter's share being about $1.2 million annually. Of these costs,$256,000 would be due to 59 additional episodic releases expected to bereported annually to the government. The remaining $1.4 million would resultfrom about 1,000 facilities, largely in the mining and extraction industries,that would file reports pursuant to the reduced reporting requirementsfor continuous releases allowed under CERCLA section 103(f)(2). None ofthe other characteristics of major rules are satisfied by today's rule.B. Regulatory Flexibility Act The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 requires that a Regulatory FlexibilityAnalysis be performed for all rules that are likely to have a ``significantimpact on a substantial number of small entities.'' EPA certifies thatthis regulation will not have a significant impact on a substantial numberof small entities. See Chapter 6 of the Economic Impact Analysis for moreinformation concerning this finding. C. Paperwork Reduction Act The information collection requirements contained in this rule have beenapproved by OMB under the provisions of the <T3>Paperwork Reduction Act, </T3>44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq. </T3>and have been assigned OMB control number 2050-0046. Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimatedto average two hours per response, including time for reviewing instructions,searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed,and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding the burden estimate or any other aspect of thiscollection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden,to Chief, Information Policy Branch, PM-223, U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency, 401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460; and to the Office of Informationand Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC20503, marked ``Attention: Desk Officer for EPA.'' <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 302 </ITAG>Air pollution control, Chemicals, Hazardous materials, Hazardous materialstransportation, Hazardous substances, Hazardous wastes, Intergovernmentalrelations, Mineral mining, Natural resources, Radioactive materials, Radionuclide,Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Source, byproduct and specialnuclear materials, Superfund, Waste treatment and disposal, Water pollutioncontrol.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 30, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William K. Reilly, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG>For the reasons set out in the preamble, Title 40 of the Code of FederalRegulations is amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 302_DESIGNATION, REPORTABLE QUANTITIES, AND NOTIFICATION </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 302 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 102 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. 9602; secs. 311 and501(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1321 and 1361.</ITAG>2. Section 302.5 is amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 302.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Determination of reportable quantities. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Listed hazardous substances. </T3>The quantity listed in the column``Final RQ'' for each substance in Table 302.4, or in Appendix B to Table302.4, is the reportable quantity (RQ) for that substance. The RQs in Table302.4 are in units of pounds based on chemical toxicity, while the RQsin Appendix B to Table 302.4 are in units of curies based on radiationhazard. Whenever the RQs in Table 302.4 and Appendix B to the table arein conflict, the lowest RQ shall apply.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>3. Section 302.6 is amended by redesignating paragraph (c) as (d) and byrevising paragraph (b) and the newly designated (d) and by adding a newparagraph (c) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 302.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Notification requirements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) Releases of mixtures or solutions of (1) Hazardous substances, except for radionuclides, are subject to thissection's notification requirements only where a component hazardous substanceof the mixture or solution is released in a quantity equal to or greaterthan its RQ. (2) Radionuclides are subject to this section's notification requirementsonly in the following circumstances: (i) If the identity and quantity (in curies) of each radionuclide in areleased mixture or solution is known, the ratio between the quantity released(in curies) and the RQ for the radionuclide must be determined for eachradionuclide. The only such releases subject to this section's notificationrequirements are those in which the sum of the ratios for the radionuclidesin the mixture or solution released is equal to or greater than one. (ii) If the identity of each radionuclide in a released mixture or solutionis known but the quantity released (in curies) of one or more of the radionuclidesis unknown, the only such releases subject to this section's notificationrequirements are those in which the total quantity (in curies) of the mixtureor solution released is equal to or greater than the lowest RQ of any individualradionuclide in the mixture or solution. (iii) If the identity of one or more radionuclides in a released mixtureor solution is unknown (or if the identity of a radionuclide released byitself is unknown), the only such releases subject to this section's notificationrequirements are those in which the total quantity (in curies) releasedis equal to or greater than either one curie or the lowest RQ of any knownindividual radionuclide in the mixture or solution, whichever is lower.(c) The following categories of releases are exempt from the notificationrequirements of this section: (1) Releases of those radionuclides thatoccur naturally in the soil from land holdings such as parks, golf courses,or other large tracts of land; (2) releases of radionuclides occurringnaturally from the disturbance of land for purposes other than mining,such as for agricultural or construction activities; (3) releases of radionuclidesfrom the dumping of coal and coal ash at utility and industrial facilitieswith coal-fired boilers; and (4) releases of radionuclides from coal andcoal ash piles at utility and industrial facilities with coal-fired boilers.(d) Except for releases of radionuclides, notification of the release ofan RQ of solid particles of antimony, arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium,copper, lead, nickel, selenium, silver, thallium, or zinc is not requiredif the mean diameter of the particles released is larger than 100 micrometers(0.004 inches). <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 302.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>4. In Section 302.4, Table 302.4 is amended by revising the entry for ``Radionuclides''under the ``Final RQ'' column for ``Pounds (kg)'' to read: ``andSection;.''5. In Section 302.4, Table 302.4 is amended by revising the footnote atthe end of the table explaining ``andSection;'' to read: ``andSection;_the adjusted RQs for radionuclides may be found in AppendixB to this table.'' 6. In Section 302.4, Table 302.4 is amended by adding the following tableas Appendix B:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>APPENDIX B_RADIONUCLIDES</T4><H1>Radionuclide</H1><H1>Atomic Number</H1><H1>Final RQ Ci (Bq)</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Radionuclides<T3>@</T3><D/><D>1andamp; (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Actinium-224<D>89</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Actinium-225<D>89</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Actinium-226<D>89</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Actinium-227<D>89</D><D>0.001 (3.7E 7)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Actinium-228<D>89</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Aluminum-26<D>13</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-237<D>95</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-238<D>95</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-239<D>95</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-240<D>95</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-241<D>95</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-242m<D>95</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-242<D>95</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-243<D>95</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-244m<D>95</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-244<D>95</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-245<D>95</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-246m<D>95</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Americium-246<D>95</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-115<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-116m<D>51</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-116<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-117<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-118m<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-119<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-120 (16 min)<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-120 (5.76 day)<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-122<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-124m<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-124<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-125<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-126m<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-126<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-127<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-128 (10.4 min)<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-128 (9.01 hr)<D>51</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-129<D>51</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-130<D>51</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Antimony-131<D>51</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Argon-39<D>18</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Argon-41<D>18</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-69<D>33</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-70<D>33</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-71<D>33</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-72<D>33</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-73<D>33</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-74<D>33</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-76<D>33</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-77<D>33</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Arsenic-78<D>33</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Astatine-207<D>85</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Astatine-211<D>85</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-126<D>56</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-128<D>56</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-131m<D>56</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-131<D>56</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-133m<D>56</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-133<D>56</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-135m<D>56</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-139<D>56</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-140<D>56</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-141<D>56</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Barium-142<D>56</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Berkelium-245<D>97</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Berkelium-246<D>97</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Berkelium-247<D>97</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Berkelium-249<D>97</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Berkelium-250<D>97</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Beryllium-7<D>4</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Beryllium-10<D>4</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-200<D>83</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-201<D>83</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-202<D>83</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-203<D>83</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-205<D>83</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-206<D>83</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-207<D>83</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-210m<D>83</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-210<D>83</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-212<D>83</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-213<D>83</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bismuth-214<D>83</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-74m<D>35</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-74<D>35</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-75<D>35</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-76<D>35</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-77<D>35</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-80m<D>35</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-80<D>35</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-82<D>35</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-83<D>35</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Bromine-84<D>35</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-104<D>48</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-107<D>48</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-109<D>48</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-113m<D>48</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-113<D>48</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-115m<D>48</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-115<D>48</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-117m<D>48</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cadmium-117<D>48</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Calcium-41<D>20</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Calcium-45<D>20</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Calcium-47<D>20</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-244<D>98</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-246<D>98</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-248<D>98</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-249<D>98</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-250<D>98</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-251<D>98</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-252<D>98</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-253<D>98</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Californium-254<D>98</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Carbon-11<D>6</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Carbon-14<D>6</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-134<D>58</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-135<D>58</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-137m<D>58</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-137<D>58</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-139<D>58</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-141<D>58</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-143<D>58</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cerium-144<D>58</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-125<D>55</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-127<D>55</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-129<D>55</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-130<D>55</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-131<D>55</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-132<D>55</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-134m<D>55</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-134<D>55</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-135m<D>55</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-135<D>55</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-136<D>55</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-137<D>55</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cesium-138<D>55</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chlorine-36<D>17</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chlorine-38<D>17</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chlorine-39<D>17</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chromium-48<D>24</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chromium-49<D>24</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Chromium-51<D>24</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-55<D>27</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-56<D>27</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-57<D>27</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-58m<D>27</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-58<D>27</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-60m<D>27</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-60<D>27</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-61<D>27</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cobalt-62m<D>27</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Copper-60<D>29</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Copper-61<D>29</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Copper-64<D>29</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Copper-67<D>29</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-238<D>96</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-240<D>96</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-241<D>96</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-242<D>96</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-243<D>96</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-244<D>96</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-245<D>96</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-246<D>96</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-247<D>96</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-248<D>96</D><D>0.001 (3.7E 7)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Curium-249<D>96</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dysprosium-155<D>66</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dysprosium-157<D>66</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dysprosium-159<D>66</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dysprosium-165<D>66</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Dysprosium-166<D>66</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Einsteinium-250<D>99</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Einsteinium-251<D>99</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Einsteinium-253<D>99</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Einsteinium-254m<D>99</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Einsteinium-254<D>99</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Erbium-161<D>68</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Erbium-165<D>68</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Erbium-169<D>68</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Erbium-171<D>68</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Erbium-172<D>68</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-145<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-146<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-147<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-148<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-149<D>63</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-150 (12.6 hr)<D>63</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-150 (34.2 yr)<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-152m<D>63</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-152<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-154<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-155<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-156<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-157<D>63</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Europium-158<D>63</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fermium-252<D>100</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fermium-253<D>100</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fermium-254<D>100</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fermium-255<D>100</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fermium-257<D>100</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Fluorine-18<D>9</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Francium-222<D>87</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Francium-223<D>87</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-145<D>64</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-146<D>64</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-147<D>64</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-148<D>64</D><D>0.001 (3.7E7)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-149<D>64</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-151<D>64</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-152<D>64</D><D>0.001 (3.7E7)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-153<D>64</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gadolinium-159<D>64</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gallium-65<D>31</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gallium-66<D>31</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gallium-67<D>31</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gallium-68<D>31</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gallium-70<D>31</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gallium-72<D>31</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gallium-73<D>31</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-66<D>32</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-67<D>32</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-68<D>32</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-69<D>32</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-71<D>32</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-75<D>32</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-77<D>32</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Germanium-78<D>32</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-193<D>79</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-194<D>79</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-195<D>79</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-198m<D>79</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-198<D>79</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-199<D>79</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-200m<D>79</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-200<D>79</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Gold-201<D>79</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-170<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-172<D>72</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-173<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-175<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-177m<D>72</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-178m<D>72</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-179m<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-180m<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-181<D>72</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-182m<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-182<D>72</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-183<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hafnium-184<D>72</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-155<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-157<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-159<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-161<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-162m<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-162<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-164m<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-164<D>67</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-166m<D>67</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-166<D>67</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Holmium-167<D>67</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hydrogen-3<D>1</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-109<D>49</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-110 (69.1 min)<D>49</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-110 (4.9 hr)<D>49</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-111<D>49</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-112<D>49</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-113m<D>49</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-114m<D>49</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-115m<D>49</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-115<D>49</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-116m<D>49</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-117m<D>49</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-117<D>49</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Indium-119m<D>49</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-120m<D>53</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-120<D>53</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-121<D>53</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-123<D>53</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-124<D>53</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-125<D>53</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-126<D>53</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-128<D>53</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-129<D>53</D><D>0.001 (3.7E 7)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-130<D>53</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-131<D>53</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-132m<D>53</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-132<D>53</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-133<D>53</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-134<D>53</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iodine-135<D>53</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-182<D>77</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-184<D>77</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-185<D>77</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-186<D>77</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-187<D>77</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-188<D>77</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-189<D>77</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-190m<D>77</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-190<D>77</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-192m<D>77</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-192<D>77</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-194m<D>77</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-194<D>77</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-195m<D>77</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iridium-195<D>77</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iron-52<D>26</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iron-55<D>26</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iron-59<D>26</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iron-60<D>26</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-74<D>36</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-76<D>36</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-77<D>36</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-79<D>36</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-81<D>36</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-83m<D>36</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-85m<D>36</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-85<D>36</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-87<D>36</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Krypton-88<D>36</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-131<D>57</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-132<D>57</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-135<D>57</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-137<D>57</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-138<D>57</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-140<D>57</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-141<D>57</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-142<D>57</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lanthanum-143<D>57</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-195m<D>82</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-198<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-199<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-200<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-201<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-202m<D>82</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-202<D>82</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-203<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-205<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-209<D>82</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-210<D>82</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-211<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-212<D>82</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lead-214<D>82</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-169<D>71</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-170<D>71</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-171<D>71</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-172<D>71</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-173<D>71</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-174m<D>71</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-174<D>71</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-176m<D>71</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-176<D>71</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-177m<D>71</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-177<D>71</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-178m<D>71</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-178<D>71</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Lutetium-179<D>71</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Magnesium-28<D>12</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Manganese-51<D>25</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Manganese-52m<D>25</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Manganese-52<D>25</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Manganese-53<D>25</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Manganese-54<D>25</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Manganese-56<D>25</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mendelevium-257<D>101</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mendelevium-258<D>101</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-193m<D>80</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-193<D>80</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-194<D>80</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-195m<D>80</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-195<D>80</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-197m<D>80</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-197<D>80</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-199m<D>80</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Mercury-203<D>80</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Molybdenum-90<D>42</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Molybdenum-93m<D>42</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Molybdenum-93<D>42</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Molybdenum-99<D>42</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Molybdenum-101<D>42</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-136<D>60</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-138<D>60</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-139m<D>60</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-139<D>60</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-141<D>60</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-147<D>60</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-149<D>60</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neodymium-151<D>60</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-232<D>93</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-233<D>93</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-234<D>93</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-235<D>93</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-236 (1.2 E 5 yr)<D>93</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-236 (22.5 hr)<D>93</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-237<D>93</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-238<D>93</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-239<D>93</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Neptunium-240<D>93</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nickel-56<D>28</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nickel-57<D>28</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nickel-59<D>28</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nickel-63<D>28</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nickel-65<D>28</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Nickel-66<D>28</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-88<D>41</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-89 (66 min)<D>41</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-89 (122 min)<D>41</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-90<D>41</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-93m<D>41</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-94<D>41</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-95m<D>41</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-95<D>41</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-96<D>41</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-97<D>41</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Niobium-98<D>41</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-180<D>76</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-181<D>76</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-182<D>76</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-185<D>76</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-189m<D>76</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-191m<D>76</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-191<D>76</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-193<D>76</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Osmium-194<D>76</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Palladium-100<D>46</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Palladium-101<D>46</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Palladium-103<D>46</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Palladium-107<D>46</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Palladium-109<D>46</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Phosphorus-32<D>15</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Phosphorus-33<D>15</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-186<D>78</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-188<D>78</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-189<D>78</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-191<D>78</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-193m<D>78</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-193<D>78</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-195m<D>78</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-197m<D>78</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-197<D>78</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-199<D>78</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Platinum-200<D>78</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-234<D>94</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-235<D>94</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-236<D>94</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-237<D>94</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-238<D>94</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-239<D>94</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-240<D>94</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-241<D>94</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-242<D>94</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-243<D>94</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-244<D>94</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Plutonium-245<D>94</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Polonium-203<D>84</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Polonium-205<D>84</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Polonium-207<D>84</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Polonium-210<D>84</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Potassium-40<D>19</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Potassium-42<D>19</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Potassium-43<D>19</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Potassium-44<D>19</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Potassium-45<D>19</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-136<D>59</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-137<D>59</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-138m<D>59</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-139<D>59</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-142m<D>59</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-142<D>59</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-143<D>59</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-144<D>59</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-145<D>59</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Praseodymium-147<D>59</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-141<D>61</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-143<D>61</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-144<D>61</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-145<D>61</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-146<D>61</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-147<D>61</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-148m<D>61</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-148<D>61</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-149<D>61</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-150<D>61</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Promethium-151<D>61</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Protactinium-227<D>91</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Protactinium-228<D>91</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Protactinium-230<D>91</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Protactinium-231<D>91</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Protactinium-232<D>91</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Protactinium-233<D>91</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Protactinium-234<D>91</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radium-223<D>88</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radium-224<D>88</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radium-225<D>88</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radium-226F<D>88</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radium-227<D>88</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radium-228<D>88</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radon-220<D>86</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Radon-222<D>86</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-177<D>75</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-178<D>75</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-181<D>75</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-182 (12.7 hr)<D>75</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-182 (64.0 hr)<D>75</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-184m<D>75</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-184<D>75</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-186m<D>75</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-186<D>75</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-187<D>75</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-188m<D>75</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-188<D>75</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhenium-189<D>75</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-99m<D>45</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-99<D>45</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-100<D>45</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-101m<D>45</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-101<D>45</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-102m<D>45</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-102<D>45</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-103m<D>45</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-105<D>45</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-106m<D>45</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rhodium-107<D>45</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-79<D>37</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-81m<D>37</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-81<D>37</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-82m<D>37</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-83<D>37</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-84<D>37</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-86<D>37</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-88<D>37</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-89<D>37</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Rubidium-87<D>37</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ruthenium-94<D>44</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ruthenium-97<D>44</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ruthenium-103<D>44</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ruthenium-105<D>44</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ruthenium-106<D>44</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-141m<D>62</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-141<D>62</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-142<D>62</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-145<D>62</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-146<D>62</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-147<D>62</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-151<D>62</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-153<D>62</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-155<D>62</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Samarium-156<D>62</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scandium-43<D>21</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scandium-44m<D>21</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scandium-44<D>21</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scandium-46<D>21</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scandium-47<D>21</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scandium-48<D>21</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Scandium-49<D>21</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-70<D>34</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-73m<D>34</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-73<D>34</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-75<D>34</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-79<D>34</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-81m<D>34</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-81<D>34</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Selenium-83<D>34</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silicon-31<D>14</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silicon-32<D>14</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-102<D>47</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-103<D>47</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-104m<D>47</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-104<D>47</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-105<D>47</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-106m<D>47</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-106<D>47</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-108m<D>47</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-110m<D>47</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-111<D>47</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-112<D>47</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Silver-115<D>47</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sodium-22<D>11</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sodium-24<D>11</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-80<D>38</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-81<D>38</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-83<D>38</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-85m<D>38</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-85<D>38</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-87m<D>38</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-89<D>38</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-90<D>38</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-91<D>38</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Strontium-92<D>38</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sulfur-35<D>16</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-172<D>73</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-173<D>73</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-174<D>73</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-175<D>73</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-176<D>73</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-177<D>73</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-178<D>73</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-179<D>73</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-180m<D>73</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-180<D>73</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-182m<D>73</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-182<D>73</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-183<D>73</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-184<D>73</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-185<D>73</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tantalum-186<D>73</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-93m<D>43</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-93<D>43</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-94m<D>43</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-94<D>43</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-96m<D>43</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-96<D>43</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-97m<D>43</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-97<D>43</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-98<D>43</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-99m<D>43</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-99<D>43</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-101<D>43</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Technetium-104<D>43</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-116<D>52</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-121m<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-121<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-123m<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-123<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-125m<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-127m<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-127<D>52</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-129m<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-129<D>52</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-131m<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-131<D>52</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-132<D>52</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-133m<D>52</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-133<D>52</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tellurium-134<D>52</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-147<D>65</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-149<D>65</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-150<D>65</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-151<D>65</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-153<D>65</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-154<D>65</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-155<D>65</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-156m (5.0 hr)<D>65</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-156m (24.4 hr)<D>65</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-156<D>65</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-157<D>65</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-158<D>65</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-160<D>65</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Terbium-161<D>65</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-194m<D>81</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-194<D>81</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-195<D>81</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-197<D>81</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-198m<D>81</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-198<D>81</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-199<D>81</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-200<D>81</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-201<D>81</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-202<D>81</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thallium-204<D>81</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-226<D>90</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-227<D>90</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-228<D>90</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-229<D>90</D><D>0.001 (3.7E 7)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-230<D>90</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-231<D>90</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-232F<D>90</D><D>0.001 (3.7E 7)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thorium-234<D>90</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-162<D>69</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-166<D>69</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-167<D>69</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-170<D>69</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-171<D>69</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-172<D>69</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-173<D>69</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Thulium-175<D>69</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-110<D>50</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-111<D>50</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-113<D>50</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-117m<D>50</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-119m<D>50</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-121m<D>50</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-121<D>50</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-123m<D>50</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-123<D>50</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-125<D>50</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-126<D>50</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-127<D>50</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tin-128<D>50</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Titanium-44<D>22</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Titanium-45<D>22</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-176<D>74</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-177<D>74</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-178<D>74</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-179<D>74</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-181<D>74</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-185<D>74</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-187<D>74</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Tungsten-188<D>74</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-230<D>92</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-231<D>92</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-232<D>92</D><D>0.01 (3.7E 8)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-233<D>92</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-234f<D>92</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-235f<D>92</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-236<D>92</D><D>0.1 (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-237<D>92</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-238f<D>92</D><D>0.1andamp; (3.7E 9)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-239<D>92</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Uranium-240<D>92</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vanadium-47<D>23</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vanadium-48<D>23</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Vanadium-49<D>23</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-120<D>54</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-121<D>54</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-122<D>54</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-123<D>54</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-125<D>54</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-127<D>54</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-129m<D>54</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-131m<D>54</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-133m<D>54</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-133<D>54</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-135m<D>54</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-135<D>54</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xenon-138<D>54</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ytterbium-162<D>70</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ytterbium-166<D>70</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ytterbium-167<D>70</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ytterbium-169<D>70</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ytterbium-175<D>70</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ytterbium-177<D>70</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ytterbium-178<D>70</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-86m<D>39</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-86<D>39</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-87<D>39</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-88<D>39</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-90m<D>39</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-90<D>39</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-91m<D>39</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-91<D>39</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-92<D>39</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-93<D>39</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-94<D>39</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Yttrium-95<D>39</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zinc-62<D>30</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zinc-63<D>30</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zinc-65<D>30</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zinc-69m<D>30</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zinc-69<D>30</D><D>1000 (3.7E 13)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zinc-71m<D>30</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zinc-72<D>30</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zirconium-86<D>40</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zirconium-88<D>40</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zirconium-89<D>40</D><D>100 (3.7E 12)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zirconium-93<D>40</D><D>1 (3.7E 10)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zirconium-95<D>40</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Zirconium-97<D>40</D><D>10 (3.7E 11)</D><F>Ci_Curie. The curie represents a rate of radioactive decay. One curieis the quantity of any radioactive nuclide which undergoes 3.7E 10 disintegrationsper second.</F><F>Bq_Becquerel. The becquerel represents a rate of radioactive decay.One becquerel is the quantity of any radioactive nuclide which undergoesone disintegration per second. One curie is equal to 3.7E 10 becquerel.</F><F/><T3>@</T3>_Final RQs for all radionuclides apply to chemical compoundscontaining the radionuclides and elemental forms regardless of the diameterof pieces of solid material.<F>andamp;_The adjusted RQ of one curie applies to all radionuclides nototherwise listed. Whenever the RQs in Table 302.4 and this appendix tothe table are in conflict, the lowest RQ shall apply. For example, uranylacetate and uranyl nitrate have adjusted RQs shown in Table 302.4 of 100pounds, equivalent to about one-tenth the RQ level for uranium-238 listedin this appendix.</F><F>E_Exponent to the base 10. For example, 1.3E 2 is equal to 130 while1.3E 3 is equal to 1300.</F><F>m_Signifies a nuclear isomer which is a radionuclide in a higher energymetastable state relative to the parent isotope.</F><F/>f_Notification requirements for releases of mixtures or solutionsof radionuclides can be found in Section 302.6(b) of this rule. Final RQsfor the following four common radionuclide mixtures are provided: radium-226in secular equilibrium with its daughters (0.053 curie); natural uranium(0.1 curie); natural uranium in secular equilibrium with its daughters(0.052 curie); and natural thorium in secular equilibrium with its daughters(0.011 curie).</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-8416 Filed 5-23-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>