<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89324-0025 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-24-89.f2.A1024</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 56 / Friday, March 24, 1989 /Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Mine Safety and Health Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">30 CFR Part 75</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Automatic Emergency-Parking Brakes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Mine Safety and Health Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final Rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This final rule requires that automatic emergency-parkingbrakes be installed on rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulage equipmentused in underground coal mines, except personnel carriers. Additionally,the Agency has more clearly defined the existing requirement that all otherrubber-tired, self-propelled electric face equipment is required to beequipped with a reliable means of precluding movement when parked. Thestandard sets forth a compliance schedule and performance standards forautomatic emergency-parking brakes and for devices to preclude the movementof equipment when parked.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>This final rule becomes effective on May 23, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Patricia W. Silvey, Director,Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances, MSHA, Room 627, 4015 WilsonBoulevard, Arlington, Virginia 22203; phone (703) 235-1910.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) is issuing final mandatorysafety standards which require automatic emergency-parking brakes\1\<NOTE/> on rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulage equipmentused in underground coal mines, other than personnel carriers. The automaticemergency-parking brakes are required to engage automatically when theequipment is deenergized, and when the equipment operator actuates thepanic bar. Additionally, all other rubber-tired, self-propelled electricface equipment is required to be equipped with some means of precludingmovement when the equipment is parked. The standards are promulgated pursuantto section 101 of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C.811), (The Act).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The term ``automatic emergency-parking brakes'' as usedin this final rule refers to ``automatic parking brakes'' and ``emergencybrakes.'' These terms were used separately in the original standard at30 CFR 75.523-3, which is replaced by this final rule.This final rule is part of MSHA's comprehensive review of the undergroundcoal mining standards in 30 CFR Part 75. On March 1, 1988, MSHA publishedits proposed rule for automatic emergency-parking brakes, announcing thatcomments on the proposal would be accepted until May 2, 1988 (53 FR 6512).In response to comments received by MSHA, a Notice of Public Hearing waspublished on June 16, 1988, announcing a July 12, 1988, hearing in Charleston,West Virginia, to receive testimony from interested parties on the proposedrule (53 FR 22502). The notice stated that the hearing record would remainopen until July 29, 1988. A transcript of the public hearing was made availableto the public. In response to requests from the mining community, two extensionsof the comment period were granted by the Agency; one until August 29 (53FR 28673), and a second until September 30, 1988 (53 FR 53505). Duringthis rulemaking process, MSHA received written and oral comments from allsegments of the mining community. The Agency's final rule addresses thecomments received and is consistent with the goals of Executive Order 12291,the Regulatory Flexibility Act, and the Paperwork Reduction Act.This final rule is based on input from commenters, and safety standardsoriginally promulgated under the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Actof 1969 (Coal Act) on February 6, 1973 (38 FR 3406). As is more fully discussedbelow, the original standards were suspended indefinitely on July 30, 1974,by MSHA's predecessor Agency, the Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration(MESA), (39 FR 27557).Requirements for automatic emergency-parking brakes were originally developedin conjunction with a proposal to require ``panic bars,'' devices ableto quickly deenergize the tramming motors of self-propelled electric faceequipment in the event of an emergency (37 FR 12395, June 23, 1972). Thestandards for panic bars currently appear at 30 CFR 75.523-1 and 75.523-2.They are required on self-propelled electric face equipment used in undergroundcoal mines, except equipment with a cab installed in accordance with 30CFR 75.1710-1.As proposed in 1972, panic bars and automatic emergency-parking brakeswere to work together, the brakes engaging when the tramming motors weredeenergized by the panic bar. Following the proposal, notice was publishedon October 13, 1972, that objections had been received (37 FR 21641), anda public hearing was scheduled for November 15, 1972 (37 FR 22883). Amongthe issues addressed at the hearing was the compliance schedule for automaticemergency-parking brakes.The final rules became effective on March 1, 1973, and retained the requirementsfor panic bars and automatic emergency-parking brakes. On the basis ofthe rulemaking record, the Agency concluded that rubber-tired, self-propelledelectric face equipment is operated where clearances are extremely limited,and that equipment operators are in constant danger of being pinned, squeezedor crushed against the mine roof, ribs or other mining equipment. Alsocited was an increasing number of fatalities between 1970 and 1973 involvingthese types of accidents.The rule's compliance dates were indefinitely suspended on December 19,1973 (38 FR 34810). Equipment manufacturers and MESA technicians had encountereddifficulties in developing performance specifications and guidelines forthe manufacture and installation of deenergization devices and automaticemergency-parking brake assemblies. No new compliance dates were set forautomatic emergency-parking brakes. It was concluded that adequate technicalspecifications for design criteria for automatic emergency-parking brakes,and adequate stopping criteria were not yet available. Also cited was thepotential difficulty of retrofitting older equipment with automatic emergency-parkingbrakes in the same period of time as furnishing new equipment with suchbrakes.In November of 1979, MSHA made publicly available its ``Technical Criteriafor Certification of Performance of Emergency Brakes and Automatic ParkingBrakes on Rubber-Tired, Self-Propelled Electric Underground Mine Equipment,''to aid equipment manufacturers in developing brake designs. MSHA also announcedthat beginning in January of 1980, the Agency would accept applicationsfor certification of performance of automatic emergency-parking brake systems.Issuance of a certificate of performance for a brake system would indicatethat the technical criteria developed by the Agency had been met. Sincethe release of MSHA's criteria, one mining equipment manufacturer has beenissued certificates of performance for automatic emergency-parking brakes.In the preamble to the proposed rule, published on March 1, 1988, the Agencyestimated that 44 percent of the equipment that would have been addressedby the rule was currently equipped with automatic emergency-parking brakes.That estimate was based on an MSHA equipment survey which did not accountfor paragraphs (b)(5), (c)(1) and (c)(2) of the proposal. Paragraph (b)(5)of the rule requires automatic emergency-parking brakes to release onlyby a manual control that does not operate any other equipment function.Paragraph (c)(1) of the rule requires a means in the operator's compartmentto apply the automatic emergency-parking brake without deenergizing theequipment, and paragraph (c)(2) requires a means in the operator's compartmentto release and reengage the automatic emergency-parking brake without emergizingthe equipment. Existing equipment without these features was mistakenlyincluded in the Agency's earlier estimate of equipment that would havecomplied with the rule. Based on commenters' concerns with the Agency's estimates, MSHA reevaluatedthe information gathered. MSHA found that the number of existing machinespresently equipped with automatic emergency-parking brakes which meet therequirements of the final rule indicates that the technology for providingsuch brake systems is available and being used by some equipment manufacturers.Therefore, requiring automatic emergency-parking brakes for rubber-tired,self-propelled electric haulage equipment is now appropriate. MSHA's surveyfindings are discussed in more detail in the paragraph-by-paragraph discussionwhich follows.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Discussion of Final Rule</ITAG>A. <T3>General Discussion</T3>Underground coal miners working on or around heavy equipment in the limitedspaces of underground coal mines are continually exposed to the dangerof being pinned or crushed between two machines or between the machineand a rib or other rigid surface. This final standard reflects improvementsin automatic emergency-parking brake designs and the current availabilityof systems which can protect miners against these dangers. It replacesthe suspended rule at 30 CFR 75.523-3.Rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulage equipment is typically equippedwith service and parking brakes. The service brake functions to stop equipmentwhile it is in motion during power-on operation. The parking brake is designedto immobilize equipment when it is parked. An automatic emergency-parkingbrake would supplement these important safety features by providing forautomatic engagement of the brake when there is an interruption of powerto the equipment or in an emergency situation when rapid-response brakingability is needed.Under the final rule, the automatic emergency-parking brake is requiredto engage immediately when the panic bar required by 30 CFR 75.523-1 and75.523-2, is actuated to deenergize equipment tramming motors. The automaticemergency-parking brake also must engage automatically within 5.0 secondsany time the equipment is otherwise deenergized. Additionally, all non-haulagerubber-tired, self-propelled electric face equipment is required to beequipped with a means of precluding movement when parked.Because the automatic emergency-parking brake engages whenever there isa loss of power to the equipment, it will function as a parking brake topreclude movement when the equipment is deenergized for any reason. Inthis way, the rule lessens the likelihood of human error, which might causeaccidental death or injury from runaway equipment. The rule allows brakeactuation to occur after a time delay of no more than 5.0 seconds whenthe equipment is deenergized to allow the equipment operator time in whichto prepare for the stop when power is unexpectedly lost.Accident and injury data gathered by the Agency demonstrate that minersare exposed to significant risks from mobile mining equipment. A 1978 MSHAstudy of 540 total haulage and machinery fatalities in underground coalmines between 1966 and 1977 showed that automatic emergency-parking brakescould possibly have changed the outcome of 126 of those fatalities.In its Notice of Public Hearing, MSHA announced that it was undertakinga case-by-case analysis of the 189 haulage and machinery fatalities occurringsince 1978 ``to determine the impact of a requirement for automatic emergency-parkingbrakes,'' (53 FR 22503). This analysis, based on MSHA fatality reports,revealed that there was some probability that automatic emergency-parkingbrakes may have changed the outcome of 32 of the fatalities occurring since1978. Twenty-nine of those fatalities occurred on electric-powered haulageequipment, and three involved diesel-powered haulage equipment.This information indicates that rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulageequipment continues to pose a serious hazard for miners in the confinedunderground coal mine environment. Although many factors can contributeto machine-related deaths underground, these studies indicate that theuse of automatic emergency-parking brakes could be expected to be instrumentalin preventing fatal accidents.Some commenters asked that promulgation of this final rule be postponed,pending completion of work on a recommended standard for equipment brakesby the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE). The commenters believed thatthe Agency did not sufficiently consider SAE's draft standards in publishingthe proposed rule for automatic emergency-parking brakes. MSHA has carefullyconsidered the comments and information made available from all sources,including SAE draft standards. MSHA personnel involved in the developmentof the proposed rule have also participated in the development of the SAEdraft brakes standard, which began approximately eleven years ago. It isnot known when the SAE's work will be completed, and the Agency has determinedthat it would not be in the best interest of miner safety to delay promulgationof this final rule until that time. When the SAE standard is completed,MSHA will review it to determine whether brakes in compliance with theSAE standard would meet the requirements of this rule. If necessary, MSHAwill consider amending the rule to permit SAE brakes as an alternativeto the standard.One commenter recommended that language be incorporated into the rule torequire a regular maintenance examination of the brake systems. Frequentexamination, testing and maintenance of all electric equipment by a qualifiedperson is currently required by 30 CFR 75.512. Records of the examinationsare also required to be kept and made available for inspection. Therefore,the present rule adequately meets the need for regular examination, testingand maintenance of automatic emergency-parking brake systems on the specifiedequipment.The recordkeeping provisions in existing andSection; 75.512 are presentlyunder review by the Agency in conjunction with its plans to publish a proposedrule revising the existing electrical standards in 30 CFR Part 75. MSHAis considering the option of replacing the present standard with a requirementfor a certification that examinations have been made, combined with a recordof unsafe conditions found and corrective actions taken.B. <T3>Paragraph-by-Paragraph Discussion</T3>Paragraph (a) of the final rule requires automatic emergency-parking brakeson rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulage equipment, except forpersonnel carriers. Compliance with the standard is required on the rule'seffective date for all newly ordered equipment. Equipment originally furnishedwith or retrofitted with automatic emergency-parking brakes that meet theperformance requirements of the rule is required to be maintained in suchcondition. All other haulage equipment addressed by paragraph (a) of thefinal rule is required to have automatic emergency-parking brakes within24 months after the effective date.In response to commenters, the scope of the final rule is somewhat differentfrom that of the proposed rule. In lieu of applying the rule to certainequipment based on its speed or where it is operated underground, the finalrule directly targets types of equipment based on the fatality historyassociated with them. The types of electric equipment primarily affectedby this final rule include shuttle cars, mine tractors, and scoops. Some commenters requested that a requirement for automatic emergency-parkingbrakes be applied to outby and diesel equipment, as well as electric faceequipment, based on the accident history. The proposed rule would haveapplied to ``rubber-tired, self-propelled electric face equipment,'' exceptequipment with drive mechanisms which preclude movement when parked, andequipment with a maximum speed of 2.5 miles per hour. The final rule requiresautomatic emergency-parking brakes on rubber-tired, self-propelled electrichaulage equipment, except personnel carriers.The Agency has determined that the final rule should apply to such equipment,regardless of where it is operated in a mine. As previously noted, MSHA'scase-by-case analysis of haulage-related fatalities occurring since 1978,revealed that at least 29 brakes-related fatalities involving electrichaulage equipment occurring since 1978 could possibly have been preventedby automatic emergency-parking brakes. Scoops were involved in 15 of thesefatalities, shuttle cars were involved in 10, and mine tractors in four.More than half of these fatal accidents occurred in areas outby the lastopen crosscut. Thus, the final rule is tailored to address the equipmenttype and its accident history. MSHA anticipates that requiring automaticemergency-parking brakes will reduce the number of fatalities on such equipment,both inby and outby the last open crosscut.Although none of the 29 deaths were attributable to longwall shield haulers,these machines are extremely large, and are used to haul heavy loads. Therefore,the same danger of pinning or crushing accidents in the future exists onlongwall shield haulers as on other kinds of heavy electric haulage equipment.Such machines are not yet widely used in the industry, but the increaseduse of longwall mining systems suggests that the future number of longwallshield haulers will increase, thereby elevating the risk of injury to miners.The final rule clarifies that personnel carriers are not required to beequipped with automatic emergency-parking brakes. Such vehicles would nothave been included in the scope of the proposed rule. The Agency is notaware of any fatalities indicating a need for automatic emergency-parkingbrakes on personnel carriers. In light of this information, MSHA has determinedthat automatic emergency-parking brakes could pose an unjustifiable hazardon machines such as personnel carriers, used solely for transporting miners.Personnel carriers are generally required to be equipped with well-maintainedbrakes through application of the safeguard provision in 30 CFR 75.1403-10(1).Since they are non-haulage machines, roof bolters are excluded from thescope of the automatic emergency-parking brake requirement, regardlessof their maximum speed. This exclusion is also based on the lack of brake-relatedaccidents associated with roof bolters. However, roof bolters are requiredby paragraph (d) to be equipped with a means of precluding movement whilestationary and unattended.MSHA estimates that approximately 7,600 machines are affected by the automaticemergency-parking brake requirement, somewhat less than would have beenaddressed under the proposed rule. The decrease is due primarily to theelimination of nonhaulage face equipment which travels faster than 2.5miles-per-hour from the scope of the final rule.The Agency is in the process of reviewing the recommendations of the MSHADiesel Advisory Committee, convened in January 1988 to evaluate the needfor new safety standards applicable to diesel-powered equipment in undergroundcoal mines. The Advisory Committee stated in its final report that ``brakesystems should meet exacting standards,'' and that ``brake requirementsshould not be unique for diesel equipment.'' The advisory committee recommendedthat brake systems be made a part of the approval of diesel mining equipment,(Report of the Mine Safety and Health Administration Advisory Committeefor Diesel-Powered Equipment in Underground Coal Mines, July, 1988. pp.40-41). Until the Agency completes its proposed rules for diesel equipment,it would be inappropriate to set requirements for such equipment withinthe context of this rulemaking process. The Agency intends to considerthis issue within the context of its proposed rules for diesel-poweredequipment.The final rule's compliance schedule is based on information gathered byMSHA in July of 1987 and September of 1988. New equipment ordered on orafter the effective date must be equipped with automatic emergency-parkingbrakes. One commenter indicated that at least one such brake system isavailable ``off the shelf.'' Another commenter stressed that a furtherdelay in requiring automatic emergency-parking brakes unnecessarily jeopardizesthe safety of miners underground. Compliance with the final rule is requiredon the effective date for affected equipment which was originally furnishedwith or retrofitted with automatic emergency-parking brakes and which meetsthe requirements of the standard. The intent of this language is to prohibitany disabling of brake systems on affected equipment that are currentlyin compliance with the final rule, and to assure that original systemswhich would have complied with the rule are restored to complying condition.Commenters questioned the accuracy of the Agency's earlier estimate ofexisting equipment which would have been in compliance with the proposedrule. An independent equipment survey submitted to the Agency by a commenterestimates that 10 percent or less of existing equipment addressed by theproposed rule would have been in compliance with the proposed standard.A second survey of an unspecified number of equipment manufacturers submittedto MSHA by representatives of the mining industry showed a large estimatedpercentage of the affected equipment to be in compliance with many aspectsof the rule.Approximately 7,600 machines will be affected by the final rule. Informationgathered by MSHA since publication of the proposal indicates that approximatelyeight percent of the equipment, or 600 machines, is currently equippedwith automatic emergency-parking brakes that would comply with all aspectsof the rule. Of the remaining equipment, 57 percent, or 4,350 machines,would require minor modifications, and approximately 35 percent of existingequipment, or 2,650 machines, would require substantial work to be retrofittedwith automatic emergency-parking brakes which would comply with the finalrule. Based on this information, the rule sets a 24-month delayed effectivedate for such equipment to allow operators sufficient time to retrofitexisting machines with automatic emergency-parking brake systems. Paragraph (b) of the final rule contains the performance criteria for automaticemergency-parking brakes. Some commenters requested that a formal approvalsystem be adopted for the brakes. However, the Agency believes that thefinal rule is sufficiently specific to allow for the design of brake systemswhich would comply with the rule. As previously noted, some existing machinesare equipped with automatic emergency-parking brake systems which wouldprovide the required safety performance. Therefore, the technology existsfor design and installation of such systems. Further, the final rule providesfor compliance alternatives which achieve specific safety objectives.Paragraph (b)(1) requires automatic emergency-parking brakes to be activatedimmediately by the emergency deenergization device, or panic bar, presentlyrequired by 30 CFR 75.523-1 and 75.523-2. This provision couples the automaticemergency-parking brakes with the panic bar function. The panic bar isrequired to deenergize the tramming motors of the machine when actuatedby the operator. For more than a decade, equipment operators have reliedon panic bars to quickly deenergize the tramming motors of mine equipmentin emergencies. Once the tramming motors have been deenergized, the vehiclemust also be stopped. Coupling the panic bar with the automatic emergency-parkingbrake would be an effective means of stopping equipment in emergency situations,and avoiding crushing and pinning accidents.Actuation of the panic bar is normally an intentional action on the partof and under the control of the equipment operator. If the operator perceivesa dangerous or emergency situation and hits the panic bar, the automaticemergency-parking brake is required to be activated immediately. In suchsituations, the halting of the machine is expected by the operator, sincehe or she initiated the action. The operator is sufficiently warned ofthe imminent stop of the equipment, and can prepare for it.Existing andSection; 75.523-1(b) excepts equipment with a substantially constructedcab from the panic bar requirement. It is not the intent of this finalrule to now require panic bars on such equipment, but to couple the functionsof the automatic emergency-parking brake and the panic bar on machinespresently required to be equipped with panic bars. All other aspects ofthe final rule would apply to rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulageequipment not required to have a panic bar.Paragraph (b)(2) requires the automatic emergency-parking brake to engageautomatically within 5.0 seconds when the equipment is deenergized. Whenequipment is intentionally deenergized by the equipment operator or unintentionallydeenergized because of a fault in the section electrical system, for example,paragraph (b)(2) requires automatic application of the automatic emergency-parkingbrake.This provision of the final rule differs from the proposal in an importantaspect. Several commenters expressed concern that equipment operators couldbe injured by a sudden stop upon unexpected deenergization of their equipment.Although the preamble to the proposed rule stated that the Agency wouldaccept a slight time delay in actuation of the brakes in such situationsto avoid operator injury, commenters requested clarification in the textof the final rule. Therefore, the final rule allows brake designs whichwill engage automatically after a time delay of up to 5.0 seconds betweeninterruption of power and the onset of brake application.This would allow the operator time to prepare for the stop, or stop themachine by use of either the service brake or by application of the automaticemergency-parking brake using the panic bar. The rule permits a maximumfive-second time delay for application of the brake. It is not mandatoryunder the final rule, but allows for compliance flexibility in the interestof preventing sudden stop operator injury. The five-second maximum wasestablished after an analysis of the delay designed into current brakesystems, which normally ranges from 2.5 to 4.5 seconds. MSHA does not wishto make such systems obsolete under the final rule. Also relevant to theAgency's decision was the intent that the brake should set before the operatorleaves the compartment, and before steering and braking capacity is lostupon deenergization.MSHA is not aware of any equipment operator fatalities linked to suddenequipment stops. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health(NIOSH) supported the proposed rule as containing ``prudent safety requirements.''However, NIOSH recommended either limiting the rate of deceleration uponbrake engagement, or requiring full-body safety restraints for equipmentoperators.A representative of NIOSH testified at the public hearing that ``abruptdeceleration greater than 10.0 g's * * * can produce injury, especiallyif the deceleration is due to free-fall.'' (Hearing Transcript, p. 30.)MSHA's Office of Technical Support estimates that the brake required bythe final rule would produce a maximum deceleration of only 0.8 g.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ This figure is consistent with post-hearing comments submittedby NIOSH.The Agency has determined that a full-body restraint requirement wouldbe inappropriate for the mining equipment addressed by the final rule.The design and seating configurations of such equipment would make sucha requirement infeasible. However, the final rule does not prohibit theuse of safety restraints if the design of the operator's compartment allows.Paragraph (b)(3) requires automatic emergency-parking brakes to safelybring the equipment to a complete stop when it is fully loaded on the maximumgrade on which the equipment is operated. This aspect of the final rulestates a basic performance objective of automatic emergency-parking brakes;to safely arrest the motion of equipment when they are engaged. The standarddoes not require a particular level of stopping capacity. Instead, it requiresautomatic emergency-parking brakes which are suitable to the equipmenton which they are installed and the conditions under which the equipmentis operated. When the equipment is loaded and on the maximum grade on whichit is operated, the automatic emergency-parking brake system must safelybring the equipment to a halt.The final rule does not retain the criterion of the suspended rule whichprovides that automatic emergency-parking brakes ``bring the equipmentto a complete stop within the same distance as the service brakes.'' Equipmentthat is covered by the final rule employs a broad array of service brakedesigns, which have varying performance characteristics. This variationwould give rise to inconsistent performance requirements, depending onservice brake designs. For this reason, MSHA does not believe that performanceof equipment service brakes provides a useful measure in all cases of performancefor automatic emergency-parking brakes.Paragraph (b)(4) requires that automatic emergency-parking brakes holdequipment stationary despite any contraction of brake parts, exhaustionof any nonmechanical source of energy, or leakage. Even a small amountof brake fluid leakage can lead to an extreme pressure drop in a hydraulically-appliedparking brake system. Also, normal operation of mine equipment can elevatethe temperature of hydraulic fluids in the brake system to 150 degreesFahrenheit, or greater. Contraction of this fluid as it cools can causea significant decrease in hydraulic pressure and concurrent loss of thebrake's holding capacity. Either of these situations can cause releaseof the brake, or significant lessening of its grade holding capacity. Atleast four fatalities have occurred since 1978 when machines moved afterhydraulically-applied locking devices used as a parking brake lost pressureand failed.The standard addresses these dangers by prohibiting brake designs thatrely on sustained hydraulic pressure for activation of the brake. One commenterrequested that the final rule specifically prohibit for use as a parkingbrake electrically-activated brakes, and devices such as lever locks whichtrap hydraulic pressure in order to hold equipment stationary. The commenterpointed out that a major manufacturer of hydraulically-applied lever locksrequires purchasers to affix a warning on the equipment in sight of theoperator that such devices are ``not to be used in place of original equipmentparking brakes.'' Mechanisms which rely on trapped hydraulic fluid or stored non-mechanicalenergy would not comply with paragraph (b)(4). For example, fluid leakagein a hydraulically-applied brake system would cause failure of the brake.Similarly, the use of battery-applied brake systems would not comply withthe rule since exhaustion of the battery would cause failure of the brake.Therefore, the commenter's suggestions are already addressed by the finalrule.Some currently available automatic emergency-parking brakes are mechanicallyor spring-applied and hydraulically released. The spring pack caliper isdesigned so that the release of hydraulic pressure allows application ofthe brake pads to the brake disk. Therefore, hydraulic fluid leakage cannotcause release of the brake. Such systems would comply with paragraph (b)(4)of the final rule.Paragraph (b)(5) requires that automatic emergency-parking brakes releaseonly by a manual control which does not operate any other equipment function.A brake release control which operates the automatic emergency-parkingbrake coincidentally with another function can lead to an unintentionalrelease of the brake. For example, if a single control releases the automaticemergency-parking brake and operates the conveyor boom on a shuttle car,the equipment operator could inadvertently release the brake while attemptingto raise or lower the conveyor boom. Such human error can allow equipmentto unexpectedly roll, striking down and injuring or killing miners in itspath. The final rule addresses this hazard by requiring brake controlsto be separate from those for other equipment functions.One commenter suggested requiring a manually operated release to be tiedto another function which is standard for each type of equipment. The commenterstated that such a requirement would lessen the tendency to neglect systemswhich are not a part of the operational routine. This suggestion was notincorporated in the final rule due to the differences in equipment designsand the danger associated with a control device shared by the brake systemand some other function. Paragraph (c)(1) requires that there be a means in the equipment operator'scompartment to apply the automatic emergency-parking brake manually withoutdeenergizing the equipment. At least five fatalities have occurred since1978 when equipment operators were repositioning themselves or were notat the controls of an energized machine when it rolled away. For example,operators of energized shuttle cars positioned on unloading ramps sometimesleave their operator's compartments to change seats. Equipment operatorsoften mistakenly rely on the service brake secured by a manual hydrauliccheck valve in this situation. If the service brake releases for any reason,the shuttle car could roll down the ramp, possibly killing miners in itspath. A manually operated hydraulic parking valve located in the operator's compartmentwhich can be used to set and release the automatic emergency-parking brakeis currently available. With this or similar devices, energized equipmentcan be effectively immobilized without the danger of it rolling away whileenergized but unattended. One commenter supported the provision as affordingthe equipment operator greater control over the operation of the parkingbrake. Paragraph (c)(2) requires a means of releasing and reengaging the automaticemergency-parking brakes on a vehicle from the operator's compartment withoutenergizing the equipment. This provision of the final rule addresses commenters'concerns about the ability to move a deenergized unit of equipment oncethe automatic emergency-parking brake has been set. It requires a meansfor release and re-engagement of the brakes to tow or otherwise move disableddeenergized equipment without requiring miners to adjust the brakes manually.Without such a release and re-engagement device in the operator's compartment,the brake caliper must be manually adjusted to release it. Manual adjustmentof the brake would require a miner to be placed in a dangerous positionoutside of the operator's compartment. A miner in this position could becrushed between machine components or between a mine surface and the machineshould the equipment move when the brake is released. The danger of suchequipment rolling away is particularly great when proper blocking techniquesare not used.Manually reengaging the brake presents a similar hazard. When a disabledvehicle is towed or moved to be repaired, it must be immobilized once itreaches its destination. If the automatic emergency-parking brake has tobe manually adjusted, miners would again be placed in a dangerous position.The potential also exists for inadvertently putting equipment back intoservice without resetting and adjusting the automatic emergency-parkingbrake caliper.Paragraph (d) requires rubber-tired, self-propelled electric face equipmentwhich is not within the scope of paragraph (a) of the standard to be equippedwith a means incorporated on the equipment and operable from each trammingstation to hold the equipment stationary on the maximum grade on whichit is operated, and despite any contraction of components, exhaustion ofany non-mechanical source of energy, or leakage. This provision of thefinal rule will become mandatory six months after the effective date ofthe rule to allow sufficient time for retrofitting equipment. The wordingof the final rule recognizes that some machines, such as roof bolters,can be trammed from more than one location, not necessarily an ``operator'scompartment.'' The requirements of paragraph (d) apply at all such locations.The effect of the proposed rule would have been to require at least a parkingbrake or a means inherent to the design of a vehicle on all rubber-tired,self-propelled electric face equipment to preclude movement when parked.Paragraph (d) of the final rule will have the same effect, but does notrefer to the speed of equipment. MSHA estimates that there are 4,200 piecesof rubber-tired, self-propelled electric face equipment other than haulageequipment currently in use in underground coal mines. Approximately 10percent of those machines are not presently equipped with a reliable meansof preventing movement when parked. This estimate is based on an MSHA equipmentsurvey, as well as input from independent members of the mining community.Compliance with the requirement assures that a brake or other means incorporatedon the machine will prevent runaway if the equipment is left unattended.For the reasons previously discussed, the standard prohibits use as a parkingbrake of devices that trap hydraulic fluid or are applied by non-mechanicalenergy. Use of the wording ``a means incorporated on the equipment'' precludesthe hazardous and unreliable procedure of using wheel chocks or similarmeans to secure the equipment from moving.Commenters expressed confusion about the exceptions included in the proposedrule. The more specific or tailored scope of the final rule, as well asthe requirements of paragraph (d), have obviated the need for the proposedexceptions for certain equipment. One commenter requested that automaticemergency-parking brakes be required on slow-moving (less than 2.5 milesper hour) equipment, and equipment with non-retarding drive trains thatare sometimes left unattended by equipment operators. The commenter requestedthat an automatic brake which would set when the machine is shut off berequired on such equipment. Other commenters requested wording changesto clarify the intent of the exceptions.The most significant effect of a 2.5 mile-per-hour maximum speed limitunder the proposed exceptions would have been the exclusion of most roofbolting machines from the automatic emergency-parking brake requirement.Roof bolters are not within the scope of paragraph (a) of the final rule.For MSHA approval, bolters are currently required by 30 CFR 18.20(f) tohave parking brakes, and must, under 30 CFR 75.523-1 and 75.523-2, be equippedwith panic bars.Fatality data indicate that equipment outside the scope of paragraph (a)of the final rule, such as personnel carriers and roof bolters, presentslittle risk of injury to miners due to loss of control while energizedor inability to stop quickly. Their sizes, speeds and uses in undergroundcoal mines, as well as the absence of brakes-related fatalities associatedwith them, suggest that requiring automatic emergency-parking brakes onsuch equipment would be unnecessary. The Agency believes, however, thatit is important to assure that roof bolters and other similar equipmentremain stationary while parked or unattended to prevent them from rollingaway and causing injury.Wheel-mounted machines with drive mechanisms which preclude movement whenparked are not required by paragraph (d) to be equipped with parking brakes.The design of the drive trains of such equipment serves the same purposeas would a parking brake. For instance, certain worm gear drive mechanismswill preclude movement of the equipment once parked. Also, when such equipmentis deenergized, its drive mechanism quickly stops the machine. Therefore,MSHA believes that automatic emergency-parking brakes are not necessaryon such machines. The danger of runaway equipment is addressed by the motion-retardingdesign of the machine itself.Paragraph (e) requires that the brake systems addressed by paragraph (a)or (d) of the final rule be applied when the equipment operator is notat the controls of the machine, except during movement of disabled equipment.This provision reduces the risk of injuries and fatalities from unattendedrunaway machines while the equipment operator is away from the controls.Much of the equipment covered by the final rule has auxiliary power take-offcapability. For example, a scoop which has auxiliary power take-off capabilityfrom which a portable rock dusting unit can be energized may require theequipment operator to be outside of the operator's compartment. In suchinstances, the equipment remains energized while the operator is outsideof the compartment, operating the rock duster. Compliance with the finalrule would ensure that the unattended vehicle is securely held stationaryby an effective parking brake.The exception for movement of disabled equipment was not included in theproposed rule. Several commenters expressed confusion about the conditionsunder which the brakes had to be set on unattended equipment. The brakesare required to be set whenever the operator is away from the controls,even when the equipment is energized. However, the brakes may be releasedin accordance with paragraph (c)(2) in order to allow towing or removalof deenergized, disabled equipment while the operator is away from thecontrols. This assures that movement of disabled equipment is possible,without necessitating placement of a person in a possibly dangerous positioninside the compartment while towing.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Drafting Information</ITAG>The principal persons responsible for preparing this document are: GeorgeM. Fesak and William C. Hughes, Coal Mine Safety and Health, MSHA; JosephF. Judeikis, Office of Technical Support, MSHA; Dale R. Cavanaugh, Officeof Standards, Regulations and Variances, MSHA; and Laura J. McNulty, Officeof the Solicitor, Department of Labor.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Executive Order 12291 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>In accordance with Executive Order 12291, MSHA has prepared a final analysisto identify potential costs and benefits associated with the automaticemergency-parking brake standard. The Agency has incorporated this analysisinto the Regulatory Flexibility Analysis required by the Regulatory FlexibilityAct. In this analysis, MSHA has determined that the automatic emergency-parkingbrake standard will not result in major cost increases nor have an effectof $100 million or more on the economy. Therefore, the rule is not withinthe criteria for a major rule, and a Regulatory Impact Analysis is notrequired.The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires that agencies evaluate and include,whenever possible, compliance alternatives that minimize any adverse impacton small businesses when developing regulations. MSHA has determined thatcompliance alternatives are not available for small mines to comply withthe requirements of this rule.MSHA estimates that the initial compliance cost for the final rule wouldbe $11,428,750. Of this figure, the initial compliance cost would be $3,677,500for small mines, and $7,751,250 for large mines. The annual recurring costwould be $2,369,240, $703,940 for small mines, and $1,665,300 for largemines.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Paperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>The final automatic emergency-parking brake rule does not contain recordkeepingor reporting requirements.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 30 CFR Part 75</ITAG>Mine safety and health, Underground coal mines, Electric equipment, Automaticemergency-parking brakes.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: March 21, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">David C. O'Neal,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Mine Safety and Health.</ITAG>Accordingly, pursuant to 30 U.S.C. 811 Part 75 Subchapter O, Chapter I,Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as set forth below:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 75_MANDATORY SAFETY STANDARDS_UNDERGROUND COAL MINES </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 75 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>30 U.S.C. 811, 957 and 961.</ITAG>2. Section 75.523-3 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 75.523-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Automatic emergency-parking brakes.</ITAG>(a) Except for personnel carriers, rubber-tired, self-propelled electrichaulage equipment used in the active workings of underground coal minesshall be equipped with automatic emergency-parking brakes in accordancewith the following schedule.(1) On and after May 23, 1989_(i) All new equipment ordered; and(ii) All equipment originally furnished with or retrofitted with automaticemergency-parking brakes which meet the requirements of this section.(2) On and after May 23, 1991, all other equipment.(b) Automatic emergency-parking brakes shall_(1) Be activated immediately by the emergency deenergization device requiredby 30 CFR 75.523-1 and 75.523-2;(2) Engage automatically within 5.0 seconds when the equipment is deenergized;(3) Safely bring the equipment when fully loaded to a complete stop onthe maximum grade on which it is operated;(4) Hold the equipment stationary despite any contraction of brake parts,exhaustion of any non-mechanical source of energy, or leakage; and(5) Release only by a manual control that does not operate any other equipmentfunction.(c) Automatic emergency-parking brakes shall include a means in the equipmentoperator's compartment to_(1) Apply the brakes manually without deenergizing the equipment; and(2) Release and reengage the brakes without energizing the equipment.(d) On and after November 24, 1989, rubber-tired, self-propelled electricface equipment not covered by paragraph (a) of this section shall be equippedwith a means incorporated on the equipment and operable from each trammingstation to hold the equipment stationary_(1) On the maximum grade on which it is operated; and(2) Despite any contraction of components, exhaustion of any non-mechanicalsource of energy, or leakage.(e) The brake systems required by paragraphs (a) or (d) of this sectionshall be applied when the equipment operator is not at the controls ofthe equipment, except during movement of disabled equipment.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7014 Filed 3-23-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-43-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>