<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89502-0013 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-02-89.f2.A1012</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">47 CFR Part 69 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[CC Docket No. 86-10; FCC 89-106] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Access Charges </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Communications Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Commission has adopted rules on the obligations oflocal exchange carriers (LECs) with respect to their provision of accessto interexchange carriers (IXCs) for 800 service. The Commission determinedthat the LECs may implement the so-called ``data base system'' of 800 accessprovided that they retain, at least for now, the current ``NXX'' systemof 800 access. The Commission also addressed other issues raised in thisproceeding. This action was taken pursuant to a Notice of Proposed Rulemakingissued in 1987 (102 FCC 2d 1387 (1986), 51 FR 3808 (1986)), and a SupplementalNotice of Proposed Rulemaking seeking further information and comment (3FCC Rcd 721 (1988), 53 FR 7214 (1988)).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2><T3>Effective: </T3>June 1, 1989.ATandamp;T should file its 800 Directory Assistance tariff by June 5, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Federal Communications Commission, 1919 M Street NW.,Washington, DC 20554.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Gary Phillips, Policy and ProgramPlanning Division, Common Carrier Bureau (202) 632-4047.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This is a summary of the Commission'sReport and Order (FCC 89-106) adopted March 30, 1989, and released April21, 1989. The full text of this Commission decision is available for inspectionand copying during normal business hours in the FCC Dockets Branch (Room239), 1919 M Street NW., Washington, DC. The complete text of this decisionmay also be purchased from the Commission's copy contractors, InternationalTranscription Service, (202) 857-3800, 2100 M Street NW., Suite 140, Washington,DC 20037. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Report and Order </ITAG>1. The term ``800 service'' describes an interexchange service in whichsubscribers agree in advance to pay for calls made to certain subscriber-designatednumbers. The service is used primarily by businesses to provide potentialcustomers and other persons a free and convenient means of contacting them.Subscribers may choose to offer 800 service on a nationwide basis, or theymay limit their service to specific geographic areas. 2. Because the called party pays for an 800 call and selects the IXC thatwill carry the call, the LEC in whose area an 800 call originates cannotidentify the IXC to which the call should be routed in the same manneras it identifies the IXC for non-800 calls_that is, based on the caller'schoice of IXC, pre-subscribed or otherwise. Accordingly, local exchangeaccess for 800 service must be handled differently from access for ordinaryinterexchange calls. Indeed, from 1967, when ATandamp;T first introduced800 service, until late 1986, LECs were unable to provide access for 800service to any IXC other than ATandamp;T (``Other Common Carrier'' or ``OCC'').3. In late 1986, the BOCs and other LECs provided OCCs with 800 accessfor the first time through the so-called ``NXX'' screening methodology.Under this system, LECs identify the carrier to which 800 calls shouldbe routed by reading the three digits that immediately follow the 800 prefixof the dialed number (the ``NXX'' digits). 4. Because the NXX screening methodology identifies the 800 carrier bythe NXX digits, the system requires that particular NXXs be assigned toparticular carriers. Consequently, under the NXX system, 800 subscriberscannot change carriers without changing their 800 number. In addition,subscribers that seek a particular 800 number must obtain their 800 servicefrom the carrier to which the NXX digits in that number have been assigned.If the carrier does not offer 800 service in the subscriber's area, thesubscriber will be unable to use the number it wants. Moreover, to preservefor as long as possible the pool of available NXXs, the administrator ofthe NXX assignment process, Bell Communications Research (``Bellcore''),will not assign a new NXX to a carrier until the carrier has used 70% ofthe capacity on each of its existing NXXs. Thus, a subscriber may not usean 800 number beginning with an unassigned NXX unless the subscriber canfind a carrier that is eligible for a new NXX and that agrees to requestthe NXX associated with that number. 5. The BOCs, along with some Independent Telephone Companies (``ITCs''),are currently developing common channel signaling networks based on theCCS7 protocol. These LECs propose to link their CCS7 networks with databases containing 800 service information so that they may replace the NXXaccess system with a so-called ``data base system'' of 800 access. Underthis data base system, information on the 800 carrier associated with each800 number in service would be loaded into various regional data basesaround the country. LECs would then access these data bases through theirCCS7 networks for routing instructions for each 800 call. The data baseswould provide these instructions based on a ten-digit screening of the800 number (the ``800'' prefix, plus the seven-digit number), as opposedto the six-digit screening on which the NXX system is based. 6. Because the data base plan would permit ten-digit screening of the 800number, it would allow number portability. This means that 800 servicesubscribers would be able to change carriers without changing their 800number. In addition, subscribers would be able to select any 800 numbernot already assigned, without regard to NXX limitations, and to use thisnumber with any carrier's 800 service, or use more than one carrier withthe same number.7. The LEC data base systems will also have other capabilities. For example,these systems could be used to: (1) Determine whether the call has originatedin a subscribed service area; (2) translate the 800 number into a POTSnumber; (3) vary the POTS translation, in accordance with customer instructions,so as to direct the routing of calls to different subscriber locationsbased on time of day, place of origination of the call, and other factors;(4) direct the routing of calls to different carriers based on these samekinds of factors; (5) determine the least cost carrier and direct the LECto route the call accordingly; and (6) generate statistical informationon the nature of a subscriber's 800 traffic. The LECs generally proposeto offer each of these services, except least cost routing, (hereinafterreferred to as ``optional'' or ``vertical'' services) to 800 subscribersand/or carriers on an optional basis. 8. The record compiled in this proceeding revealed that the data base systemwould offer both advantages and disadvantages as compared with the NXXsystem. On the one hand, the record confirmed that the number portabilitymade possible by the data base plan would allow 800 subscribers greaterflexibility in choosing 800 numbers and carriers and also help promotecompetition in the 800 market. While no party attempted a precise quantificationof these benefits in monetary terms, the vast majority of commenters agreedthat these benefits are real and that number portability was a desirablecomponent of a competitive 800 service market. On the other hand, the recorddemonstrated that until CCS7 capabilities are widely deployed, the database system would significantly increase access time for 800 calls. A largenumber of parties expressed serious concerns about these increased accessdelays and the Commission found that the public interest would not be servedby permitting LECs to discontinue existing 800 access services in suchcircumstances. 9. According to the Commission, the record established that it would bepossible for LECs to offer data base and NXX access simultaneously withoutmaterially affecting the technical quality of either service. The Commissionstated that the record also indicated that some IXCs might prefer database access, even if ATandamp;T chooses NXX access for all of its NXXs. Underthe circumstances, the Commission found, at least for now, dual offeringswould best serve the public interest. Accordingly, the Commission permittedthe LECs to implement the proposed data base plan, with some modifications,but it required LECs that do so to continue offering NXX access. Pursuantto this NXX option, each carrier may choose either NXX or data base accessfor each of its currently assigned NXXs. In addition, as carriers are assignednew NXXs, carriers may dedicate these NXXs to either system. If and whenthe LECs' deployment of CCS7 is sufficient, so that the level of accessdelay associated with the data base system is substantially reduced, theCommission stated that it will, upon appropriate petition, permit LECsto discontinue NXX access. The Commission stated that its current expectationis that it will be able to grant such a petition when CCS7 is deployedto access tandems and, on a nationwide average basis, to end offices accountingfor eighty percent of originating 800 traffic. 10. The Commission also concluded that LECs should be permitted to offereach of the proposed vertical features to IXCs as part of 800 access service,but not to IXC's 800 service customers. The Commission addressed each ofthe proposed services individually. Addressing call validation, the Commissionobserved that efficiency goals would be furthered if LECs were permittedto block unauthorized 800 calls before sending them to an IXC. The Commissionalso noted that no party opposed LEC provision of this service, and it,accordingly, permitted LECs to offer the service to IXCs. 11. With respect to POTS translation, the Commission found that while someIXCs might prefer to purchase POTS translation capability from the LECs,POTS translation does not represent a significant barrier to entry, evenfor small IXCs. At the same time, however, the Commission noted, the recordrevealed no compelling reason to preclude the LECs from offering POTS translationas an access service. While IXCs argued that they compete on the basisof which vertical features they can offer, the Commission found it highlyunlikely that basic POTS translation represents a significant source ofcompetition. Indeed, it stated, POTS translation capabilities are bothinvisible to the 800 subscriber and, from a practical standpoint, a virtualnecessity for IXCs wishing to enter the 800 market. It concluded that permittingthe LECs to provide this service to IXCs may make it cost-effective forsome IXCs to enter the 800 market that would not have done so otherwise,and it, therefore, found no reason to withhold this permission. 12. The Commission found that alternate POTS translation presented moredifficult issues since: (1) The BOCs proposed to offer this feature, notonly to IXCs, but to IXC customers, as well; (2) unlike basic POTS translation,alternate POTS translation is not a virtual prerequisite for participatingin the 800 market, but rather the kind of service option that IXCs currentlyoffer to obtain a competitive edge in this market; and (3) IXCs argue thatthe LECs' data base systems provide the LECs with at least a small advantageover IXCs in the offering of this and other optional services. After balancingthe various considerations, the Commission concluded that LECs should bepermitted to offer alternate POTS translation, but only to IXCs, not tointerstate 800 service subscribers directly. The availability of this servicefrom LECs, the Commission stated, should not only provide competitive alternativesto IXC offerings of this service, it should increase competition in the800 market generally by enhancing the position of small IXCs. Moreover,the Commission found that the 1.5 additional seconds required for an IXCto query its own data base, in lieu of purchasing alternate POTS translationfrom a LEC, will not preclude IXCs from using their own data base systemsif they have them, or provide IXCs that purchase alternate POTS from aLEC with a significant advantage over IXCs that use their own system toprovide this service. 13. Nevertheless, the Commission did not permit LECs to sell alternatePOTS translation service to 800 service subscribers directly. The Commissionnoted that in other contexts, it has generally limited LECs to sellingswitched access services and features to IXCs and other purchasers of interstateaccess and not to the customers of IXCs or of other service providers.It found that similar limitations should apply here. The provision of alternatePOTS translation by a LEC to an IXC's subscriber, it stated, would potentiallyinterfere with the relationship between the IXC and its customer. In addition,it found that permitting 800 subscribers to order alternate POTS servicefrom a LEC could potentially compromise IXCs' ability to manage trafficflow over their own networks. 14. Finally, the Commission permitted the BOCs to provide multiple carrierrouting capabilities with their data base systems_<T3>i.e., </T3>it permitted the BOCs to route different calls to differentcarriers based on specified factors. However, the Commission prohibitedthe BOCs from offering this capability directly to 800 subscribers so asto ensure both that BOC optional services do not become a vehicle for theBOCs to place themselves between IXCs and IXC customers, and that IXCscan control their own networks. Subscribers that wish to take advantageof BOC multiple carrier routing capabilities, the Commission stated, willbe free to design their own service and order it from whichever IXCs theychoose. In addition, one or more IXCs will be free to design an 800 servicefor a prospective customer and order the necessary ``piece-parts'' of thisservice from other IXCs on behalf of the customer. Indeed, the Commissionfound, contrary to the BOCs' assertions, regional carriers will have everyincentive to market multiple carrier routing to customers that seek nationwide800 service.15. Turning to cost issues, the Commission expressed its agreement withthe majority of parties, who argued that CCS7 costs should be treated differentlyfrom costs associated specifically with 800 access service under the database system. The Commission stated that CCS7 represents a new network infrastructurethat will not only support a number of new interstate and state services,but will also increase the efficiency with which LECs provide existingservices, basic and non-basic. As such, it stated, CCS7 represents a generalnetwork upgrade, the core costs of which should be borne by all networkusers. The Commission thus concluded that it will treat as costs of providingdata base access service only those costs that are incurred specificallyfor the implementation and operation of the data base system, and it directedthe LECs to establish rates for data base access based only on these specificcosts. The costs of CCS7 components that will be used to support otherservices, it stated, should be apportioned in accordance with existingrules for other network services. 16. The Commission also agreed with parties that argued that existing accountingprovisions suffice for the capital investment and expense associated withthe data base systems and CCS7 networks. The Commission stated that itsnew Part 32 rules incorporating the USOA were designed with the expectationthat they would accommodate the implementation of new services and theupdate of existing technology. Indeed, the Commission noted, it specificallyrejected a ``service costing'' approach to accounting during its revisionof these rules on the ground that it was neither feasible nor desirableto combine a financial accounting system with a cost accounting systembecause of their fundamentally different objectives. The Commission foundnothing unique in CCS7 or data base system costs that warranted a deviationfrom these rules. Indeed, said the Commission, to the contrary, the newPart 32 rules were adopted after ATandamp;T already had its common channelsignaling system and associated data base systems in place. Therefore,the Commission found, the USOA will accommodate the implementation of CCS7and data base systems without any special accounting changes or provisions.17. Although the Commission did not specify in detail the appropriate accountingtreatment for all data base system costs, it did address one particularaccounting issue. Several LECs had asserted that assignment of data basesystem expenses incurred prior to system implementation to Account 1439(Other deferred charges), as required by the Bureau and the <T3>Supplemental Notice, </T3>is inappropriate. The Commission agreed,noting that at the time it prescribed this treatment for data base systemexpenses it appeared that these expenses would be substantial in amount,but the record now indicated otherwise. The Commission stated that basesystem expenses should be booked as incurred in accordance with normalaccounting procedures. In addition, the Commission directed LECs to reportto the Bureau all data base system expenses previously accumulated in Account1439, and delegated authority to the Bureau to determine the appropriateaccounting treatment of these balances. 18. The Commission also found that insofar as existing Part 32 categoriesappropriately classify data base system and CCS7 costs, existing separationscategories suffice for these costs. Noting the relatively modest revenuerequirement for 800 data base access, the Commission found separationschanges unnecessary, particularly in light of recent efforts to simplifythe separations rules. The Commission also noted that the costs of ATandamp;T'sCCIS network and related data bases have been separated under existingseparations procedures, and that no party presented any reason why CCS7and data base costs require different separations treatment for the BOCsthan for ATandamp;T. 19. Finally, the Commission agreed that LECs should offer data base accessthrough separate subelements for 10-digit screening and the various verticalfeatures. The Commission noted that it recently adopted a Notice of ProposedRulemaking to consider Part 69 rule changes that would permit LECs to establishsubelements of existing Part 69 rate elements for new access services thatwill be offered on an unbundled basis. The Commission stated that whilethe principal focus of this rulemaking is on the BSEs that the BOCs willoffer pursuant to the Commission's ONA requirements, the rules establishedtherein may also create a framework for LECs to establish subelements fornew access services, such as 800 data base access, that the Commissionpermits or requires to be offered on an unbundled basis. Therefore, theCommission did not adopt specific Part 69 rule changes governing 800 accessservice at this time. However, as discussed above, the Commission clarifiedthat LECs must develop rates for 800 data base access based only on theirdata-base-specific costs. LECs that seek to implement their data base systemsprior to completion of this rulemaking, it stated, should file petitionsfor waiver of our Part 69 rules to establish separate unbundled subelements,consistent with the principles stated herein, for basic data base accessand each of the various vertical features. 20. With respect to administrative issues, the Commission noted that theindustry has made considerable progress in resolving many of the serviceorder/SMS issues arising from the LECs' use of their data base systems.The Commission pointed out that LECs now state (1) that they will not acceptorders for interLATA 800 service from 800 subscribers directly, unlessthey are authorized to do so by the IXC that will carry the traffic; and(2) that they will provide IXCs with direct, on-line SMS access on thesame terms on which such access will be made available to LECs. To theextent that contested issues remain, the Commission found, the best courseat this time is to allow these inter-carrier discussions to continue. Inthe Commission's view, such a process has a better prospect of achievingan efficient result that serves the interests of all parties than woulda solution imposed by regulation. The Commission noted that to the extentIXCs object to the administration of the data base plan, they may chooseto retain NXX access, and it anticipated that this option will encourageLECs to accommodate IXC concerns about customer control and traffic management.Finally, the Commission noted that it remained open to petitions askingit to address administrative issues that are not resolved through industrydiscussions or that are not resolved in a way that serves the public interest.21. The Commission also found that the BOCs and Bellcore have largely respondedto IXC concerns about Bellcore's role in administering the SMS by agreeingto transfer administration of the SMS to an independent third party andretaining a consulting firm to select the new SMS administrator. The Commissionnoted that this firm has issued a Request for Proposals from interestedand qualified parties, and that it appears that a new administrator willbe chosen in the near future.22. The Commission found unconvincing ALC's objections to the manner inwhich the BOCs are choosing an SMS administrator. It stated that thereis no evidence that the consulting firm chosen by the BOCs cannot dischargeits responsibilities impartially or that the new SMS administrator willin any way favor the BOCs or disadvantage other carriers. In the eventthat any party is aggrieved by the actions of the SMS administrator, theCommission stated, the Commission's complaint process is available to addresssuch grievances. Similarly, the Commission was not persuaded of the needfor new 800 number administration guidelines. It noted that the currentguidelines were adopted after inter-industry discussions at the OBF, andthat although certain parties may object to them, their objections relateprincipally to the forum in which these guidelines were adopted and tothe incorporation of number administration functions in the SMS. Moreover,the Commission stated, Bellcore, in conjunction with the OBF, has adoptedand implemented rules for the assignment of NXXs, which are even more valuablethan individual 800 numbers, and no IXC claims that these rules favor theBOCs or have been administered by Bellcore impartially. Again, however,the Commission noted that if a party has reason to believe that the 800number administration guidelines are unfair or not in the public interest,it may file a petition or complaint specifying its objection and the matterwill be considered accordingly. 23. The Commission agreed with IXCs that argued that the BOCs should continueto allow IXCs to provide PIUs as the jurisdictional basis for assessingaccess charges for 800 calling. It stated that the BOCs did not show thatthe jurisdictional indicators they propose would provide more reliabledata than PIUs. Indeed, said the Commission, it appeared that jurisdictionalindicators would provide incorrect data in some situations, such as whenan IXC is using dynamic routing for its 800 traffic. The Commission sawno reason to complicate matters for IXCs by requiring them to provide jurisdictionalindicators in some situations and PIU data in others, as proposed by someBOCs. Although PIUs are a surrogate for actual routing data, the Commissionstated, the BOCs have not demonstrated that PIUs are inaccurate or otherwiseunsatisfactory. 24. The Commission did, however, require IXCs using the data base systemto provide the BOCs with the POTS numbers of 800 subscribers that willuse a BOC for its intraLATA 800 service, either by choice or because thesubscriber requests service in a state that does not permit intraLATA competition.In these situations, the Commission found, the BOCs require this informationin order to recognize their own 800 traffic, and there is no legitimatereason why IXCs should withhold it from them. 25. The Commission found that at least some of its concerns with regardto 800 Directory Assistance service have apparently been addressed throughsteps taken by ATandamp;T in its provision of this service. The Commissionnoted ATandamp;T's representation that it has opened its DA service to all800 carriers and currently provides DA service for several IXCs, includingMCI. The Commission also noted that only one IXC, Microtel, alleged thatthe arrangements offered by ATandamp;T are unsatisfactory. Nevertheless,the Commission stated that it remains concerned about the incentives andmarket power inherent in a situation in which an 800 service carrier providesthe only DA service for the industry. 26. Some parties urged the Commission to establish a competitive biddingprocess for 800 DA rights. The Commission found that while a competitivebidding process might ensure in the short-term that 800 DA is providedon the most favorable terms possible, it would not necessarily addressthe Commission's concerns about the potential for discrimination that isinherent when one carrier provides a monopoly service to its competitors.Other parties stated that the Commission should place 800 DA in the handsof a neutral third party. The Commission found that while it is conceivablethat at some point in the future it may so conclude, the record did notsupport such action at this time. As noted, the Commission stated, onlyone IXC found fault with the terms and conditions on which ATandamp;T currentlyoffers 800 DA. Moreover, since ATandamp;T has 800 DA facilities in placeand operational, as well as experience with providing this service, ATandamp;Tcan presumably offer this service on a reasonably efficient basis. Indeed,the Commission found, the costs that another entity would incur in establishingand providing this service might well outweigh the benefits to be gainedby placing DA in the hands of a neutral third party. 27. Therefore, the Commission concluded, at least for now, ATandamp;T maycontinue providing 800 DA service under the number (800) 555-1212. However,because at the present time, this is, for all practical purposes, a monopolyservice, the Commission required ATandamp;T to tariff this offering. Thismeans that ATandamp;T must provide 800 DA on a nondiscriminatory basis and,to this end, the Commission required ATandamp;T to include in its tariffa description of its procedures for handling, listing, displaying, andproviding DA information to callers. The Commission required ATandamp;T tofile its 800 DA tariff within 45 days of the release of this order. Finally,the Commission encouraged parties to continue exploring 800 DA issues inindustry fora and to develop alternative solutions that might be superiorto existing arrangements. 28. The Commission also rejected the argument of The National TelephoneCooperative Association (NTCA) that the Regulatory Flexibility Act appliesto the rule changes adopted herein. It noted that in <T3>MTS and WATS Market Structure </T3>(93 FCC 2d 241 (1983)), the Commissionheld that because of the nature of local exchange and access service, smalltelephone companies are dominant in their fields of operation and thereforeare not small entities as defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act. TheCommission stated that NTCA offered no new arguments or evidence to alterthis conclusion, but emphasized that it was, nevertheless, committed toreducing the regulatory burdens imposed on these companies, whenever itcan do so in a manner consistent with its other public interest responsibilities.The Commission stated that it, accordingly, considered the impact of thisorder on small LECs and concluded that small LECs would not be adverselyaffected because: (1) The order does not require them to participate inthe data base plan; (2) small LECs that wish to participate in this systemmay do so without incurring substantial costs by routing 800 traffic tolarger telephone companies; and (3) NTCA did not show that LECs that route800 traffic to another carrier for screening will lose control of theirrelationship with their customers. Customer relationships should be unaffectedby the manner in which LECs choose to perform 10-digit screening. <ITAG tagnum="84">Ordering Clause </ITAG>1. Accordingly, pursuant to the provisions of sections 4(i), 4(j), 201-205,218, 220, 403, and 404 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 154(i), 154(j),201-205, 218, 220, 403, and 404, the policies, rules, and requirementsset forth herein <T3>are adopted.</T3><ITAG tagnum="20">Federal Communications Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Donna R. Searcy, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10429 Filed 5-1-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6712-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>