<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89503-0010 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-03-89.f2.A1009</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">National Highway Traffic Safety Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 571</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 85-07; Notice 3] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2127-AB12</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards Air Brake Systems</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This notice makes several amendments to Federal MotorVehicle Safety Standard No. 121, <T3>Air Brake Systems.</T3> First, the test rig used to test the pneumatictiming of trailers is modified to better simulate the performance of actualtractors. Second, the standard's maximum application and maximum releasetiming requirements for trailers are revised, both to reflect the modifiedtest rig and, for towing trailers and dollies, to ensure faster applicationand release timing. Third, new requirements are established to addressthe timing of the interface (gladhand) between towing vehicles and trailers.The purpose of the gladhand timing requirements is to ensure that the airdelivery from towing vehicles to towed vehicles is fast enough to applythe brakes of all vehicles in the combination at approximately the sametime, thereby avoiding a reduction in combination stability (e.g., trailerbumping) caused by a slow gladhand.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>The amendments made by this rule to the Code of FederalRegulations are effective June 2, 1989. The amendments require mandatorycompliance effective May 3, 1991. Between those dates, manufacturers havethree options for meeting maximum application and maximum release timingrequirements for trailer brake chamber timing: (1) Meeting the existingrequirements, using the existing test rig, (2) meeting the new requirements,using the new test rig, or (3) meeting requirements approximately equivalentto the existing requirements, using the new test rig. Petitions for reconsiderationmust be received on or before June 2, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Petitions for reconsideration should be submitted to:Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 SeventhStreet, SW., Washington, DC 20590.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mr. Richard C. Carter, Officeof Vehicle Safety Standards, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC (202-366-5274).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2> <ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>Pneumatic timing is an important factor in air brake system performance.The time required for a vehicle's service brake chambers to reach a relativelyhigh pressure level after actuation of the brake control by the driveris referred to as ``pneumatic application time.'' Since the generationof brake torque, and therefore braking force, is directly related to theair pressure available in the brake chambers, pneumatic application timeaffects vehicle stopping distance. As a general matter, the shorter thepneumatic application time, the shorter the vehicle's stopping distance.For combination vehicles, pneumatic application timing can affect stability.If a trailer's brakes apply more slowly than the towing vehicle's brakes,the trailer can bump the towing vehicle, applying an excessive compressiveforce on the kingpin connecting the trailer to the towing vehicle. If thebrakes are applied during a turn and the road is wet, this force may reducethe stability of the combination and contribute to a jackknife accident.``Pneumatic release timing'', the time required for the pressure in thebrake chambers to fall from a relatively high pressure to a relativelylow pressure after the driver releases the brake control, also affectsbraking performance. If a vehicle's wheels lock as the driver is attemptingto stop, the vehicle will skid. If the driver is to regain control of thevehicle in this situation, immediate release of the brakes is necessary.For combination vehicles, pneumatic release timing can affect stability.If a towing vehicle's brakes release more slowly than the trailer's, destabilizingforces may increase at the kingpin.Standard No. 121, <T3>Air Brake Systems,</T3> specifies certain requirements for pneumatictiming. Section S5.3.3 provides that the brake actuation (application)time for trucks, buses, and trailers must not exceed specified periodsof time. Section S5.3.4 provides that the brake release time for thesevehicles must not exceed specified periods of time. The timing tests for trailers, including trailer converter dollies, arenot conducted with the trailer connected to an actual tractor. Instead,the trailer's brake system is connected to a test rig. The test rig, whichis commonly referred to as the ``121 mini-tractor,'' delivers air to, andreleases air from, the trailer during the timing test. The timing testsfor vehicles designed to tow trailers are conducted with a 50-cubic-inchreservoir connected to the control line coupling. This reservoir representsthe control line volume of the towed trailer. <ITAG tagnum="84">The May 1985 NPRM </ITAG>On May 14, 1985, NHTSA published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (50 FR 20113) an NPRM to amend the pneumatictiming requirements of Standard No. 121, for the purpose of improving thetiming balance of combination vehicles. The proposal was largely basedon research conducted at the agency's Vehicle Research Test Center (VRTC).On July 1, 1985, NHTSA published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (50 FR 27032) a notice extending the commentperiod by six months to permit commenters more time to analyze the agency'sdata and to conduct their own testing. First, NHTSA proposed to modify the test rig used to test the pneumatictiming of trailers. The existing test rig, which is shown as Figure 1 inStandard No. 121, was derived from SAE Recommended Practice J982. At first,the standard did not specify performance characteristics for the test rig.However, after petitions pointed out that the agency's compliance testsmight prove inconclusive if a manufacturer could show conformity on a fastertest rig, NHTSA adopted the actuation and release times suggested by thepetitioners. These times, which are specified in section S6.1.13, reflectedthe performance of test rigs then in use by manufacturers.NHTSA's research since Standard No. 121 was issued has indicated, however,that some current truck tractors and towing straight trucks have applyand release times that are much slower than the test rig. As a result,the timing of trailers with the test rig is not necessarily representativeof timing of the trailers when towed by actual tractors. This has resulted in trailer plumbing that is optimized for the test rigand not necessarily optimized with actual tractors. In particular, sometrailer manufacturers use control line tubing with an exterior diameterof one-half inch because it produces faster application times during StandardNo. 121's tests than smaller tubing. NHTSA's research indicated, however,that the half-inch tubing usually produces<T3> slower</T3> actuation times than three-eighths-inch tubing on trailersconnected to actual tractors. Based on its research, NHTSA proposed modifications in the test rig tobring its performance more in line with that of actual tractors. In placeof the rapid application and release times of the existing test rig (0.06and .22 seconds), the agency proposed nominal application time of 0.35second and a nominal release time of 0.70 second. NHTSA also proposed amore detailed layout for the test rig, including metering valves and otherplumbing changes to permit better calibration of the trailer test rig.Finally, in the interest of clarifying test conditions, the agency proposedto specify the reservoir pressures in the test rig during brake testing.A second aspect of the proposal concerned vehicle timing requirements.NHTSA proposed to establish new requirements to address the timing of theinterface (gladhand) between towing vehicles and trailers, and to amendthe maximum application and maximum release timing requirements for trailersand other vehicles. The purpose of the proposed gladhand timing requirements was to ensurethat the air delivery from towing vehicles to towed vehicles is fast enoughto apply the brakes of all vehicles in the combination at approximatelythe same time, thereby avoiding combination instability (e.g., traileroverrun) that might be caused by a slow gladhand.The proposed changes in Standard No. 121's application and release timesfor trailers were in part to account for the slower timing of the modifiedtest rig. Given the 0.29 second slower application time for the modifiedtest rig, it would be necessary to increase the current 0.30 second maximumapplication time for trailers by roughly that amount (i.e., to approximately0.60 second) in order to maintain an equivalent requirement. However, NHTSAproposed a maximum time of 0.50 second, as its research indicated thatthis time was easily obtainable with the modified test rig. The fastertime was desired to shorten stopping distances and improve vehicle stability(e.g., reduce trailer bumping) caused by slow trailer braking. NHTSA alsoproposed to lengthen the maximum release time from 0.65 second to 1.0 second.Given the 0.48 second slower release time for the test rig, this representeda proposal to require faster trailer release timing. NHTSA also proposed changes in the timing requirements for trailer converterdollies and trucks designed to tow other air braked vehicles. For trailerconverter dollies, NHTSA proposed to lengthen the maximum application timefrom 0.35 second to 0.50 second, and the maximum release time from 0.65second to 1.00 second. The proposed maximum application and release timesfor trailer converter dollies were thus the same as for trailers. NHTSAalso proposed to lengthen the maximum application time for trucks designedto tow other air-braked vehicles, from 0.45 second to 0.50 second. Comments were received from the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association(MVMA), Truck Trailer Manufacturers Association (TTMA), individual truckand trailer manufacturers, brake and brake component manufacturers, theAmerican Trucking Associations (ATA), and the Insurance Institute for HighwaySafety (IIHS). The vast majority of the commenters supported modificationof the test rig and the establishment of gladhand timing requirements.However, a number of commenters opposed various aspects of the proposedmaximum application and maximum release times for trailers, trucks designedto tow other vehicles, and gladhands. Several commenters also requestedestablishment of a minimum time for tractor brake application, in orderto prevent combination balance problems caused by overly fast tractors.A detailed discussion of the issues raised by the commenters is providedbelow. <ITAG tagnum="84">Modified Test Rig</ITAG>The first aspect of NHTSA's proposal to improve the timing balance of combinationvehicles was to modify Standard No. 121's test rig in order to better simulatetractors. Commenters generally supported this aspect of the proposal. MVMA,for example, stated that modification of the current mini-tractor wouldbe a significant step toward improving brake application and release timingbetween tractors and trailers. That organization stated that it agreesthat the trailer test rig, as well as current timing requirements, needto be modified to more closely simulate today's equipment. General Motors(GM) commented that it believes that the proposed modification of the mini-tractoris appropriate and will significantly improve the real-world relevancyof the tests for which it is employed. That company stated that since trailerbrake systems must currently be tuned to achieve compliance with the unrealisticallyfast test rig, this change alone should significantly improve the standard.While supporting modification of the test rig, a number of commenters questionedthe proposed specification of test rig componentry. As indicated above,the NPRM proposed a more detailed layout for the test rig, including meteringvalves and other plumbing changes to provide trailer test rig calibration.Some commenters recommended dropping the proposed component specificationsand instead specifying more complete pressure versus time characteristics.Midland Brake commented that the proposal specified part of the componentsand the end points of the pressure versus time characteristics, which itcontended allows a multitude of pressure versus time characteristics whichmay result in a great variation of trailer timing results depending uponthe pressure versus time characteristics of the particular test rig. Midlandstated that there are two means to accomplish the intended result: specifyingthe exact full characteristics of each component or instead specifyingthe pressure versus time characteristics. That commenter recommended specifyingthe pressure versus time characteristics. According to Midland, there isno reason to specify any of the components, since timing values for 0 to60 psi apply and 95 to 5 release can be specified without specifying components.Midland stated that the proposal would unnecessarily require manufacturersto include each component in their test rigs, adding cost without benefits.GM similarly commented that the proposed componentry specifications areinherently incapable of assuring specific performance levels and suggestedthat a pressure versus time curve should instead be specified.Other commenters recommended adopting the proposed component specificationswhile also specifying more complete pressure versus time characteristics.Fruehauf commented that it built two different mini-tractors, substantiatingthat a mini-tractor built around the guidelines presented in the docketis obtainable and that the repeatability of mini-tractors is acceptableif the calibration curves are similar. Fruehauf also stated that it agreeswith the proposed mini-tractor schematics but believes that a calibrationcurve should be provided. Theurer similarly commented that the lack ofa pressure-time pulse for the test rig is a shortcoming of both the existingrule and the proposal. TTMA stated that it supports the recommendationsof Fruehauf and Theurer that Standard No. 121 specify the performance ofthe test rig by providing a pressure-time application and release curve.ATA commented that the mini-tractor must be consistent regardless of whobuilds it, in order to ensure that all trailers are tested in a like manner.It recommended that detailed specifications be given for the test rig'squick release valve. Echlin commented that it strongly suggests that theplumbing details of the test rig be omitted in view of the confusion generatedby the details. That company stated that to control the build-up and decaycharacteristic of the test rig to any greater degree than the proposedlimits of .35 second and .70 second appears to lead to greater confusionthan gain.Two commenters, Ford and International Harvester (IH), recommended slowertest rig timing. Ford recommended that the proposed test rig actuationtime be extended from 0.35 second to 0.45 second, and that the proposedtest rig release time be extended from 0.70 second to 0.85 second. Thatcommenter stated that it had analyzed the control line coupling (gladhand)application timing of 21 tractor vehicles tested at VRTC and calculatedthe mean value at 0.308 second with a range from 0.22 second to 0.44 second.Ford stated that based on this small sample, approximately 16 percent ofall tractors may be expected to exceed 0.37 (one standard deviation abovethe mean) second and 2.3 percent of all tractors may be expected to exceed0.42 second (two standard deviations above the mean). Ford stated thatfor gladhand release timing, the mean value of the VRTC sample is 0.68second with a range from 0.47 second to 0.98 second. That commenter statedthat approximately 16 percent of all trailers may be expected to exceed0.85 second (one standard deviation above the mean), and 2.3 percent maybe expected to exceed 1.02 seconds (two standard deviations above the mean).Ford argued that its recommended actuation and release times would be morerepresentative. IH recommended test rig application and release times of0.50 second and 0.90 second, respectively.After considering the comments, NHTSA has decided to adopt a modified testrig along the lines of the proposal, while specifying both a layout oftest rig componentry and pressure versus time application and release curves.The agency believes that the times suggested by Ford and IH are less representativethan those of typical tractors. In both instances, the times are furtheraway from the mean values of the data cited by Ford than those of the proposal.NHTSA agrees with commenters that specification of pressure versus timeapplication and release curves, which can be used to calibrate the testrig, will help ensure repeatability of test results. The curves adoptedin Figure 3 of this notice are based on the performance of VRTC's testrig, which was built to the specifications of the proposal. The agencyis not adopting the recommendation of some commenters that tolerances beestablished for the application and release curves, since the inclusionof tolerances in the standard would increase the variability of test resultsobtained using equipment specified by the standard. This allows manufacturersleeway in building their test rigs and eliminates the need to specify theperformance of each component. It has never been the agency's policy tospecify performance curve tolerances in any of its rules. The normal compliancetest convention implicit in the single specification as shown in Figure3 is that the manufacturers would set the performance of their new mini-tractorequal to or slower than the performance curves (to the right or to theadverse side), while the agency would set its compliance mini-tractor equalto or faster than the curve (to the left or favorable side). If a manufacturer'strailer brake chamber timing passed with a slower mini-tractor they couldbe assured that their trailer would pass with a faster compliance mini-tractor.A tolerance boundary as suggested by GM and others would create the needfor multiple testing which can be very burdensome.The agency believes that it is appropriate to specify generic test rigcomponentry as well as application and release curves. By providing a layoutof componentry, the public is informed how to build a test rig that canproduce the performance specified in the curves. Also, as a practical matter,it is necessary to use componentry similar to that of the proposal in orderto obtain the performance reflected in the curves. Since the componentspecifications are generic, they are not restrictive with respect to whichmanufacturer's components are used.In response to comments, NHTSA is adopting several minor changes in thecomponent specifications. The California Highway Patrol (CHP) and Bendixnoted that the test procedure for brake release times specifies 95 psiwhile the legend in Figure 1, Trailer Test Rig, listed only the 100 psiapplication pressure setting. The figure is changed to specify that thetest rig's regulator is set at 100 psi for the application time test and95 psi for the release time test.Bendix also recommended that reservoir volume should be specified as 1000-1500cubic inches to allow use of standard size air brake reservoirs, that thesupply connection be moved between the check valve and regulator to preventloss of reservoir pressure on disconnection of the gladhand, and that ameans to shut off shop air be provided. While small differences in reservoirvolume would not make any appreciable difference in test results, the widerange of sizes suggested by Bendix could have an effect on those results.While this might be controlled by the calibration curves, NHTSA believesthat the purpose of the component specifications is best served by specifyinga single reservoir volume that can easily produce the required test rigperformance. On the other hand, the agency does not believe it is necessaryto further define quick release valve or coiled tubing, as suggested incomments, since any effect on performance caused by the use of slightlydifferent components can easily be accounted for by adjusting the testrig in accordance with the calibration curves. The agency notes that whilethe reservoir used in the mini-tractor was nominally meant to be 1000 cubicinches, the NPRM specified a 1015 cubic inch size because that was thesize used in VRTC testing. For the final rule, NHTSA is specifying 1000cubic inches. If a production tank of slightly larger volume is used, epoxycan be poured into the tank to bring it down to the specified volume. NHTSA agrees with Bendix' suggestion that a means should be provided toprevent loss of reservoir pressure upon disconnection of the gladhand.Rather than move the supply connection between the check valve and theregulator, however, the agency is specifying the addition of a shut-offvalve to the test rig supply line. This makes the test rig easier to useand also results in greater utility for the device. The agency notes thatthe Society of Automotive Engineers is considering using the mini-tractorin a new recommended practice for determining trailer reservoir volume,which would require the trailer supply line to receive air from the mini-tractorwith the shop air disconnected. NHTSA does not find it necessary to specifya means for shutting off shop air, since a check valve is already includedbetween the shop air and reservoir (see Figure 1).While NHTSA would use test rigs meeting Standard No. 121's component specificationsin its enforcement testing, it notes that the National Traffic and MotorVehicle Safety Act does not require particular testing by manufacturers.Instead, manufacturers must exercise due care in certifying that theirvehicles meet applicable safety standards. If a manufacturer is able toobtain a test rig that is different than that specified by Standard No.121 but produces the same performance, the manufacturer is free to usethat rig in its testing. Therefore, component specifications do not resultin any increased or unnecessary costs for manufacturers.Some commenters expressed concern about possible difficulties in obtainingmodified test rigs. TTMA stated that suppliers of previous test rigs nolonger manufacture them and that the requirements would necessitate morethan the usual difficulty in finding means of designing and building thetest rigs. Theurer stated that it is concerned about the cost of modifyingor acquiring new test rigs and stated that none of the manufacturers ofits test rigs currently supply test rigs, nor are prepared to do modificationsto existing equipment.NHTSA estimates that a current 121 test rig can be reworked for approximately$200 (parts only) using a smaller volume tank and several additional valves,or a new one can be built for $400 to $500 (parts only). NHTSA's experiencein building the modified test rig at VRTC indicates that it is a relativelysimply task and does not require any components that are not readily available.Similarly, Freuhauf had no difficulty in building a modified test rig.If a manufacturer is unable or prefers not to build its own test rigs,it can have them built by companies which produce specialized equipment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Timing Requirements</ITAG>The second aspect of NHTSA's proposal concerned vehicle timing requirements.The agency proposed to establish gladhand timing requirements and to amendthe maximum application and maximum release timing requirements for trailersand other vehicles.A number of commenters questioned whether certain of the specific timingvalues of the NPRM are justified, particularly to the extent that otherthan minimal vehicle modifications may be required. For example, MVMA statedthat it agrees that timing is a factor in brake balance, but questionsits significance in relationship to brake torque and pneumatic balance.According to that commenter, industry experience shows that combinationtiming has a minimal effect on vehicle balance. MVMA also asserted thatNHTSA's own test results do not support the significance of combinationtiming on trailer push, jackknifing, or accident avoidance. That organizationrecommended that the agency establish timing requirements which will requireminimal changes to towing vehicles.Bendix commented that the proposed changes would require air brake systemdesign changes to most tractors, towing trucks, non-towing trailers, towingtrailers and dollies. According to that commenter, the proposed changeswould result in faster application and release times for combination vehiclesand would also result in a reduction in the difference between the responsetimes of individual brakes in a combination vehicle. Bendix stated thatit believes that, for combination vehicles, faster application times coupledwith improved timing balance will result in shorter stopping distancesand better driving control. That commenter stated that it believes alsothe proposed changes are in the proper direction and are technically feasible,although it is unaware of data to substantiate performance improvements.Several commenters argued that adoption of the proposed timing requirementswould not ensure combination vehicle stability because the brakes of atractor with very fast application time could still actuate well beforethe brakes of a trailer meeting the proposed requirements, with the resultthat the trailer would overrun the tractor. ATA commented that the actualmaximum application times which are adopted are not as important as thenecessity to adopt a minimum time for tractor brake application. That commenterstated that no matter what the maximum brake apply time for tractors becomes,a minimum time must also be established to ensure that tractor brakes notactuate too quickly, putting the combination out of balance and defeatingthe purpose of the proposed revisions. ATA stated that very fast tractorsare being sold every day, with application times as fast as 0.13 second,with many at 0.14 second and 0.15 second. Other commenters supporting minimumapplication times for tractors included CHP, Echlin, Theurer, and BrakeTechnology Company.International Harvester (IH) submitted test data which it asserted indicatesthat although a 0.60 second differential in tractor-to-trailer applicationtiming results in an unacceptable pushing sensation, a 0.40 second differentialis acceptable. That commenter stated that its test results, as well asother field experiences, convinces it that there is no compatibility benefitin requiring the timing differential between tractor and trailer chambersto be closer than 0.4 second. IH also commented that to truly control thetiming differential between tractors and trailers, a relationship of gladhandto tractor and trailer chamber timing needs to be established.A further discussion of comments concerning the proposed vehicle timingrequirements, categorized by requirement and/or type of vehicle, is providedbelow.<ITAG tagnum="84">Gladhand Timing Requirements</ITAG>As discussed above, Standard No. 121 does not currently specify timingrequirements at the air line coupler between a tractor and trailer (truckgladhand) or between successive trailers in multiple trailer combinations(trailer gladhand). While the standard's existing timing tests for vehiclesdesigned to tow trailers are conducted with a 50-cubic-inch reservoir (representinga typical trailer's control line volume) connected to the control linecoupling, no minimum times are specified for the rise or fall of air pressurein the test reservoir. The NPRM proposed to require that a power unit,e.g., a tractor, increase the pressure in the test reservoir to 60 p.s.i.in not more than 0.35 second, and release the pressure in not more than0.70 second. The NPRM proposed to require that a trailer increase the pressurein the test reservoir in not more than 0.50 second, and release the pressurein not more than 1.00 second. The purpose of the proposed gladhand timingrequirements was to ensure that the air delivery from towing vehicles totowed vehicles is fast enough to result in application of the brakes ofall vehicles in the combination at approximately the same time, therebyavoiding reduction in combination stability (e.g., trailer bumping) causedby a slow gladhand.Most commenters addressing the proposed gladhand timing requirements supportedthe establishment of such requirements but argued that the proposed requirementsare too stringent. MVMA stated that it believes that gladhand timing requirementswill improve tractor/trailer compatibility. It expressed concern, however,that the proposed requirements may require modification of most of theair braked vehicles produced by its member companies. That organizationargued that available research does not justify requiring extensive productmodifications and suggested that requirements be established that are achievablewith minimal modifications.GM stated that while it believes the addition of gladhand timing requirementsmay improve combination vehicle compatibility, it does not believe NHTSAhas provided any data to substantiate a need for the proposed 0.35/0.70second tractor control line application/release times. That company statedthat the 0.35/0.70 second values appear to represent only an average oftimes of vehicles tested by the agency and that the vehicles tested arenot totally representative of the current vehicle fleet. GM argued furtherthat while NHTSA has implied that the kingpin forces measured are largelythe result of the brake timing existent on the tested vehicle combinations,those forces are actually a function of brake system pneumatic balance,torque balance, brake application technique and timing. That commenterasserted that NHTSA has demonstrated neither that there is a need to lowersuch forces nor that the revisions proposed would serve to achieve thatend. GM recommended as an initial step that the 0.50/1.00 second applicationand release times proposed for trailer gladhands also be adopted for tractorsand trucks equipped to tow trailers. It stated that if the 0.50/1.00 secondtiming is appropriate for trailers utilized as towing vehicles, it questionswhy these values would not also be appropriate for all towing vehicles.GM argued that its recommendation would accomplish the objectives of theproposal without requiring as extensive a change in pneumatic systems.Midland Brake commented that although the control line coupling timingof 0.35 second apply and 0.70 second release may be typical values forpower units, there appears to be no firm evidence or rationale for mandatingthese values as the maximum allowable. That commenter added that vehiclemanufacturers would have to design their brake systems for apply and releasetimes even less than these values to be certain that all production vehicleswith normal manufacturing tolerances will meet the requirements. Midlandstated that it believes that the proposed requirements would cause significantchanges by many vehicle manufacturers and, like GM, argued that 0.50/1.00second requirements would be more practical.IH stated that its test results indicate that application timing of 0.50second, as opposed to the proposed value of 0.35 second, would providea tractor/trailer timing differential that would not result in trailerpushing or any other combination compatibility problem. That commenterstated that it is difficult to determine the effect of trailer releasetiming and tractor/trailer release differentials on compatibility. Accordingto IH, however, its test results indicate that a release timing at thetractor coupling of 0.90 second is sufficient. That company also arguedthat it disagrees that the costs of the proposed gladhand timing requirementswould be minimal. It stated that although NHTSA's test results indicatedthat the majority of tractors passed the proposed requirements, they werenot worst case vehicles. IH stated that the designs of all wheelbases mustbe changed if the longest wheelbase does not meet the requirements, sinceit does not customize the piping of a tractor by wheelbase. According tothat company, the proposed requirements would require an average customercost increase of $25.00 per unit. IH stated that its customers would pay$725,000 per year for an imperceptible benefit of 10 milliseconds on applicationand 40 milliseconds on release.Freightliner stated that its data show that significant modifications tothe pneumatic system are required for the majority of its product lineto approach the proposed 0.35 second application limit. It stated thatit endorses the concept of setting standards at the gladhand but recommendsa maximum application value of 0.40 second for vehicles under 200 inchesin wheelbase and 0.45 second for vehicles with a wheelbase over 200 inches.Ford recommended that the maximum application and release gladhand timingrequirements for power units be set at 0.45/0.85 second. That commenterstated that any redesign of its tractors necessary to bring them into compliancewith the proposed values would not have a substantial effect on tractor/trailerpneumatic timing capability. Echlin stated that it questions mandating an upper limit to the applicationand release times at the tractor/towing truck gladhand at what has beenindicated to be ``within the range of times observed in the trucks testedat the VRTC.'' That commenter stated that since it has not been demonstratedthat the response rate at the gladhand of trucks/tractors is too slow,there appears little substance to require vehicle manufacturers to incurthe expense to modify these vehicles to change the nominal apply and releasecharacteristics. Echlin suggested that a better approach might be to assumethat the 0.35/0.70 second times are adequate and add an upper limit tothis characteristic, such as 0.40/0.80 second. One commenter, Volvo White, opposed the adoption of gladhand timing requirements.That company argued that manufacturer's compliance data would be invalidated,that many of the changes implemented over the last ten years to improvetractor trailer compatibility would no longer be available, and that NHTSA'sresearch does not justify the need for the proposed requirements. Accordingto Volvo White, its product lines would not conform without major analysisand redesign activities. It also stated that it believes, although it cannotconfirm without extensive tests, that the design changes required to ensureconformance would adversely affect compatibility for some of its customers.NHTSA believes that timing is an important factor for safe air brake systemperformance and notes that most commenters supported the establishmentof gladhand timing requirements. The agency agrees with commenters thatother factors, including brake torque and pneumatic balance, are also importantfactors in brake balance. However, the significance of these other factorsdoes not obviate the safety need for appropriate brake timing requirements.In establishing timing requirements for combination vehicles, an importantgoal is to avoid trailer brakes applying so slowly that excessive compressive,and potentially destabilizing, forces are produced at the kingpin. In moreextreme cases, these compressive forces create a pushing sensation thatis unnerving to drivers. However, the forces can decrease stability atlevels that cannot be detected by drivers. Therefore, NHTSA does not agreewith IH's argument that a 0.40 second differential is acceptable simplybecause drivers have difficulty detecting a pushing sensation at that level.ATA argued that ideal or optimum combination vehicles would apply the rearmostbrakes first and then sequentially move forward until the front axles areapplied last. While this approach might be ideal for reducing combinationinstability, NHTSA believes that it could only be achieved by major changesin air brake design. Moreover, a standard requiring such performance couldresult in longer stopping distances, since it might be necessary for thebrakes on leading axles of such combinations to actuate significantly laterthan on current designs. In establishing timing requirements, NHTSA mustconsider both combination balance and potential effects on stopping distance.The 0.35 second/0.70 second maximum application and release gladhand timingrequirements proposed by NHTSA for power units are typical of current productionvehicles. For example, recent tests conducted for the Truck Trailer BrakeResearch Group (TTBRG) had gladhand application times of 0.15, 0.20, 0.24,0.25, 0.25, 0.26, 0.26, 0.26, 0.27, 0.27, 0.31, 0.32, 0.33, 0.36 and 0.39second. The gladhand release times for these vehicles were 0.43, 0.45,0.48, 0.54, 0.55, 0.57, 0.61, 0.62, 0.63, 0.65, 0.67, 0.68, 0.69, 0.73and 0.78 second. In developing the NPRM, NHTSA did not intend to require major changes inair brake design. On the other hand, the goal of improving the balanceof combination vehicles cannot be achieved by simply setting requirementsat the level of the ``least common denominator'' vehicles being produced.The maximum application time at the gladhand is particularly importantfor safety since a slowing of this time slows the application time fortrailer brakes, resulting in both increased stopping distances <T3>and </T3>the potential for increased instability caused by ``trailerpush.''After reviewing the comments, NHTSA continues to believe that the proposed0.35 second maximum gladhand application time for power units is appropriate.Most vehicles easily meet this requirement, and most others can meet therequirement with minor plumbing changes. A few special design towing trucksmay require the addition of a relay valve. A short gladhand release time is not as important for safety and, in fact,it is not desirable to have the gladhand release before the tractor brakes.Given these factors, NHTSA believes that a maximum release time slightlyslower than proposed in the NPRM is appropriate, 0.75 second, which shouldminimize the need for design changes.NHTSA does not agree with GM's comment that because the agency proposed0.50/1.00 second maximum gladhand timing for towing trailers, the sametiming is appropriate for all towing vehicles. As a general matter, itis easier to achieve faster gladhand timing for power units than for trailers,since the distance between the gladhand and air supply is much less. Indeed,as discussed below, towing trailers need a relay valve in order to meetthe proposed 0.50/1.00 second requirements, while most power units do notneed a relay valve to meet the more stringent 0.35/0.75 second requirements.While the agency recognizes that it would be desirable for towing trailersto have even faster gladhand timing than proposed in the NPRM, it recognizesalso that the design changes needed would be much more difficult for thesevehicles.In addressing the proposed gladhand timing requirements for towing trailersand dollies, some commenters raised the issue of whether relay valves shouldbe required on dollies as well as towing trailers. Bendix commented thatthe proposed requirements would encourage the use of relay valves on bothtowing trailers and dollies. That company supported the proposed requirements,arguing that they result in improved combination performance regardlessof what type of vehicle is purchased in the future. Bendix stated thatif a fleet is purchasing new dollies to be used with existing trailers,the dolly will be able to improve multiple trailer combination timing performance,while for new trailer purchases, the trailer will be able to improve themultiple trailer combination timing performance. Fruehauf, on the otherhand, commented that it is redundant to install these types of valves onall three units of a combination.NHTSA agrees that in order to meet the proposed 0.50/1.00 second gladhandtiming requirements, dollies would generally need to be equipped with abooster relay valve. Given that the other towed vehicles in a doubles combinationwould generally have booster relay valves under the requirements establishedby this notice, NHTSA does not believe that it is necessary for dolliesto also be equipped with such devices. The air flow restriction througha dolly should not be significant enough to warrant a booster on each dolly.Also, dollies have historically been designed to be uncomplicated. WhileBendix is correct that there would be some benefit from relay-valve-equippeddollies being used with old trailers, NHTSA does not believe that thispotential benefit justifies requiring design changes to dollies that wouldbe of marginal benefit when the dollies are used with new trailers. TTBRGtests of three in-service dollies without boosters showed gladhand application/releasetimes of 0.49/1.04, 0.51/1.32, and 0.49/1.28 seconds. NHTSA believes thatgladhand timing requirements of 0.55/1.10 second can be met by dollieswithout boosters. Many dollies already meet these requirements, and onlyminor plumbing changes should be necessary for other dollies.After reviewing the comments, NHTSA believes that the proposed 0.50/1.00second maximum gladhand timing requirements are appropriate for towingtrailers other than dollies. While these requirements will generally requirethe use of booster relay valves, the VRTC tests indicate that the use ofthese devices will result in a substantial improvement in timing. The costof adding a booster relay valve is estimated to be about $45 (parts only)per vehicle. The agency notes that commenters did not object to requiringbooster valves for these vehicles.NHTSA shares the concern of several commenters that the overall timingrequirements proposed in the NPRM might not ensure combination vehiclestability in some situations because the brakes of a tractor with a veryfast application time could still actuate well before the brakes of a trailermeeting the proposed requirements. While the agency agrees with the commentersthat a minimum application time for tractors would take care of this problem,it believes that there is a better approach. As a general matter, fasterbrake application is better than slower application, so long as incompatibilitydoesn't become a problem. The disadvantage of a minimum application timeis that it would prohibit fast tractors in situations where timing compatibilityis not a problem, e.g., captive combinations (where a tractor always towsthe same trailer) where the trailer has very fast timing. NHTSA believesthat it is sufficient to require the actuation time at the gladhand tobe faster than the timing of the tractor brake chambers and that the releasetime be fast enough to assure good modulation of the tractor brakes.NHTSA is publishing a supplementary NPRM (SNPRM) proposing to require thatthe actuation time at the gladhand be at least as fast as the timing atthe brake chambers. As a practical matter, such a requirement would notneed to include any maximum actuation time at the gladhand, since thattime would be limited by the maximum time specified for the brake chambers.Given the importance of timing, NHTSA does not believe that the establishmentof the timing requirements proposed by the May 1985 NPRM should be delayed.In this notice, the agency is establishing 0.35/0.75 second maximum actuationand release gladhand timing requirements for power units, 0.50/1.00 secondrequirements for towing trailers other than dollies, and 0.55/1.10 secondrequirements for dollies. However, in light of the SNPRM, the agency isalso establishing an alternative option for towing vehicles of actuationat the gladhand being at least as fast as the timing at the brake chambers.For manufacturers choosing this option, the maximum brake chamber requirementsestablished by this notice (discussed below) would ensure essentially thesame maximum gladhand actuation time. <ITAG tagnum="84">Brake Chamber Timing_Power Units</ITAG>Standard No. 121 currently specifies that the brake application time fortrucks and buses not exceed 0.45 second and that the brake release timefor those vehicles not exceed 0.55 second. The NPRM proposed to lengthenthe maximum brake application time for trucks designed to tow other air-brakedvehicles to 0.50 second, while retaining the current time of 0.45 secondfor other trucks and buses. The primary reason for proposing the changewas to establish application times of 0.50 second across all units of acombination. A number of commenters argued that there is no reason for towing trucks,non-towing trucks and buses to have different timing requirements. Echlinstated that the same manufacturers build these vehicles, often on the sameproduction lines, and expressed concern that differing requirements couldcause confusion, especially when a vehicle is converted from one kind toanother. IH stated that it agrees with slowing down tractor application,but believes that it should be done for all vehicles. Bendix commentedthat the increase in actuation time is acceptable and would not increasestopping distances significantly. The Insurance Institute for Highway safety(IIHS) expressed concern that the proposal would increase braking timesand further increase the already large disparity in braking performancebetween cars and trucks. Freightliner stated that the proposed change maybe insufficient. That company noted that ATA's recommended practice ofa 0.30 second minimum application time is increasingly specified by itscustomers. It stated that the window created by ATA's 0.30 second timeand the proposed 0.50 second time is insufficient. After analyzing the comments on this issue, NHTSA has decided not to changethe current 0.45 second application time for trucks and buses. While thepotential impact on stopping distance would be relatively small, the agencybelieves that it should not relax a requirement closely related to stoppingdistance unless it is clearly necessary. In this case, the potential improvementin compatibility that would be achieved by permitting 0.05 second longerapplication time does not clearly outweigh the impact on stopping distance.Moreover, manufacturers are currently meeting the 0.45 second requirementwithout difficulty. NHTSA notes that Standard No. 121 does not specifythe 0.30 second minimum application time cited by Freightliner and that,in any event, manufacturers can design their vehicles to meet both StandardNo. 121 and ATA's recommended minimum application time. <ITAG tagnum="84">Brake Chamber Timing_Trailers</ITAG>Standard No. 121 currently specifies, using the old test rig, that thebrake application time for trailers other than dollies not exceed 0.30second and that the brake release time for those vehicles not exceed 0.65second. Given the 0.29 second slower application time for the modifiedtest rig, an equivalent requirement using the modified test rig would beapproximately 0.60 second. The NPRM proposed a maximum time of 0.50 second,which appeared to be easily obtainable, for the purpose of requiring fasterapplication time. Given the 0.48 second slower release time for the modifiedtest rig, an equivalent requirement using the modified test rig would beapproximately 1.20 seconds. The NPRM proposed a maximum time of 1.00 second,which also appeared to be easily obtainable, for the purpose of requiringfaster release time. For trailer converter dollies, Standard No. 121 currently specifies, usingthe old test rig, maximum application/release times of 0.35/0.65 second.The NPRM proposed the same maximum application/release times as for trailers,0.50/1.00 second. Bendix commented that the proposed actuation times for trailers, alongwith the slower test rig, is a big step in the right direction. That companyargued that trailer brakes should come on as fast as possible to minimizetime lag and trailer push. It stated that the use of \3/8\-inch tubingto speed up the control signal time was verified by its testing, and thatthe times and combination time balance were improved even more dramaticallywith pilot relay valves on slide axle non-towing trailer systems. Bendixstated that while it does not suggest faster times, it believes the proposed0.50/1.00 second times should not be increased. That company stated thatit has been involved in specific field problems when trailer release timeexceeds 1.00 second. Freuhauf commented that it disagrees with the proposed 0.50/1.00 secondmaximum application/release times and recommended that the times be extendedto 0.60/1.20 seconds. That company stated that the docket is clearly requestinga reduction in the application and release times of trailers. Freuhaufpresented test data showing that a standard 48 foot trailer has application/releasetimes of 0.216 second/0.573 second using the current mini-tractor and 0.579second/1.194 seconds using the modified mini-tractor. That company arguedthat its experience with this trailer over the last ten years indicatesthat the trailer's timing is acceptable for safe highway operation. Freuhaufalso presented test data showing that the trailer's timing, using the modifiedtest rig, could be improved to 0.507 second/1.022 seconds by using smallersize tubing. That company asserted that the test results indicate thata simple change of total control line diameter will not allow a standard48-foot tandem axle semi-trailer to meet the 0.50/1.00 second proposal.Freuhauf acknowledged that it is possible to achieve the proposed timingrequirements by using a booster type valve or relay, but argued that theaddition of boost valves further complicates and potentially reduces thereliability of the brake system on trailers for marginal improvements inapplication and release times. That company argued that this, coupled withthe additional sizeable economic penalty caused by the addition of theboost valve and other necessary design changes, makes the addition of aboost valve unacceptable. Freuhauf also indicated that it tried to accomplishthe proposed timing requirements by evaluating four delivery ported relayvalves. Freuhauf stated, however, that while the use of such valves improvedtiming results, they did not result in sufficient margins to ensure thatall of its production vehicles would comply with the proposed requirements.TTMA commented that the proposed trailer timing requirements would requireadditional valves and complexity which is not justified. That organizationstated that users complain that complexity in trailer air systems and differencesin systems make it difficult to train maintenance personnel. TTMA statedthat it supports the comment by Freuhauf to change the maximum timing requirementsto 0.60 seconds apply and 1.20 seconds release. Midland Brake commented that the maximum trailer timing requirements shouldbe such that if a trailer with \1/2\ inch tubing complies with the currentrequirements, it should comply with new requirements when the control lineis changed from \1/2\ inch to \3/8\ inch. That commenter argued that thiswas the assumption in the NPRM. Midland stated that its testing shows thatthis would not be the case under the proposed 0.50/1.00 second requirementsand argued that timing requirements at those levels would require additionalsystem changes, at significant costs. Theurer commented that it concurs that a \3/8\ inch diameter control linecan be substituted for the commonly used \1/2\ inch line. That commenterstated, however, that there are many specialized trailers where the controlline is \1/2\ inch to meet the release timing requirements. Theurer statedthat preliminary tests of the proposed test rig indicate that the problemis exacerbated. That company stated that if it turns out that some trailersrequire \1/2\ inch diameter control lines to meet release timing requirements,it will probably build all units with the larger lines to minimize inventory,thereby negating whatever costs savings are attributable to the smallerline size. Theurer presented test data for a production 48 foot trailer,using a modified test rig, showing application/release times of 0.60 second/0.99second using \1/2\ inch line and 0.62 second/1.15 seconds using \3/8\ inchline.After evaluating the comments, NHTSA has decided to adopt maximum brakechamber application/release times of 0.60/1.20 second for non-towing trailers,0.55/1.10 second for dollies, and 0.50/1.00 second for other towing trailers.At the time of the NPRM, the agency believed that the proposed 0.50/1.00second requirements could be met by the last two categories of trailerswithout booster valves. However, based on its review of the comments andother available data, the agency now believes that adoption of the proposedrequirements would necessitate the addition of a booster valve on manytrailers in all three categories. The brake chamber timing requirements for non-towing trailers and dolliesare being set at a level that NHTSA believes can be met without the additionof a booster valve. The agency does not believe that the potential benefitsassociated with slightly faster timing requirements for these vehicleswould justify the increased cost and complexity associated with designsincorporating a booster valve. As indicated above, the 0.60/1.20 secondrequirement for non-towing trailers is about equivalent to the existingrequirement, taking into account the new test rig. The 0.55/1.10 secondrequirement for dollies is somewhat more stringent than the existing requirement,and may thus result in slightly faster timing. NHTSA has concluded that the proposed 0.50/1.00 second maximum brake chambertiming requirements are appropriate for towing trailers other than dollies.As discussed above, the gladhand timing requirements established by thisnotice will generally necessitate the use of a booster valve for thesevehicles. The same booster valve may be used to meet both the gladhandand brake chamber timing requirements. Thus, once the booster valve isincluded to improve gladhand timing, the vehicle can more easily meet fasterbrake chamber timing requirements. Moreover, there is a greater need fortowing trailers to have faster brake chamber timing. It is industry practiceto use towing trailers as both the first and second trailers in doublescombinations. When the towing trailer is used as the second trailer, itis typically serviced by a slower gladhand (that of the first trailer)than the first trailer or a typical single trailer (which are servicedby the power unit gladhand). Faster brake chamber timing for the secondtrailer helps offset the slower timing at the gladhand. Eaton commented that the time differential between tractors and trailersshould be decreased by reducing the trailer release time and thereby promotingenergy balance improvements between tractors and trailers. The differencebetween these values reflects the agency's view that trailer release timesthat are slightly slower than the release time for towing vehicles do notdegrade the stability of combination vehicles. <ITAG tagnum="84">Other Comments</ITAG>Eaton commented that it supports NHTSA's objective in improving the stabilityof combination vehicles during braking, but argued that brake energy balance,which is influenced by air system timing, must be considered. That commenterstated that tractor-trailer combination vehicles with unbalanced brakeenergy characteristics will develop significant brake maintenance costsbecause of a disproportionate braking workload distribution between thevehicles. Eaton stated that any proposed air system timing changes to StandardNo. 121 should be thoroughly evaluated relative to the optimization ofbrake energy balance, as well as timing balance. As indicated earlier inthis notice, NHTSA agrees that factors other than timing, such as braketorque and pneumatic balance, are also important factors in brake balance.The agency has considered these factors in evaluating air brake timingand believes that the improved timing performance will help optimize brakeenergy balance as a whole.The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety argued that rather than concentratingall of its truck brake rulemaking on revising the current standard, NHTSAshould begin rulemaking to establish a new standard for vehicles with airbrakes that reflects state-of-the-art technology. That commenter also arguedthat any changes to the current standard should decrease timing delay requirementsto reflect modern air brake technology. According to that organization,SAAB-Scania has an electrically actuated air brake system by Bosch, whichcan reduce actuation time by 50 percent and incorporates a fail-safe systemthat utilizes pneumatic triggering if the electrical system malfunctions.As discussed above, NHTSA believes that the requirements adopted by thisnotice will result in improved on-road performance for combination vehicles.The agency notes that it is currently engaged in research that will helpit decide in the future whether to consider upgrading Standard No. 121to reflect various new technologies.<ITAG tagnum="84">Effective Date</ITAG>The amendments made by this rule to the Code of Federal Regulations areeffective June 2, 1989. The amendments require mandatory compliance effectiveMay 3, 1991. After reviewing the comments, NHTSA has concluded that twoyears leadtime is needed to enable manufacturers to make the design changesneeded to meet the new requirements. Between those dates, manufacturershave three options for meeting maximum application and maximum releasetiming requirements for trailer brake chambers: (1) Meeting the existingrequirements, using the existing test rig, (2) meeting the new requirements,using the modified test rig, or (3) meeting requirements approximatelyequivalent to the existing requirements but specifying use of the modifiedtest rig. Permitting optional compliance with amendments that become effectiveat a later date promotes manufacturer flexibility without creating anyadverse impacts. The purpose of the third option noted above is to facilitateearly use by manufacturers of the modified test rig.<ITAG tagnum="84">Economic and Other Impacts</ITAG>NHTSA has evaluated the economic and other effects of this final rule anddetermined that they are neither ``major'' within the meaning of ExecutiveOrder 12291 nor ``significant'' within the meaning of the Department ofTransportation regulatory policies and procedures. A final regulatory evaluationdescribing those effects has been placed in the docket.The regulatory evaluation concludes that the final rule will result ina combination of cost increases and cost savings. While there will be netcost increases for some towing vehicles (tractors, towing trucks, towingtrailers), on the order of $15.50 or less for most vehicles, there is apotential for net cost savings over the entire affected fleet (tractors,towing trucks, towing trailers, single trailers, dollies). A one-time costfor trailer manufacturers is the need to modify existing test rigs. Mosttrailer manufacturers have between one and three test rigs. The agencyestimates that the necessary modifications can be made for about $300 pertest rig. It is expected that specification of the new test rig will enabletrailer manufacturers to change to smaller diameter control lines, at acost saving of $35 per unit. About 85 percent of towing trailers will requirethe addition of a booster relay valve, at a cost of $45, in order to complywith the amended brake chamber and new gladhand timing requirements. Thegladhand timing requirements will also result in increased testing costsfor towing trailers, dollies, tractors, and towing trucks. In addition,about 30 percent of tractors/towing trucks will require control line tubingchanges and relay valve modifications, at a net cost of $10 per unit, inorder to comply with the gladhand timing requirements.In accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, NHTSA has evaluatedthe effects of this action on small entities. Based upon this evaluation,I certify that the amendments will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. Few of the truck tractor manufacturersaffected by this final rule are small manufacturers. While many of thetrailer manufacturers may qualify as small manufacturers, this final rulewill not significantly increase the production or certification costs forthose manufacturers. Other small businesses, small organizations, and smallgovernmental units will be affected by the amendments only to the extentthat they purchase motor vehicles. The amendments will not have any significanteffect on the price of those vehicles. Accordingly, no regulatory flexibilityanalysis has been prepared.The agency has also analyzed this rule for the purposes of the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act, and determined that the rule will not have anysignificant impact on the quality of the human environment.Finally, this rule has been analyzed in accordance with the principlesand criteria contained in Executive Order 12612, and it has been determinedthat the rule does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrantthe preparation of a Federalism Assessment.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 49 CFR Part 571</ITAG>Imports, Motor vehicle safety, Motor vehicles, Rubber and rubber products,Tires.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 571_[AMENDED]</ITAG>In consideration of the foregoing, 49 CFR Part 571 is amended as follows:1. The authority citation for Part 571 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 15 U.S.C. 1392, 1401, 1403, 1407; delegation of authorityat 49 CFR 1.50.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 571.121</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>2. S5.3.3 of andSection; 571.121 is revised to read as follows:S5.3.3 <T3>Brake actuation time.</T3> Each service brake system shall meet therequirements of S5.3.3.1, except that, at the option of the manufacturer,vehicles manufactured before May 3, 1991 may meet the requirements specifiedin either S5.3.3.2 or S5.3.3.3.S5.3.3.1(a) With an initial service reservoir system air pressure of 100p.s.i., the air pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured fromthe first movement of the service brake control, reach 60 p.s.i. in notmore than 0.45 second in the case of trucks and buses, 0.50 second in thecase of trailers, other than trailer converter dollies, designed to towanother vehicle equipped with air brakes, 0.55 second in the case of trailerconverter dollies, and 0.60 second in the case of trailers other than trailersdesigned to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes. A vehicle designedto tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes shall meet the above actuationtime requirement with a 50-cubic-inch test reservoir connected to the controlline output coupling. a trailer, including a trailer converter dolly, shallmeet the above actuation time requirement with its control line input couplingconnected to the test rig shown in Figure 1. (b) For a vehicle that is manufactured after May 3, 1991 and is designedto tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes, the pressure in the 50-cubic-inchtest reservoir referred to in S5.3.3.1(a) shall, when measured from thefirst movement of the service brake control, reach 60 p.s.i. not laterthan the time the fastest brake chamber on the vehicle reaches 60 p.s.i.or, at the option of the manufacturer, in not more than 0.35 second inthe case of trucks and buses, 0.55 second in the case of trailer converterdollies, and 0.50 second in the cae of trailers other than trailer converterdollies.S5.3.3.2 <T3>(Optional requirement for vehicles manufactured before May 3, 1991.)</T3>With an initial service reservoir system air pressure of 100 p.s.i.,the air pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured from the firstmovement of the service brake control, reach 60 p.s.i. in not more than0.45 second in the case of trucks and buses, and 0.60 second in the caseof trailers. A vehicle designed to tow another vehicle equipped air brakesshall meet the above actuation time requirement with a 50-cubic-inch testreservoir connected to the control line output coupling. A trailer, includinga trailer converter dolly, shall meet the above actuation time requirementwith its control line input coupling connected to the test rig shown inFigure 1.S5.3.3.3 <T3>(Optional requirement for vehicles manufactured before May 3, 1991.)</T3>With an initial service reservoir system air pressure of 100 p.s.i., theair pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured from the firstmovement of the service brake control, reach 60 p.s.i. in not more than0.45 second in the case of trucks and buses, 0.35 second in the case oftrailer converter dollies, and 0.30 second in the case of trailers otherthan trailer converter dollies. A vehicle designed to tow another vehicleequipped with air brakes shall meet the above actuation time requirementwith a 50-cubic-inch test reservoir connected to the control line outputcoupling. A trailer, including a trailer converter dolly, shall meet theabove actuation time requirement with its control line input coupling connectedto the test rig shown in Figure 1(a).3. S5.3.4 of andSection; 571.121 is revised to read as follows:S5.3.4 <T3>Brake release time.</T3> Each service brake system shall meet the requirementsof S5.3.4.1, except that, at the option of the manufacturer, vehicles manufacturedbefore May 3, 1991 may meet the requirements specified in either S5.3.4.2or S5.3.4.3.S5.3.4.1(a) With an initial service brake chamber air pressure of 95 p.s.i.,the air pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured from the firstmovement of the service brake control, fall to 5 p.s.i. in not more than0.55 second in the case of trucks and buses, 1.00 second in the case oftrailers, other than trailer converter dollies, designed to tow anothervehicle equipped with air brakes, 1.10 seconds in the case of trailer converterdollies, and 1.20 seconds in the case of trailers other than trailers designedto tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes. A vehicle designated totow another vehicle equipped with air brakes shall meet the above releasetime requirement with a 50-cubic-inch test reservoir connected to the controlline output coupling. A trailer, including a trailer converter dolly, shallmeet the above release time requirement with its control line input couplingconnected to the test rig shown in Figure 1.(b) For vehicles designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes,effective May 3, 1991, the pressure in the 50-cubic-inch test reserviorreferred to in S5.3.4.1(a) shall, when measured from the first movementof the service brake control, fall to 5 p.s.i. in not more than 0.75 secondsin the case of trucks and buses, 1.10 seconds in the case of trailer converterdollies, and 1.00 seconds in the case of trailers other than trailer converterdollies.S5.3.4.2 <T3>(Optional requirement for vehicles manufactured before May 3, 1989.)</T3>With an initial service brake chamber air pressure of 95 p.s.i., the airpressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured from the first movementof the service brake control, fall to 5 p.s.i. in not more than 0.55 secondsin the case of trucks and buses, and 1.20 seconds in the case of trailers.A vehicle designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes shallmeet the above release time requirement with a 50-cubic-inch test reservoirconnected to the control line output coupling. A trailer, including a trailerconverter dolly, shall meet the above release time requirement with itscontrol line input coupling connected to the test rig shown in Figure 1.S5.3.4.3 <T3>(Optional requirement for vehicles manufactured before May 3, 1991.)</T3>With an initial service brake chamber air pressure of 95 p.s.i., theair pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured from the firstmovement of the service brake control, fall to 5 p.s.i. in not more than0.55 seconds in the case of trucks and buses, and 0.65 seconds in the caseof trailers. A vehicle designed to tow another vehicle equipped with airbrakes shall meet the above release time requirement with a 50-cubic-inchtest reservoir connected to the control line output coupling. A trailer,including a trailer converter dolly, shall meet the above release timerequirement with its control line input coupling connected to the testrig shown in Figure 1(a).4. A new Figure 1 is added following S5.3.4.3 to read as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M001</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration(s) 161</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-C </ITAG>5. The existing Figure 1 is redesignated Figure 1(a).6. A new Figure 3 is added following S6.1.13 to read as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M 001</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration(s) 163</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-C </ITAG>7. S6.1.13 of andSection; 571.121 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">S6.1.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Trailer test rig.</ITAG>(a) The trailer test rig shown in Figure 1 is calibrated in accordancewith the calibration curves shown in Figure 3. For the requirements ofS5.3.3.1 and S5.3.4.1, the pressure in the trailer test rig reservoir isinitially set at 100 p.s.i. for actuation tests and 95 p.s.i. for releasetests.(b) The trailer test rig shown in Figure 1(a) is capable of increasingthe pressure in a 50 cubic inch reservoir from atmospheric to 60 lb/in\2\in 0.06 second, measured from the first movement of the service brake controlto apply service brake pressure and of releasing pressure in such a reservoirfrom 95 to 5 lb/in\2\ in 0.22 second measured from the first movement ofthe service brake control to release service brake pressure.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on May 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jeffrey R. Miller,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10320 Filed 4-28-89; 2:23 pm]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>