<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89405-0115 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-05-89.f2.A1114</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-369 and 50-370]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Duke Power Co.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendments to FacilityOperating Licenses and Proposed No Significant Hazards Consideration Determinationand Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of amendments to Facility Operating License No. NPF-9 and FacilityOperating License No. NPF-17, issued to Duke Power Company, (the licensee),for operation of the McGuire Nuclear Station, Units 1 and 2, located inMecklenburg County, North Carolina.The proposed amendments would relocate fire protection requirements fromthe operating licenses and Technical Specifications (TS) to the Final SafetyAnalysis Report (FSAR) in accordance with NRC Generic Letters (GL) 86-10and 88-12. Specifically, the requested changes would revise Unit 1 LicenseCondition 2.C.(4) and corresponding Unit 2 License Condition 2.C.(7) ``FireProtection Program'' to delete obsolete requirements to complete certainmodifications which have been completed, and substitute a standard conditionthat states:<ITAG tagnum="21">b. The licensee may make changes to the approved fire protection programwithout prior approval of the Commission only if those changes would notadversely affect the ability to achieve and maintain safe shutdown in theevent of a fire.</ITAG>The proposed amendments would delete TS 3/4.3.3.7, referenced TS Table3.3-11 corresponding Bases, each titled ``Fire Detection Instrumentation;''TS 3/4.7.10 ``Fire Suppression Systems'' including all subsections, referencedTS Table 3.7-5 ``Fire Hose Stations,'' and associated Bases; TS 3/4.7.11``Fire Barrier Penetrations'' and its corresponding Bases; and TS 6.2.2.ewhich addresses staffing requirements for the site Fire Brigade. Additionally,reference to the ``Fire Brigade'' composition within the footnote referencedby TS 6.2.2.e would be removed. The TS Index would be revised to reflectthese deletions.The proposed amendments would supplement the administrative controls requirementsof TS 6.5.1 ``Review and Audit-Technical Review and Control Activities''to require that the Station Manager ensure the performance of a reviewby a qualified individual/organization of the Fire Protection Program andimplementing procedures and submittal of recommended changes to the NuclearSafety Review Board. The amendments would also supplement TS 6.8.1 ``Proceduresand Programs'' to add the following to the existing activities requiringwritten procedures: ``h. Fire Protection Program implementation'' and ``i.Commitments contained in FSAR Chapter 16.0.''The licensee's application for the amendments was dated March 9, 1987,and revised March 20, 1989.Before issuance of the proposed license amendments, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendments would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety.The proposed revision to the license condition is in accordance with theguidance provided in GL 86-10 and GL 88-12 for licensees requesting removalof fire protection TS. The incorporation of the existing Fire ProtectionProgram, and the former TS requirements by reference to the proceduresimplementing these requirements, into the FSAR and the use of the standardlicense condition on fire protection will ensure that the Fire ProtectionProgram, including the systems, the administrative and technical controlsthe organization, and the other plant features associated with fire protectionwill be on a consistent status with other plant features described in theFSAR. Also, the provisions of 10 CFR 50-59 would then apply directly forchanges the licensee desires to make in the Fire Protection Program. Inthis context, the determination of the involvement of an unreviewed safetyquestion defined in 10 CFR 50.59(a)(2) would be made based on the ``accident* * * previously evaluated'' being the postulated fire in the fire hazardsanalysis for the fire area affected by the change. Hence, the proposedlicense condition establishes an adequate basis for defining the scopeof changes to the Fire Protection Program which can be made without priorCommission approval, i.e., without introduction of an unreviewed safetyquestion. The revised license condition or the removal of the existingTS requirements of fire protection does not create the possibility of anew or different kind of accident from those previously evaluated. Theyalso don't involve a signficant reduction in the margin of safety sincethe license condition does not alter the requirement that an evaluationbe performed for the identification of an unreviewed safety question foreach proposed change to the Fire Protection Program. Consequently, neitherthe proposed license condition nor the removal of the fire protection requirementsinvolves a significant increase in the probability or consequences of anaccident previously evaluated.The proposed modification of the Administrative Control Section 6 of theTS includes the addition of Fire Protection Program implementation to therequirements for Specification 6.8. Procedures and Programs, that requireswritten procedures be established, implemented, and maintained coveringthis program. This section of the TS is also modified to include the reviewof the Fire Protection Program and implementing procedures by a qualifiedindividual or organization and the submittal of recommended changes tothe Nuclear Safety Review Board as one of the responsibilities of the StationManager under TS 6.5.1. In this manner, the Fire Protection Program willbe addressed by administrative control requirements that are consistentwith other programs addressed by license conditions. These changes, andthe change to the license conditions to delete obsolete (completed) requirements,are administrative in nature and do not impact the operation of the facilityin a manner that involves significant hazards considerations.The proposed amendments include the removal of fire protection TS in fourareas: (1) Fire detection systems, (2) fire suppression systems, (3) firebarriers, and (4) fire brigade staffing requirements. While it is recognizedthat a comprehensive Fire Protection Program is essential to plant safety,many details of this program that are currently addressed in TS can bemodified without affecting nuclear safety. With the removal of these requirementsfrom the TS, they have been incorporated into the Fire Protection Programimplementing procedures. Hence, with the additions to the existing administrativecontrol requirements that applicable to the Fire Protection Program andthe revised license condition, there are suitable administrative controlsto ensure that license initiated changes to these requirements, that havebeen removed from the TS, will receive careful review by competent individuals.Again, these changes are administrative in nature and do not impact theoperation of the facility in a manner that involves significant hazardsconsiderations.Based on the preceding assessment, the staff proposes to find that theamendments involve no significant hazards considerations.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publication Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-216, Phillips Buildings, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland,from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments received may beexamined at the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington,DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to interveneare discussed below.By June 5, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendments to the subject facility operating licensesand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first rehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the basis for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportuntiyfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW.,Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during thelast ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitionerpromptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to WesternUnion at 1-800-325-6000 (in Missouri 1-800-342-6700). The Western Unionoperator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the followingmessage addressed to David B. Matthews: Petitioner's name and telephonenumber; date petition was mailed; plant name; and publication date andpage number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Mr. Albert Carr, Duke Power Company, 422 SouthChurch Street, Charlotte, North Carolina 28242, attorney for the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of factors specified in 10 CFR2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application forthe amendments which is available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC, and at the AtkinsLibrary, University of North Carolina, Charlotte (UNCC Station), NorthCarolina 28223.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 28th day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Darl S. Hood,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate II-3, Division of Reactor Projects_I/II,Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10701 Filed 5-3-89; 8:45am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>