<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89201-0069 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-01-89.f2.A1068</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRL. 3513-2]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Determination To Prohibit the Use of Big River, MishnockRiver, Their Tributaries and Adjacent Wetlands as Disposal Sites; KentCounty, RI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed section 404(c) determination.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Section 404(c) of the Clean Water Act (Act) authorizesthe Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to prohibit or restrict the dischargeof dredge or fill material at defined sites in the waters of the UnitedStates (including wetlands) whenever it determines, after notice and opportunityfor hearing, that use of such sites for disposal would have an unacceptableadverse impact on various resources, including wildlife. EPA Region I proposesunder section 404(c) of the Act to prohibit use of Big River, MishnockRiver, their tributaries and adjacent wetlands in Kent County, Rhode Island,as disposal sites for dredged or fill material in connection with constructionof Big River Reservior, a 3400 acre water supply project. The Big Riverproposal would directly eliminate approximately 550 acres of valuable wetlandsand impact an additional 500 to 600 acres of wetland habitat. There havebeen proposals to construct the project either by the State alone or asa joint venture with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps). EPA RegionI believes that filling and inundating the wetlands and waters of the sitemay have an unacceptable adverse effect on wildlife habitat and fisheries.<T3>Purpose of Public Notice: </T3>EPA seeks comments on this proposeddetermination to prohibit the disposal of dredged or fill material intoBig River, Mishnock River, their tributaries and adjacent wetlands. SeeSolicition of Comments, at the end of this public notice, for further details.<T3>Public Comment: </T3>Comments on or requests for additional copiesof the proposed determination should be submitted to the EPA Region It'sdesignated Record Clerk, Virginia Laszewski, U.S. EPA, JFK Federal Building,WWP-1900, Boston, MA 02203-2211.EPA seeks comments concerning the issues enumerated under the Soliciationof Comments at the end of the document. Copies of all comments submittedin response to this notice, as well as the administrative record for theproposed determination, will be available for public inspection duringnormal working hours (9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) at the EPA Region I office.In accordance with EPA regulations at 40 CFR 231.4, the Regional Administratorhas decided that a hearing on this proposed 404(c) determination wouldbe in the public interest. A separate public notice will be published inthe <T4>Federal Register </T4>and local newspapers to announce the date, timeand location of this hearing and describe the hearing procedures. Noticewill be given at least 30 days in advance of the hearing. Written commentsmay be submitted prior to the hearing, and both oral and written commentsmay be presented at the hearing.Because of the large scale of the proposed project, the complexity of issues,and the large volume of information which exists about this project, theRegional Administrator hereby determines that good cause exists to establisha comment deadline of July 31, 1989. This will also provide an opportunityfor people to visit the site and make their own observations if they theywish to do so, and for the State and others to submit information aboutproject need and alternatives. Neither the Corps nor the State plans tobuild this project within the next year; therefore, the extended commentperiod would not disadvantage the project proponents. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact:</T2> Mr. Mark J. Kern, EPA Water QualityBranch, JFK Federal Building, WWP-1900, Boston, MA 02203-2211. (617) 565-4421.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Supplementary Information:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>I. Section 404(c) ProcedureThe Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 <T3>et seq.,</T3> prohibits the discharge of pollutants, including dredgedor fill material, into the waters of the United States, including wetlands,except in compliance with, among other things, section 404. Section 404establishes a federal permit program to regulate the discharge of dredgedor fill material subject to environmental regulations developed by EPAin conjunction with the Department of the Army. The Corps may issue permitsauthorizing dredged and fill material discharges into waters and wetlandsif they comply with, among other things, EPA's 404(b)(1) guidelines, exceptas provided in section 404(c). Section 404(c) authorizes EPA, after providingnotice and opportunity for hearing, to prohibit or restrict filling watersof the United States where it determines that such use would have an unacceptableadverse effect on wildlife or other specified environmental interests.EPA can exercise 404(c) to ``veto'' a permit the Corps had decided to issueor, as here, to protect valuable aquatic areas in the absence of any specificpermit decision.Regulations published in 40 CFR Part 231 establish the procedures to befollowed by EPA in exercising its section 404(c) authority. Whenever theRegional Administrator has reason to believe that use of a site may havean unacceptable adverse effect on one or more of the pertinent resources,he may begin the process by notifying the Corps of Engineers and the applicantthat he intends to issue a proposed determination under section 404(c).Unless the applicant or the Corps persuades the Regional Administratorwithin 15 days that no unacceptable adverse effects will occur, the RegionalAdministrator publishes a notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of his proposed determination, soliciting publiccomment and offering an opportunity for a public hearing. Today's noticerepresents this step in the process.Following the public hearing and the close of the comment period, the RegionalAdministrator either withdraws the proposed determination or prepares arecommended determination. (A decision to withdraw may be reviewed at thediscretion of the Assistant Administrator for Water at EPA Headquarters.)If the Regional Administrator prepares a recommended determination, hethen forwards it and the complete administrative record compiled in theRegion to the Assistant Administrator for Water at EPA Headquarters. TheAssistant Administrator makes the final decision affirming, modifying,or rescinding the recommended determination.II. Project Description and HistoryThe Big River Reservoir has at different times been proposed as a Stateor federal project. The State of Rhode Island has proposed building a watersupply reservoir; the Corps has proposed building a reservoir for watersupply, flood control, and recreation purposes. The project dimensions,site characteristics, and impacts are essentially the same for both proposals.This proposed 404(c) action applies to both proposals.The Big River Reservoir project, mostly located south of exit 6 on I-95,would involve the discharge of dredged and fill material into Big Riverto construct a dam and reservoir to create a 3,400 acre reservoir. Thereservoir would produce between 27 and 36 million gallons a day (MGD) ofpotable water (State versus Corps estimates). The dam would be 70andmin172;high while the average water depth would be about 25andmin172; deep. To containthe water within the basin, a slurry wall would be built down to bedrockin the northeast portion of the proposed reservoir to intercept approximately8 MGD of groundwater that now leaves the site and enters Mishnock Lakeand Swamp. Mishnock Lake and Swamp, which are not part of the Big Riverwatershed, are located approximately \1/2\ mile northeast of the proposedreservoir.A treatment plant would be built adjacent to the proposed reservoir on51 acres of land a 96&quot; diameter rock tunnel would transport water approximately6 miles to an existing distribution system. Additional site preparationwould destroy approximately 2,800 acres of terrestrial forest and relocate10 roadways, 300 structures, numerous graveyards, and several dump sites.According to State estimates, the project would cost at least $282 million,not including costs for environmental studies and mitigation. The federalgovernment would construct less than half of the project and fund lessthan 50% of the initial cost. Most of that expenditure would be reimbursedby the State, resulting in a federal share of approximately 2%-5%.In the 1960's the State of Rhode Island acquired over 8,000 acres of landat the Big River reservoir site in anticipation of building a reservoir.In 1978, having failed several times to secure funding to complete engineeringstudies, Rhode Island asked the Corps to consider constructing the reservoiras part of a federal flood control project. The Corps completed an EnvironmentalImpact Statement (EIS) on the reservoir project in 1981, which concludedthat environmental impacts would be significant. As early as 1982, EPAalerted the Corps that because of the adverse wetland impacts, EPA believesthe project could not comply with section 404(b)(1) Guidelines, the primaryfederal regulations that protect wetlands.Congress authorized the project as part of the Omnibus Water ResourcesDevelopment Act of 1986, but ordered additional wildlife mitigation studiesto be completed no later than November 17, 1987. These additional studieshave not been completed.In 1986, the State informed the Corps that it again wished to pursue thereservoir as a state project and subsequently applied for a federal section404 permit. The Corps in 1987 informed the State that a supplemental EISwould be required to address alternatives, mitigation, and a number ofother unresolved issues surrounding the project. For example, the 1981EIS indicated that 570 acres of wetland habitat would be lost if the damwere constructed. New information now suggests that the total acreage ofwetlands at risk exceeds 1000 acres, including Mishnock Swamp and the riverinewetlands along the South Branch of the Pawtuxet River. Moreover, the EISdid not address downstream water quality impacts, an important factor sincethe Pawtuxet River currently violates Rhode Island's water quality standardsfor dissolved oxygen and toxic chemicals.During 1987 and 1988, EPA voiced its concerns about the adverse environmentalimpacts of the reservoir proposal and alerted the State that the projectcould not comply with section 404 requirements. EPA also emphasized theneed for the State to thoroughly analyze the need for and alternativesto the project. The most recent State needs analysis for this project isover 20 years old. In a June 6, 1988 letter EPA urged the Corps to denythe permit because the project would cause significant degradation of theaquatic environment which could not be adequately mitigated.In a July 1, 1988 letter to Rhode Island's Governor DiPrete, the Corpsstated that the project as proposed would cause significant impacts tothe aquatic environment, would not comply with the section 404(b)(1) Guidelines,and probably could not receive a federal 404 permit. However, during aAugust 11, 1988 meeting, the Corps indicated to Governor DiPrete that theBig River reservoir might again become a federal project.In an August 24, 1988 letter, EPA's Regional Administrator informed theRhode Island Water Resources Board, the Governor, and the Corps of hisintention to begin a 404(c) action, based on his belief that the projectmay have unacceptable adverse impacts to wildlife and fisheries. Pursuantto 40 CFR 231.3, a 15-day opportunity for consultation ensued, which endedon September 9, 1988. Neither the State nor the Corps chose to consultwith EPA. Instead Governor DiPrete officially asked the Corps, on September1, 1988, to build the dam. The Water Resources Board withdrew its section404 permit application to the Corps in late September, 1988.The Corps New England Office has asserted that if it builds the reservoirproject, it would be exempt from section 404(c) of the Clean Water Act.Normally, Corps civil works projects, including those authorized by Congress,must comply with the Clean Water Act and other federal and state requirements.In the Big River reservoir case, however, the Corps claims the projectis exempt under section 404(r) of the Act.EPA has concluded that the project is not exempt because the Corps didnot follow the substantive and procedural requirements of section 404(r).The Act plainly requires an agency seeking an exemption under section 404(r)to submit an EIS to Congress before either project authorization or appropriationof funds. The Corps failed to submit the Big River reservoir EIS to Congressbefore authorization. Even if the EIS had been submitted to Congress, theproject does not qualify for an exemption for several other reasons. Thesereasons include the manner of project financing, deficiencies in the NEPArecord and an improper analysis of compliance with the EPA 404(b)(1) guidelines.EPA explained its position relative to the exemption issue in a December7, 1988 letter to the Corps New England Division.III. Characteristics and Functions of the SiteBig River, located in central Rhode Island, is part of the 29.7 squaremile Big River Watershed. On a larger scale, the water drains to NarragansettBay as part of the Pawtuxet River Basin. The wetlands along Big River andthe Mishnock Swamp form the largest wetland complex in the 228-square milePawtuxet River Basin. The diverse habitats associated with the Big Riversite support a large number of wildlife species. According to the 1981EIS, 221 species of birds, 55 species of mammals, and 39 species of reptilesand amphibians can reasonably be expected to inhabit the site.Along Big River and its tributaries the wetland habitats are unalteredby development or other human intrusions. As such, they provide high quality,diverse habitat for fish and wildlife, a travel corridor for upland andwetland wildlife, food web production for on-site and downstream biologicalcommunities, nutrient and pollutant uptake and assimilation, floodwaterstorage, and flow moderation. Additionally, they serve as an environmentfor fishing, hunting, and other recreational activities.The wetlands which would be lost by constructing the dam and reservoirare part of an intact, functioning system specifically adapted to the hydrologicregime of Big River and its tributaries. Most of the large wetlands borderfinger-like stream channels scattered throughout the site. Thus, naturaltopographic changes in the landscape create a variety of interspersed wetlandand upland habitats. This mixture of vegetation types allows the ecosystemto support a broad range of aquatic, semi-aquatic, and terrestrial wildlifecommunities. Vertical stratification of the forest canopy, sub-canopy,and ground cover also contributes to habitat diversity. Hence, fish andwildlife use the area as a resting, breeding, rearing, and feeding areaas well as a travel corridor to nearby undeveloped habitat.Leaf biomass produced by the trees and shrubs supports diverse fish andwildlife communities both at the project site and downstream. Numerousmammals at the site include white-tailed deer, red and gray fox, muskrat,cottontail rabbits and snowshoe hare, woodchuck, and raccoon. Extensiverodent populations and aquatic vertebrates at the site provides a significantfood source for numerous predators. Thus, many valuable fur-bearing mammalssuch as long-tailed weasel, mink, otter and possibly bobcat inhabit thesite. Of the 55 species of mammals cited in the EIS, the Rhode Island HeritageProgram lists bobcat as a State threatened species (occurring at less than5 locations in the State).The large prey population also supports a variety of raptors, such as red-tailedhawk, red-shouldered hawk, sparrow hawk, and great-horned owl. Additionalbird species known to inhabit the site include osprey, belted kingfisher,flycatchers, swallows, and woodpeckers. Populations of spring and fallmigratory birds, especially various woodland warblers, flourish at thesite. The EIS lists 221 species of birds potentially using the site, andthe Rhode Island Heritage Program has identified 104 species of birds whichnest in the Big River area. The State classifies two species, Cooper'shawk and upland sandpiper, as threatened species.Extensive conifers at the site not only provide food and cover for deerand other mammals but also supply winter food for bird species, such asthe crossbill, which feed extensively on seeds of softwoods. The marshesof the proposed Big River site harbor breeding waterfowl such as blackduck, mallard, and wood duck, while migratory species include green wingedteal, shovelers, and ringnecked ducks. Shore birds, rails, and coots alsofrequent the marshes along with wading birds such as great-blue heron andbittern. Other species of concern to the Rhode Island Natural HeritageProgram at the Big River site include four-toed salamander, eastern ribbonsnake, buck moth, and barrens bluet damselfly. Vernal pools, created duringspring runoff, provide especially productive habitat for many species ofamphibians and reptiles.Wetlands along Big River help to maintain and/or improve water quality,as well as regulate water quantity. Pollutants entering the watershed aretrapped, assimilated, or transformed within the diverse substrate providedby the wetlands. During the summer, the shading effects of the forest canopycools water temperatures in the river and tributaries, providing favorableconditions for native brook trout. Wetland trees and shrubs retard floodwater,decreasing downstream flood stages. The basal flow contribution from MishnockSwamp to the South Branch of the Pawtuxet River during summer stress conditionsprovides water at the most important time of year.Big River and its tributaries support self-sustaining cold water fisheries.Over 20 miles of free flowing streams within the site support more than15 species of fish including brook trout, white suckers, and redfin pickerel.IV. Basis of the Proposed Determination<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Section 404(c) Criteria</ITAG>The CWA requires that exercise of the final section 404(c) authority bebased on a determination of ``unacceptable adverse effect'' to municipalwater supplies, shellfish beds, fisheries, wildlife or recreational areas.EPA's regulations define ``unacceptable adverse effect'' at 40 CFR 231.2(e)as:<ITAG tagnum="21">Impact on aquatic or wetland ecosystem which is likely to result insignificant degradation of municipal water supples or significant lossof or damage to fisheries, shellfishing, or wildlife habitat or recreationareas. In evaluating the unacceptability of such impacts, considerationshould be given to the relevant portions of the Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines(40 CFR Part 230).</ITAG>One of the basic functions of section 404(c) is to police the applicationof the section 404(b)(1) guidelines. Those portions of the Guidelines relatingto less environmentally damaging practicable alternatives, water qualityimpacts, and significant degradation of waters of the United States areparticularly important in the evaluation of unacceptability of environmentalimpacts in this case. The guidelines forbid the discharge of dredged orfill material into waters of the United States if there is a less environmentallydamaging practicable alternative, if it would cause or contribute to aviolation of a State water quality standard or if it would cause or contributeto significant degradation of waters of the United States.<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Adverse Impacts of the Proposed Project</ITAG>Constructing the dam, and impounding Big River to create an artificiallake, would inundate 3,400 acres of wildlife habitat including 550 acresof productive wetlands. This loss represents approximately 50% of the totalwetlands in the Big River watershed. Moreover, if Mishnock Swamp becomesdewatered because of the dam and slurry wall, over 500 additional acresof prime wetland would be adversely affected. Virtually all of the diverseforested habitat that now exists in the 3,400 acre site would be destroyed.The proposed dam would eliminate all of the forest-stream-pool habitatand adjacent floodplain community which has adapted to periodic flooding.Based on the annual planned flow releases from the impoundment, Flat RiverReservoir would receive 45% less water; the South Branch of the Pawtuxet,34% less water; and the Pawtuxet River, 15% less water. As a result, thedam would also partially dewater extensive riverine wetlands along theSouth Branch of the Pawtuxet River, further adding to the wetland habitatloss. Further, reduced basal flow contributions from Mishnock River tothe South Branch of the Pawtuxet, during summer months, could worsen thealready poor water quality of the Pawtuxet, during summer months, couldworsen the already poor water quality of the Pawtuxet River.The dam would transform a diverse ecosystem, harboring a wide variety ofwildlife, into a shallow lake about 25 feet deep that benefits only a fewspecies, primarily warm water fish and bottom dwelling organisms. The coldwater fisheries, including native brook trout, will be destroyed. The BigRiver site potentially supports over 50 species of mammals, over 35 speciesof reptiles and amphibians, and over 200 species of birds, including over100 which nest at the site. The State considers at least 13 species whichinhabit the Big River site to be threatened or of special state interest.Another 10-20 species require large tracts of habitat for survival.Wildlife currently living on the site or migrating through it will eitherdie or be forced into adjacent upland habitat less suited to their needs.If they survive dislocation, they will have to compete for available foodand habitat with the existing upland animal communities. Many species ofwildlife at the site either require wetland habitat for survival, or dependupon wetlands for a major portion of their life cycle. Thus, the dam woulddrastically reduce both the total numbers of individuals, and the diversityof species in the Big River area. In addition, the dam will permanentlyblock the Big River site for use as a travel corridor. This would disruptmovement patterns of animals forcing them to cross highways and other exposedareas.EPA does not believe that the Pawtuxet River, Flat River Reservoir, andBig River would achieve state water quality standards if the dam is built.The Pawtuxet River now violates the Class C standard of 5 mg/1 of dissolvedoxygen during summer months. In addition, the standards require that normalseasonal and diurnal variations of dissolved oxygen above 5 mg/1 be maintained.Impounding Big River would likely worsen dissolved oxygen levels duringall seasons by reducing flows in the Pawtuxet River by 15%. The PawtuxetRiver historically supported large runs of anadromous fish including shad,alewives, and Atlantic Salmon. A further reduction in flow and increasedconcentration of pollutants may destroy any future plans for restoration.The impoundment of the Big River and its tributaries would convert coldwater fisheries to a warm water lake, and would violate antidegradationrequirements in the Rhode Island water quality standards. Rhode Islandhas very few remaining cold water fisheries, while warm water fisheriesare common throughout the State. The Pawtuxet River Basin, for example,has 34 ponds greater than 10 acres in size primarily suited for warm waterspecies, but virtually no other cold water fisheries.Flat River Reservoir provides the best warm water fisheries in the PawtuxetRiver Basin, but it is showing some signs of eutrophication. Water fromBig River, which provides over half of the water budget to Flat River Reservoir,will be reduced from an annual average flow of 60 cubic feet per second(cfs) to 6 cfs. This loss of water would increase eutrophication and adverselyimpact the fisheries and recreation of Flat River Reservoir, and couldviolate anti-degradation provisions of the Rhode Island water quality standards,which require existing water uses to be maintained and protected.<ITAG tagnum="81">C. Project Need and Alternatives</ITAG>1. <T3>Current Information. </T3>EPA believes that environmentally acceptablealternatives to the Big River reservoir, to supply potable water, havenot adequately addressed.\1\<NOTE/> EPA does not believe the need for additional potable wateris established, given the paucity of data about basic user informationand the lack of water conservation practices in the State. In addition,there appears to be a variety of ways to meet whatever need actually existswithout threatening over 1000 acres of wetlands and downstream water quality.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Water supply is the sole purpose of the State proposal.The Corps characterizes its project as multi-purpose, i.e., water supply,flood control and recreation. According to the EIS, construction of thedam would not be economically justified for flood control or recreationalone. Therefore, EPA is focusing its attention on alternatives to satisfythe primary purpose of water supply. EPA believes insofar as the Big Riverproject provides benefits of flood control and recreation, they could beachieved through less environmentally damaging measures.Despite the long history of the Big River proposal, there is a lack ofbasic information regarding the supply and demand for water in Rhode Island.There appears at present to be no method in the state for distinguishingbetween industrial, commercial and residential users. Therefore, thereis no information, for example, on how much water different types of industryuse. EPA does not believe that an accurate need forecast can be developedwithout first conducting a thorough water audit, lacking in the 1981 EISand other studies. The record developed to date serves to underscore EPA's doubts about theneed for a new water supply reservior. The State has not completed a basicwater use forecast for over 20 years. A new reservoir is needed, accordingto the State, primarily because the Scituate reservoir is approaching its``safe yield''. However, estimates of what constitutes the Scituate's safeyield vary by up to 15 mgd_approximately half the water that Big Rivercould supply. Moreover, the state Water Resources Board acknowledges thatit has no comprehensive policy to conserve water through public education,pricing policies, leak repair, drought planning or other such measures.The Corps, in the 1981 EIS, did not examine the State's water supply practicesto determine potential water savings, did not gather any user-specificinformation particular to Rhode Island water users, and used populationprojection which time has shown in inaccurate. Currently, the Corps agreesthat a new analysis of water supply demands should be done. If a need for additional water is established, EPA believes that thereare alternatives (or combinations of alternatives) to the Big River proposalto supply potable drinking water. Management alternatives include education,leak detection and repair, plumbing changes for new construction, and droughtplanning. Conserving drinking water from power generation, irrigation,commercial and industrial use can also increase potable water suppliesby matching the quality of water with its intended use. Not all industrialand commercial activities need potable water for their operations. Similarly,existing water supplies that drop below drinking water standards couldbe maintained to meet non-potable needs rather than abandoned. In addition,a thorough analysis of alternatives would also include investigation intogroundwater supplies, less environmentally damaging surface water sources,improved protection of existing water sources, and desalinization. Preliminaryinvestigations, for instance, indicate that 5-10 mgd of potable water isavailable from the aquifer at the Big River site at a fraction of the costof a new reservoir. 2. <T3>Additional studies. </T3>In recent discussions with EPA, the Statehas indicated that it is undertaking an updated analysis of water supplyneeds in Rhode Island as well as an evaluation of all alternatives, includingconservation, to meet the future demand for drinking water in the State.In order to seek an objective view of the issues involved, the State hassaid it will retain an independent consultant to conduct the studies. TheState has proposed that the scoping and oversight of the studies will beoverseen by an inter-agency committee established by the Governor and thatinterested parties and EPA will be given opportunity to comment on theprogress of the work.<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Mitigation </ITAG>The State did not submit a mitigation plan with its permit application.The Corps, in its 1981 EIS, proposed several structural and nonstructuralmeasures to mitigate adverse impacts including management of forests adjacentto the reservoir, reclaiming a mined area and putting up birdhouses. TheCorps proposed to mitigate the loss of wetlands chiefly by constructing``subimpoundments'' in the upper reaches of the reservoir in an attemptto enhance or create wetland habitat. If fully successful, these subimpoundmentswould contain about 90 acres of wetlands. EPA does not believe the adverse environmental impacts of the reservoirproposal can be mitigated. To even attempt meaningful replacement of thefull spectrum of existing wetland values would require a mitigation planso complex as to be infeasible from both a scientific and practical standpoint.Even if a plan could be devised which theoretically replaced wetlands values,EPA doubts it could be relied upon to prevent the potentially unacceptableadverse environmental impacts of this project given the inherent risksassociated with mitigation. Recent studies in New England and elsewhere point to a number of scientificand practical difficulties associated with mitigation. The scientific baseis too incomplete to support assertions that artificial wetlands will providethe functions of natural wetlands, let alone replace the diverse valuesof the 500-1000 acres of wetlands that would be lost at this site. Somewetland functions, such as flood storage, can normally be replicated successfully.Attempt to mitigate wildlife habitat losses have met with mixed success,and benefit only a few select species. There has been little demonstratedability to recreate on a broad scale other wetland values such as groundwaterdischarge and recharge or the complex interactions of water, soil and plantsinvolved in the uptake and transformation of nutrients and pollutants.After considering the project's impacts, unprecedented in New England,and the poor track record of wetland creation and enhancement projectsto compensate for projects involving much less severe impacts, EPA RegionI has concluded that the adverse effects of the Big River project cannotbe adequately mitigated. In any case, the mitigation scheme briefly describedin the 1981 EIS would not compensate for the severe impacts to wildlifeand other wetland values which the Big River project would cause. Evenif 90 acres of subimpoundments could be successfully created and maintained,they would largely involve manipulation of existing wetland habitat. Thiswould increase the value of these areas for select wildlife species atthe expense of others. It would not begin to balance the impacts associatedwith the loss of 500 to 1000 acres of diverse, natural wetlands. Moreover,most of the wetlands destroyed by the project are forested. The subimpoundmentswould provide little or no value for the many species adapted to life inthe forested systems.V. Proposed DeterminationThe Regional Administrator proposes to recommend that the discharge ofdredged or fill material into Big River, Mishnock River, and their tributariesand adjacent wetlands be prohibited for the purpose of constructing theproposed Big River reservoir and ancillary facilities. Based on currentinformation, the Regional Administrator has reason to believe that theadverse impacts of the Big River reservoir would likely be unacceptable.Moreover, these impacts may be partly or entirely unnecessary or avoidable.This proposed determination is based primarily on the adverse impacts towildlife and fisheries. EPA has already concluded that the project wouldcause or contribute to significant degradation of waters of the UnitedStates and violate the andSection; 404(b)(1) guidelines. It would directlydestroy approximately 550 acres of wetlands and has the potential to degradean additional 500-600 acres of wetlands through groundwater starvationand reduced downstream river flows. In addition to these impacts, EPA isconcerned about the lack of basic information about future water supplyneeds and the absence of a rigorous analysis of water supply alternatives.In light of existing information, EPA believes that there are likely tobe feasible and less environmentally damaging alternatives to buildingthe Big River reservoir.VI. Solicitation of CommentsEPA solicits comments on all issues discussed in this notice. In particular,we request information on the likely adverse impacts to wildlife and otherfunctional values of the rivers, streams, and wetlands at the Big Riversite and at Mishnock Swamp. We also seek information pertaining to flora,fauna and hydrology of the Big River site, Mishnock Swamp, and adjacentlands. All studies, knowledge of studies, or informal observations is ofimportance for this notice. Information on species or communities of regionaland or statewide importance would be especially useful.While the significant loss of wildlife habitat serves as EPA's main basisfor this proposed 404(c) determination, EPA Region I has additional concernswith the proposed project including water quality impacts, fisheries, alternatives,project need and mitigation. As discussed above in <T3>Additional Studies, </T3>the State plans to conduct additional evaluationsof the need for drinking water and alternatives to meet that need. TheState intends, during the comment period, to submit the information compiledin these studies for EPA's consideration during the 404(c) process. EPAalso solicits comments on the following aspects of the project:(1) The potential for violations of State water quality standards to occur,especially in the Pawtuxet River, the Flat River Reservoir and NarragansettBay;(2) Information about fisheries at the Big River site, and the impactsto fisheries if the reservoir is built. Also the likelihood of maintainingcold water fisheries at the site if the Big River reservoir were built;(3) The potential for wetland losses, and their associated values and functions,along the South Branch of the Pawtuxet and in Mishnock Lake, Swamp andRiver if the dam were built and operated as proposed;(4) Information about recreational use of the area;(5) The need for additional drinking water and the current data base formaking projections of need and alternatives, as well as what new informationmust be gathered to make reasonably accurate projections on how much watercan be saved or produced by other alternatives;(6) Information on the availability of less environmentally damaging practicablealternatives to satisfy the basic project purpose_drinking water supply_takinginto account cost, technology, and logstics;(7) In the absence of the need for additional water supply, informationabout environmentally acceptable alternatives for the secondary purposesof flood control and recreation.(8) Information on the potential for mitigation to replace the functionsand values of the 500-1100 acres at risk at the Big River site.The record will remain open for comments until July 31, 1989. All commentswill be fully considered in reaching a decision to either withdraw theproposed determination or forward to EPA Headquarters a recommended determinationto prohibit or restrict the use of Big River, its tributaries, and adjacentwetlands as a disposal site for construction of Big River Reservoir.<T3>For further information contact: </T3>Mr. Mark J. Kern, U.S. E.P.A.,JFK Federal Building, WWP-1900, Boston, MA 02203-2211, (617) 565-4421.<ITAG tagnum="6">Michael R. Deland,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Regional Administrator, Region I.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-2272 Filed 1-31-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>