<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89929-0152 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-29-89.f2.A1151</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register </T4> / Vol. 54, No. 188 / Friday, September 29, 1989/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Human Development Services</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Program Announcement No. 13612-902]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Administration for Native Americans; Availability of Financial Assistance</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Administration for Native Americans (ANA), Office of HumanDevelopment Services (OHDS), HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Announcement of availability of competitive financialassistance for Alaskan Native social and economic development projects.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Administration for Native Americans announces theanticipated availability of fiscal year 1990 funds for social and economicdevelopment projects. Financial assistance provided by ANA is designedto strengthen the self-sufficiency of Alaskan Natives through the supportof both social and economic development projects and the strengtheningof local governance capabilities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>The closing dates for receipt of applications are February2, 1990, and May 18, 1990.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Ted George (206) 442-0992 or RobertKreidler (206) 442-8113, Administration for Native Americans, Office ofHuman Development Services, Department of Health and Human Services, 22016th Avenue, Mail Stop RX-34, Seattle, Washington 98121.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">A. Introduction and Program Purpose</ITAG>The purpose of this program announcement is to announce the anticipatedavailability of fiscal year 1990 financial assistance to promote self-sufficiencyfor Alaskan Natives through support of local governance, social and economicdevelopment projects. Funds will be awarded under section 803(a) of theNative American Programs Act of 1974, as amended, Public Law 93-644, 88Stat. 2324, 42 U.S.C. 2991b.Proposed projects will be reviewed on a competitive basis against the evaluationcriteria in this announcement.The purpose of the financial assistance provided by ANA under the NativeAmerican Programs Act (the Act) is to promote social and economic self-sufficiencyfor American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native AmericanPacific Islanders (American Samoan Natives and indigenous peoples of Guamand the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands).ANA believes that responsibility for achieving self-sufficiency rests withthe governing bodies of Indian tribes and Alaskan Native villages and inthe leadership of Native American groups. The development of self-sufficiencyrequires strengthening governmental responsibilities, economic progress,and improvement of social systems which protect and enhance the healthand well-being of individuals, families and communities.Achievement of self-sufficiency is based on the community's ability toplan, organize, and direct resources in a comprehensive manner to achievelong-range community goals. ANA bases its program and policy initiativeson the following three program goals:(1) <T3>Governance: </T3>to assist tribal and village governments, Native Americaninstitutions, and local leadership to exercise local control and make decisionsover their resources;(2) <T3>Economic Development: </T3>to foster the development of stable, diversifiedlocal economies and economic activities which will provide jobs, promoteeconomic well-being, and reduce dependency on public funds and social services;and(3) <T3>Social Development: </T3>to support local access to, control of, andcoordination of services and programs which safeguard the health and well-beingof people, and which are essential to a thriving and self-sufficient community.To accomplish these goals, ANA supports tribal and village governmentsand other Native American organizations in the development and implementationof community-based, long-term governance and social and economic developmentstrategies (SEDS) aimed at promoting the self-sufficiency of their owncommunities. This approach is based on two fundamental principles:(1) The local community and its leadership are responsible for determiningtheir own goals, setting priorities, and planning and implementing programsaimed at achieving those goals; the unique mix of socio-economic, political,and cultural factors involved in each community makes such self-determinationnecessary; the local community is in the best position to apply its owncultural, political, and socio-economic values in deciding on long-termstrategies and programs; and(2) Economic and social development are interrelated, and development inone area should be balanced with development in the other in order to enhanceself-sufficiency. Without a careful balance of the two, the community'sdevelopment efforts may be jeopardized. Expansion of social services, withoutproviding opportunities for employment and economic development, may leadto greater dependency. Conversely, inadequate social services can seriouslyimpede productivity and economic development.<ITAG tagnum="84">B. Proposed Projects to be Funded</ITAG>The fundamental task which Native American communities face is developingenduring social and economic strategies in keeping with local goals, resources,and cultural values. ANA is interested in assisting communities in theimplementation of projects that are a part of long-range strategies toachieve social and economic self-sufficiency. ANA expects its applicantsto have undertaken a long-range planning process that addresses the community'sdevelopment and encourages social and economic growth for the community.Such long-range planning must consider the maximum use of available resources,directing those resources at opportunities and addressing issues that hinderprogress.ANA encourages applicants to consider innovative approaches to achievethe specific governance and social and economic goals of the community,and to use non-ANA resources including human, natural, and financial onesto strengthen and broaden the proposed project's impact in the community.All projects funded by ANA must be completed, self-sustaining, or supportedwith other than ANA funds at the end of the project period. ANA's fundingof specific projects is not for those programs which operate indefinitelyor have need for ANA funding on a recurring basis.Goal 1: GovernanceEffective governance is a necessary foundation and condition for socialand economic development of Indian tribes, Alaskan Native villages, andNative American groups. Efforts to achieve effective governance include(1) strengthening the effectiveness of tribal and village governments;(2) increasing the ability of tribes, villages and Native American groupsand organizations to plan, develop, and administer a comprehensive programsupportive of community social and economic self-sufficiency; and (3) increasingawareness of the legal rights and benefits to which Native Americans areentitled, either by virtue of treaties, the Federal trust relationship,legislative authority, or as citizens of a particular state or of the UnitedStates.Under the governance goal, ANA strongly encourages tribal and village councilsand other governing bodies to create, strengthen, improve, and streamlinetheir institutional management in order to develop and implement socialand economic development strategies and to improve the day-to-day managementof programs. By improving such capabilities, Indian Tribes, Alaskan villagesand Native American groups can better define, control, and achieve thegoals of their people and promote greater efficiency and effectivenessin the use of available resources.Goal 2: Economic DevelopmentEconomic development is the long-term mobilization and management of economicresources to achieve a diversified economy characterized by widespreaddistribution of economic resources, services, and benefits; participationof community members in the productive activities and economic investmentsof the community; and pursuit of economic interests in ways that balanceeconomic gain with social development.Goal 3: Social DevelopmentSocial development is the mobilization and management of resources forthe social benefit of community members, and involves the establishmentof institutions, systems, and practices that contribute to the social environmentdesired by the community. This includes the development of, access to,and local control over the institutions that protect the health and welfareof individuals and families, and that preserve the values, language, andculture of the community.Building on the foundation of strong local governance, ANA supports tribaland village governments' and other Native American organizations' effortsto achieve coordinated and balanced development and implementation of socialand economic development strategies. These interrelated strategies shouldcoordinate and direct all resources, Federal and non-Federal, toward locallydetermined priorities, and affect the community and its members in waysthat promote greater economic and social self-sufficiency. In addition,these combined strategies should provide an independent source of revenueto the community which will assist the applicant in decreasing dependencyon public funds.Alaska Initiative Based on the three ANA goals, in fiscal year 1984, ANA implemented a specialAlaska social and economic development initiative. The purpose of thisspecial effort was to provide financial assistance at the village level,or for village-specific projects aimed at improving a village's socialand economic development. This program announcement continues to implementthis initiative. ANA sees both the nonprofit and for-profit corporationsin Alaska as being able to play an important supportive role in assistingindividual villages to develop and implement their own locally determinedstrategies which take advantage of the opportunities afforded to AlaskanNatives under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA), Public Law92-202.Examples of the types of projects that ANA is seeking to fund include,but are not limited to, projects that will:<ITAG tagnum="81">Governance</ITAG>andbullet; Initiate a demonstration program at a regional level to allowNative people to become involved in developing strategies to maintain anddevelop their economic subsistence base.andbullet; Assist villages in developing land use capabilities and skillsin the areas of land and natural resource management, resource assessmentand development, and studies of the potential impact of land use upon theenvironment and the subsistence ecology.andbullet; Assist village consortia in the development of tribal constitutions,codes, and court systems.andbullet; Develop agreements between the State and villages that transferprograms, jurisdictions, and/or control to Native entities.andbullet; Strengthen village government control of land management, includingland protection.andbullet; Develop tribal courts, adoption codes, and/or related comprehensivechildren's codes.andbullet; Assist in status clarification for traditional councils. andbullet; Initiate village level mergers between village councils and villagecorporations.andbullet; Develop Regional IRAs (Indian Reorganization Act of 1934) andvillage consortia, in order to maximize tribal government resources, i.e.,to develop model codes, tribal court systems, governance structures, andorganic documents.<ITAG tagnum="81">Economic Development</ITAG>andbullet; Assist villages to develop businesses and industries which (1)use local materials, (2) create jobs for Alaskan Natives, (3) are capableof high productivity at a small scale of operation, and (4) complementtraditional and necessary seasonal activities. andbullet; Substantially increase and strengthen efforts to establish andimprove the village and regional infrastructure and the capabilities todevelop and manage resources in a highly competitive cash-economy system.andbullet; Assist villages or consortia of villages in developing subsistencecompatible industries that will retain local dollars in villages, reducingdependency on State and Federal subsidies.andbullet; Assist in new or expanded Native businesses.andbullet; Assist villages in labor export, i.e., people leaving the localcommunities for seasonal work and returning to their communities.andbullet; Consider strategies and plans to protect against, monitor, andassist when catastrophic events occur, such as the current oil spill. <ITAG tagnum="81">Social Development</ITAG>andbullet; Assist villages in developing programs to deliver needed socialservices.andbullet; Assist in developing training and education programs for thosejobs in education, government, and health usually found in local communities;and to work with the various agencies to encourage job replacement of non-Nativesby Natives. andbullet; Coordinate land use planning with village corporations and citygovernment.andbullet; Develop local models related to comprehensive planning and deliveryof social services.andbullet; Develop new service programs established with ANA funds and fundedfor continued operation by local communities or the private sector.andbullet; Develop or coordinate activities with State-funded projects, indecreasing the incidences of child abuse and neglect, fetal alcohol syndrome,or Native suicides.andbullet; Assist in obtaining licenses to provide housing or related servicesfor State or local governments.andbullet; Assist villages to determine the viability of a business thatcould provide relief for caretakers needing respite from demanding carework.<ITAG tagnum="84">C. Eligible Applicants</ITAG>The following are eligible to apply for a grant award under this programannouncement:andbullet; Current ANA grantees in Alaska funded under section 803(a) ofthe Native American Programs Act with a project period ending in FiscalYear 1990 (October 1, 1989-September 30, 1990);andbullet; Alaskan Native villages as defined in the Alaska Native ClaimsSettlement Act (ANCSA) and/or nonprofit village consortia;andbullet; Nonprofit Alaskan Native Regional Associations in Alaska withvillage specific projects;andbullet; Nonprofit Native organizations in Alaska with village specificprojects; and andbullet; Nonprofit Alaskan Native community entities or tribal governingbodies (IRA or traditional councils) as recognized by the Bureau of IndianAffairs.Although for-profit Regional Corporations established under ANCSA are noteligible applicants, individual villages and Indian communities are encouragedto use the for-profit corporations as subcontractors and to collaboratewith them in joint-venture projects for promoting social and economic self-sufficiency.ANA encourages the for-profit corporations to assist the villages in developingapplications and to participate as subcontractors in the project.This program announcement does not apply to current grantees with multi-yearprojects when applying for continuation funding for their second or thirdbudget periods.<ITAG tagnum="84">D. Available Funds</ITAG>Approximately $1.5 million of financial assistance is expected to be availableunder this program announcement.<T3>Funding Guidance: </T3>ANA plans to award approximately 15-18 grantsunder this announcement. For individual village projects, the funding levelfor a budget period of 12 months will be up to $100,000; for regional nonprofitand village consortia, the funding level for a budget period is up to $150,000,commensurate with approved multi-village objectives. This program announcementis being issued in anticipation of appropriation of the necessary fundsand is contingent upon that appropriation.Each applicant is eligible to receive no more than one grant award underthis announcement.<ITAG tagnum="84">E. Multi-Year projects</ITAG>Applicants may apply for projects of up to 36 months duration. A multi-yearproject, one extending more than 12 months, affords grantees the opportunityto undertake more complex and in-depth projects than can be completed inone year. Applicants are encouraged to develop multi-year projects. However,applicants should note that a multi-year project is a project on a singletheme that requires more than 12 months to complete. It is not a seriesof unrelated projects presented in chronological order over a three yearperiod. Funding after the first budget period of a multi-year project isnon-competitive.The budget period for each multi-year project grant will be 12 months.The non-competitive funding for the second and third years will dependupon the grantee's progress in achieving the objectives of the projectaccording to the approved work plan, the availability of Federal funds,and compliance with applicable statutory, regulatory, and grant requirements.<ITAG tagnum="84">F. Grantee Share of Project</ITAG>Grantees must provide at least 20 percent of the total approved cost ofthe project, which may be cash or in-kind contributions. The total approvedcost of the project is the sum of the Federal share and the non-Federalshare. The method to compute the non-Federal share is shown in the ApplicationKit. An itemized budget detailing the applicant's non-Federal share andits source must be included in the application. A request for a waiverof the non-Federal share requirement may be submitted in accordance with45 CFR 1336.50(b)(3) of the Native American Program Regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">G. Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs</ITAG>This program is not covered by Executive Order 12372.<ITAG tagnum="84">H. The Application Process</ITAG>Availability of Application FormsIn order to be considered for a grant under this program announcement,an application must be submitted on the forms supplied and in the mannerprescribed by ANA. The application kits containing the necessary formsmay be obtained from:<ITAG tagnum="15">Administration for Native Americans, Office of Human Development Services,DHHS, 2201 6th Avenue, Mail Stop RX-34, Seattle, Washington 98121, Attention:No. 13612-902, (206) 442-0992.</ITAG>Application SubmissionOne signed original and two copies of the grant application, includingall attachments, must be hand delivered or mailed to:<ITAG tagnum="15">Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Human DevelopmentServices, Discretionary Grants Management Branch, 2201 6th Avenue, MailStop RX-31, Seattle, Washington 98121, ATTENTION: ANA 13612-902.</ITAG>Do Not Submit the Application to Washington, DC.The application shall be signed by an individual authorized to act forthe applicant village or organization and to assume the applicant's obligationsunder the terms and conditions of the grant award, including Native AmericanProgram statutory and regulatory requirements.Application ConsiderationThe Commissioner of the Administration for Native Americans determinesthe final action to be taken with respect to each grant application receivedunder this announcement.The factors discussed below should be taken into consideration by all applicants:andbullet; Incomplete applications and applications that do not conform tothis announcement will not be accepted for review. Applicants will be notifiedin writing of any such determination by ANA.andbullet; Complete applications that conform to all the requirements ofthis program announcement are subjected to a competitive review and evaluationprocess. An independent review panel evaluates each application againstthe published criteria. The results of this review assist the Commissionerin making final funding decisions.andbullet; The Commissioner's decision takes into account the comments ofthe ANA staff, State and Federal agencies having performance related information,and other interested parties.andbullet; The Commissioner makes grant awards consistent with the purposeof the Act, all relevant statutory and regulatory requirements, this ProgramAnnouncement, and the availability of funds.andbullet; After the Commissioner has made decisions on all applications,unsuccessful applicants will be notified in writing within approximately120 days of the closing date. Successful applicants are notified throughan official Financial Assistance Award (FAA). The award will state theamount of Federal funds awarded, the purpose of the grant, the terms andconditions of the grant award, the effective date of the award, the projectperiod, the budget period, and the amount of the non-Federal matching sharerequirement.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Review Process and Criteria</ITAG>Applications submitted in a timely manner under this program announcementwill undergo a pre-review to determine:andbullet; That the applicant is eligible in accordance with the EligibleApplicant Section of this announcement;andbullet; That the application proposes project objectives which are responsiveto the Program Announcement; andandbullet; That the application materials submitted are sufficient to allowthe panel to undertake an in-depth evaluation. All required materials andforms are listed in the Grant Application Checklist in the ApplicationKit.Applications which pass the pre-review will be evaluated and rated by anindependent review panel on the basis of five evaluation criteria. Thesecriteria are used to evaluate the quality of a proposed project and todetermine its likelihood of success. A proposed project should reflectthe purposes of ANA's SEDS philosophy and program goals (as described under``Introduction and Program Purpose'' of this announcement) and increasethe probability of greater self-sufficiency for a specific tribe or NativeAmerican community. The five programmatic and management criteria are closelyrelated to each other and are considered in judging the overall qualityof an application. Points will be given only to applications which areresponsive to this announcement and these criteria. The five evaluationcriteria are set forth below:(1) Long-Range Goals and Available Resources(15 points)(a) The application presents long-range goals, within the context of thecommunity's comprehensive social and economic development goals, whichthe proposed project addresses. (Inclusion of the community's entire developmentplan is not necessary.)(b) Available resources (other than ANA) which will assist and be coordinatedwith the project are described. These resources may be human, natural orfinancial, and may include other Federal and non-Federal resources.(2) Organizational Capabilities and Qualifications(10 points)Position descriptions or resumes of key personnel, including those of consultants,are included. Position descriptions specifically describe the job and areclearly related to the project. Resumes indicate that the proposed staffare qualified to carry out the project activities. Either a position descriptionor a resume set forth the qualifications that the applicant believes arenecessary for overall quality management.(3) Project Objectives, Approach and Activities (45 points)The application proposes specific project objectives and activities. TheObjective Work Plan includes project objectives and activities for eachbudget period proposed and demonstrates that these objectives and activities_andbullet; Are measurable and quantifiable;andbullet; Are based on a fully described and locally determined balancedstrategy for governance and for social and economic development;andbullet; Clearly address the community's long-range goals;andbullet; Can be accomplished with available or expected resources duringthe proposed project period;andbullet; Indicate when the objective and major activities under each objectivewill be accomplished; andandbullet; Specify who will conduct the activities under each objective.(4) Results or Benefits Expected. (20 points)The proposed project will result in specific, measurable outcomes for eachobjective which will clearly contribute to the overall development of thecommunity and its members. The specific information provided on expectedoutcomes for each objective is the basis upon which the outcomes can beevaluated at the end of each budget year.(5) Budget (10 points)There is a budget for each budget period requested. The budget fully explainsand justifies the line items in the budget categories in section B of theBudget Information. Sufficient detail is included to facilitate determinationof allowability and relevance to the project. The funds requested are commensuratewith the scope of the project. For business development projects, the proposalhas demonstrated that the expected return on the funds used to developthe project provides a reasonable profit/benefit ratio within a futurespecified time frame.<ITAG tagnum="84">J. Guidance to Applicants</ITAG>The following points are provided to assist applicants in developing acompetitive application.(1) Program Guidanceandbullet; ANA reviewers of applications have indicated they are better ableto judge the feasibility and practicality of a proposed economic developmentproject when the applicant has utilized a business plan to discuss theproject. ANA has included sample business plans in the application kit.It is strongly suggested that an applicant use these as a guide in thedevelopment of an application. The more information given a review panelon a proposed business project, the better able it is to evaluate the potentialfor success.andbullet; Community Coordination: ANA supports the concept that the keyto balanced socio-economic development is the local village. ANA encouragesnative village governments to coordinate their local plans with other villageentities, if any, and especially the city government and the village corporation.In addition, villages are encouraged to make maximum use of regional nonprofitresources, including village-to-regional corporation subcontracts.andbullet; ANA does not fund on the basis of need. ANA funds projects presentingthe strongest prospects for fulfilling a community's governance, socialor economic development.andbullet; In discussing the problems of the community being addressed inthe application, sufficient background and/or history of the communityconcerning these problems should be included so that the suitability ofthe proposed project will be understood by reviewers.andbullet; The project proposal must clearly identify in measurable termsthe expected results of the project and its positive and continuing impacton the community.andbullet; In the ANA Program Narrative, Section A of the application package,``Resources Available to the Proposed Project,'' the applicant should addressany specific financial circumstances which may impact on the project, suchas any monetary or land settlements made to the applicant and any restrictionson the use of those settlements. The specific reasons for seeking ANA fundsmust be explained when the applicant appears to have other resources tosupport the proposed project and chooses not to use them.andbullet; Supporting documentation, including testimonials from concernedinterests other than the applicant, should be used to provide support forthe feasibility of the project.<T3>(2) Technical Guidance. </T3>andbullet; The application's Form 424 must be signed by the applicant's representativeauthorized to act with full authority on behalf of the applicant. andbullet; ANA suggests that the pages of the application be numbered sequentiallyfrom the first page. This allows for easy reference during the review process.Simple tabbing of the sections of the application is also helpful to thereviewers. andbullet; Two copies of the application plus the original are required.andbullet; Applicants are encouraged to have someone other than the authorapply the evaluation criteria and score the application prior to its submissionin order to gain a better sense of the application's quality and potentialcompetitiveness. andbullet; For purposes of developing an application, applicants should planfor a project start date approximately 120 days after the closing dateunder which the application is submitted. andbullet; ANA will not fund essentially identical projects serving the sameconstituency. andbullet; ANA will accept only one application from any one applicant. Ifan eligible applicant sends in two applications, the one with the earlierpostmark will be accepted for review unless the applicant withdraws theearlier application. andbullet; An application from a Federally recognized Alaska Native tribalentity must be from the governing body. andbullet; The Cover Page (included in the Kit) should be the first pageof an application. andbullet; The Approach page (section B of the ANA Program Narrative) foreach objective proposed should be of sufficient detail to become a dailyor weekly staff guide of responsibilities should the applicant be funded.andbullet; If a profit-making venture is being proposed, profits must bereinvested in the business in order to decrease or eliminate ANA's futureparticipation. Such revenue must be reported as general program income.A decision will be made at the time of grant award regarding appropriateuse of program income. (See 45 CFR part 74 and part 92.) andbullet; Applicants proposing multi-year projects must fully describe annualproject objectives and activities. Separate Objective Work Plans (OWP)must be presented for each project year and a separate itemized budgetof the Federal and non-Federal costs of the project for each budget periodmust be included. andbullet; Applicants for multi-year projects must justify the entire time-frameof the project (i.e., why the project needs funding for more than one year)and describe the results to be achieved by the end of each budget periodof the total project period. andbullet; The applicant should specify the entire project period lengthon the first page of the Form 424, Block 13, not the length of the firstbudget period. Should the application's contents propose one length ofproject period and the Form 424 specify a conflicting length of projectperiod, ANA will consider the project period specified on the Form 424as governing. andbullet; Line 15a of the 424 should specify the Federal funds requestedfor the first Budget Period, not the entire project period. andbullet; Village governments or other applicants without established accountingsystems must arrange for qualified, acceptable accounting services priorto release of grant funds. <T4>Note. </T4>Subpart H, 45 CFR part 74 and subpart C, 45 CFR part 92address those elements of a generally acceptable accounting system forFederal grantees. The financial management standards in subparts H andC, for example, include: (1) Accurate, current and complete disclosure; (2) Records which show source and application of funds; (3) Effective control and accountability of funds and property; (4) Comparison of actual and budgeted amounts; (5) Procedures to minimize time lapsing between transfer and disbursementof funds; (6) Procedures to determine allowability and allocating of funds; (7) Accounting records with source documentation; (8) Periodic audits; and (9) A follow-up system. <T3>(3) Projects or Activities that generally will not meet the purposesof this Announcement. </T3>andbullet; Projects which support a grantee in providing training and/ortechnical assistance (T/TA) to other tribes or Native American organizations(``third party T/TA''). However, the purchase of T/TA by a grantee forits own use or for its members' use (as in the case of a consortium), whereT/TA is necessary to carry out project objectives, is acceptable. andbullet; The development of feasibility studies, business plans, marketingplans or written materials such as manuals that are not an essential partof the applicant's long-range development plan. ANA is not interested infunding ``wish lists'' of business possibilities. ANA expects evidenceof solid investment of time and thought on the part of the applicant toany development of business plans, etc. andbullet; The provision of direct delivery of social services programs orexpansion or continuation of existing social service delivery programs.andbullet; Core administrative functions or other activities that essentiallysupport the applicant's ongoing administrative functions. However, ANAwill allow villages which do not have governing systems in place to applyfor projects for core administrative capacity-building at the village governmentallevel. andbullet; Project goals which are not responsive to one or more of the threeANA goals (Governance, Economic Development, Social Development). andbullet; Project plans or strategies that do not meet the needs of thelocal community. andbullet; Proposals from consortia of tribes that are not specific in regardto support from and roles of member tribes. andbullet; Projects which should be supported by other Federal funding sourcesappropriate and available for the proposed activity. andbullet; Activities that will not be completed by the end of the projectperiod or that will not be self-sustaining at the end of the project period,including projects that will not be supported by other than ANA funds atthe end of the project period.andbullet; Lack of demonstrated coordination with non-ANA resources. andbullet; Lack of a justification or explanation for requesting ANA funds,or a lack of discussion of other resources and revenues for use in theproject. andbullet; The purchase of real estate (see 45 CFR 1336.50 (e)) or construction(see HDS Grants Administration Manual Ch. 3, andSection; E.). andbullet; The outright purchase of an existing business or a speculativebusiness development investment purpose (capital venture). ANA will critically evaluate applications within which the acquisitionof major capital equipment (whether oil rigs or computers/word processingequipment), franchises, or the payment of management fees are major componentsof the Federal share of the budget. During negotiation, such expendituresmay be deleted from the budget of an otherwise approved application. ANA will also critically evaluate projects reflecting heavy reliance onuse of outside consultants, especially where consultants have preparedthe application and have provided a major role for themselves in the proposedproject. <ITAG tagnum="84">K. Due Date for Receipt of Applications </ITAG>The closing dates for applications submitted in response to this programannouncement are February 2, 1990 and May 18, 1990. <ITAG tagnum="84">L. Receipt of Applications </ITAG>Applications must either be hand delivered or mailed. <T3>Deadlines. </T3>Applications mailed through the U.S. Postal Serviceor a commercial delivery service shall be considered as meeting an announceddeadline if they are either: (1) Received on or before the deadline date at the address specified inthe Application Submission Section, or (2) Sent on or before the deadline date and received in time for the ANAindependent review. (Applicants are cautioned to request a legibly datedreceipt from a commercial carrier or U.S. Postal Service or a legible postmarkdate from the U.S. Postal Service. Private metered postmarks shall notbe acceptable as proof of timely mailing.) <T3>Late applications.</T3> Applications which do not meet the criteriain the above paragraph of this section are considered late applicationsand will be returned to the applicant. Applications will not be held overfor the next closing date. ANA shall notify each late applicant that itsapplication will not be considered in the current competition. <T3>Extension of deadlines.</T3> ANA may extend the deadline for all applicantsbecause of acts of God such as floods, hurricanes, etc., or when thereis a widespread disruption of the mails. However, if ANA does not extendthe deadline for all applicants, it may not waive or extend the deadlinefor any applicant. <ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Program Number 13.612 NativeAmerican Programs) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: August 16, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Dominic J. Mastrapasqua, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Commissioner, Administration for Native Americans. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Approved: September 20, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Mary Sheila Gall, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Human Development Services. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-23074 Filed 9-28-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4130-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>