<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89123-0103 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-23-89.f2.A1102</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Research Demonstration Program To Reduce the Spread of AIDS by ImprovingTreatment for Drug Abuse</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> National Institute on Drug Abuse, Alcohol, Drug Abuse,and Mental Health Administration, HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice of request for applications.<T3>Purpose:</T3> This announcement requests applications for researchdemonstration projects to improve the effectiveness of drug abuse treatmentas an AIDS prevention strategy. Statutory authority for these grant awardsis section 301 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241). Fundswill be available under this announcement for (1) establishing treatmentresearch units and (2) for supporting individual and collaborative demonstrationresearch projects. In both cases, funds may be requested to pay for treatmentservices as well as research costs.The aim of the grant program is to demonstrate that improvements in drugabuse treatment result in greater decreases in AIDS-risk bahaviors thantreatment as usual. Toward this goal, applicants are expected to designcarefully controlled studies to demonstrate the effectiveness of improvementsin existing treatment strategies, or the efficacy of new treatment strategies.Funding will be restricted to the treatment of drug abuse typically associatedwith HIV transmission. This includes intravenous drug abuse (optiate and/orother drugs) as well as types of drug abuse frequently involving unprotectedsex in exchange for drugs or money to purchase drugs_i.e., prostitutionor the ``sex for crack'' phenomenon.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>AIDS is a serious medical disorder caused by the Human ImmunodeficiencyVirus (HIV). One of the principal modes of transmission of HIV is needlesharing by intravenous drug abusers. By recent estimate, 31% of all AIDScases involve intravenous drug use, which is the second most common meansof transmission of the virus. Drug abusers may be particularly susceptibleto HIV infection due to the suppressive effects of some abused drugs onthe immune system. While most intravenous drug abusers inject heroin, intravenoususe of such nonopiate drugs as amphetamines and cocaine occurs as well.In addition to needle sharing, some intravenous and non-intravenous drugusers frequently engage in unprotected sexual activity, which may resultin HIV infection of themselves or their sexual partners. Of particularpublic health concern are drug users who engage in unprotected sex fordrugs, or for money to maintain a drug habit.Both IV drug abusers and non-IV users who engage in risky sexual practiceshave the potential for spreading the virus into the heterosexual population.Approximately 80 percent of all HIV infection cases attributed to heterosexualtransmission have been attributed to sexual contact with intravenous drugabusers. In addition, drug abuse is a major contributing factor in theperinatal transmission of HIV, with over two-thirds of perinatal casesof AIDS occurring in children born to intravenous drug abusers or theirsexual partners.While drug abuse treatment is widely regarded as an effective AIDS preventionstrategy, a number of problems exist with current treatment approaches.These problems include unacceptably high client dropout rates and ratesof illicit drug use during treatment, as well as relapse rates followingtreatment. Overcoming these problems is expected to make drug abuse treatmentan even more effective AIDS prevention strategy. In addition to resolvingproblems with existing treatment approaches, new and improved treatmentapproaches must also be developed.The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) has a strong commitment tohelp curb the spread of HIV among drug abusers and from drug abusers totheir sexual partners and children. An essential part of NIDA's effortsin this area is the development of more effective treatments for drug abusers,so that those presently at risk for HIV infection have better treatmentavailable. NIDA is interested in supporting treatment research demonstrationprojects directed at eliminating or reducing drug use (and other behaviorswhich place individuals at risk for HIV infection) by increasing treatmentprogram effectiveness.<ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Program</ITAG>Applications for grants under this announcement must focus on correctingdeficiencies in existing treatment approaches and/or developing new treatmentapproaches. Outcome must be tailored toward reducing drug use, needle sharingand other behaviors that place an individual at risk for HIV infection.The interventions can be pharmacological or nonpharmacological, and maybe based in a variety of settings (e.g., hospitals, residential programs,outpatient programs, correctional settings, etc.). Investigation in alltypes of treatment modalities is encouraged (including methadone maintenance,detoxification, drug-free outpatient, and therapeutic community or inpatientprograms), as well as programs that seek to mainstream drug abuse treatmentinto the primary health care system.Applicants are expected to establish new treatment slots with the moneyrequested, in support of their research objectives. While applicants mayrequest funds for HIV seropositivity testing and counseling, the focusof the demonstration program is on reducing risk behaviors and HIV testingis not required.Treatment Research UnitsOne type of award possible under this announcement is to establish facilitiesfor conducting controlled studies of treatment effectiveness. TreatmentResearch Units (TRUs) are expected to be fully staffed and operationalclinical research components, in which established investigators in thetreatment research field are provided with resources for designing andconducting studies on treatment effectiveness. Funding for TRUs will includecosts for both clinical and research activities, including patient carecosts and staff to recruit subjects, provide followup, etc. In additionto providing the resources necessary for establishing and operating a fully-equippedtreatment research unit, TRUs are intended to provide qualified investigatorswith maximum flexibility in using such facilities to address treatmentresearch issues. Thus, while the overall plan for establishing a TRU willbe subject to IRG review, selection and approval of research studies tobe conducted within each TRU will follow review and recommendation by anoutside Scientific Advisory Group, which will be appointed by each facility.Each TRU may be tailored to the specific research interests of the treatmentinvestigator(s), and be organized around a research theme or set of generalresearch objectives. For example, one TRU may involve a residential drug-freetreatment program and study factors related to dropout from treatment,while another TRU may involve a methadone maintenance program and studyfactors related to illicit drug use during treatment. Still another facilitymay focus on the development of new pharmacological treatments for drugabuse. While the major focus of TRUs must be on improving treatment effectiveness,individual projects may address clinical factors that contribute to poortreatment performance or to relapse following treatment.Each application for a TRU must include plans for establishing and operatingthe TRU, as well as a general overview of an expected 5-year research plan.The research plan should provide a statement of research directions andtypes of projects to be conducted in the TRU. Detailed research protocolsare not required as part of the application, but applicants should includedescriptions of general research methods that are expected to be employed,types of treatment to be evaluated, and characteristics of patient populationsto be involved in the research. Applications must also include plans forestablishing and operating the Scientific Advisory Group (including typesof expertise needed, criteria and process for selection of members, plansfor operation of the Group, and its relationship to the TRU), establishinglinkages with the treatment community, protection of human subjects, andinformation dissemination. Applicants should specify how the effects oftreatment improvement on high-risk behaviors for HIV transmission willbe assessed. Applicants should provide adequate information regarding availablefacilities and staff, so that the IRG process may adequately review theapplicant's capability and the feasibility of the plans to establish theTRU. Because their focus will differ, each program is expected to haveunique staffing needs, which must be addressed in the grant application.All TRUs are expected to create new treatment capacity, and none of thefunds provided under this announcement can be used to replace funding forexisting treatment slots (although it is permissible to add staff to afacility containing both previously existing and new treatment slots).Up to $10 million will be available to fund 5 or more TRUs (i.e., averagecost $2 million/grant) under this category.Research Demonstration ProjectsThe second type of award possible under this announcement is for individualor collaborative demonstration research projects. The purpose of theseprojects is to implement and test promising treatment strategies that havenot been widely used. In planning these projects, investigators are expectedto use the most rigorous methodology consistent with the purposes of theresearch. It is expected that sound methodologies will be employed in allresearch activities. Thus, an investigator may wish to demonstrate theeffectiveness of dosing schedule in methadone maintenance programs by randomlyassigning subjects to fixed dose vs. flexible dose schedules, while anotherinvestigator may wish to demonstrate the effectiveness of treatment regimensby randomly assigning subjects to two types of treatment programs. However,it is recognized that experimental designs involving random assignmentof subjects to treatments and double blind strategies may not be appropriatefor all circumstances. In such cases, other types of controls may be used,including single-subject experimental designs, case controls, regression-discontinuitydesigns, etc. Applicants having access to a large number of programs areencouraged to conduct collaborative studies.Research demonstration projects are expected to include the creation ofnew treatment slots. In designing research demonstration projects, thecrucial importance of a sound evaluation plan and qualified research staffcannot be over-emphasized. Many agencies providing treatment services havea research department, but those who do not may wish to enter into collaborationwith well-qualified researchers. All applications must address issues ofproject feasibility, implementation of the intervention, study design,sampling procedure, instrumentation and measurement, data collection, trackingof clients, followup, and data analysis, as appropriate.  andbullet; Applicants should specify how the effects of treatment on high-riskbehaviors for HIV transmission will be assessed.  andbullet; In collaborative arrangements, organizational lines of controland arrangements for cooperation by treatment programs and agencies mustbe clearly specified.  andbullet; The application should also include an information disseminationplan, to assure that research findings are communicated to the treatmentfield in a timely, efficient fashion.  andbullet; Applicants should provide adequate information regarding availablefacilities and staff, as well as plans to acquire new staff.  andbullet; Evidence that programs have been involved in research data collectionmay be useful in supporting an application. While the costs of individual grants may differ widely, it is expectedthat 20 grants will be funded in this category, at an <T3>average</T3> cost of $1 million each.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Allowable Costs </ITAG>For both Treatment Research Units and individual or collaborative researchdemonstration projects, funds may be expended on bed/slot costs, rentaland operation of facilities, approved renovation and modification of facilities(subject to limits and conditions specified in Public Health Service grantpolicy), equipment costs, hiring and training of staff, program management,coordination of health and social services, and other costs normally allowableunder existing Public Health Service grants policy. No funds from theseresearch demonstrations grants may be used for new construction or to replacefunding for existing treatment slots. Applicants are advised to requestbudgetary funds for two round trips to Washington, DC each year (2 daysper trip) to confer with project officers and review findings.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Inclusion of Women and Minorities in Study Populations </ITAG>ADAMHA urges applicants for grants to give added attention, where feasibleand appropriate, to the inclusion of women and minorities in study populationsfor research on clinical studies of treatment and treatment outcomes. Ifwomen and minorities are not included in a given study, a clear rationalefor their exclusion must be provided. Investigators are reminded that merelyincluding arbitrary numbers of women and minority group participants ina given study is insufficient to guarantee generalization of results. <ITAG tagnum="84">Protection of Human Subjects </ITAG>Grants funded under this RFA are subject to the requirements of 45 CFRPart 46, Protection of Human Subjects. These regulations are availablefrom the Office for Protection from Research Risks, National Institutesof Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. Telephone: (301) 496-7041. Because of the expedited schedule for review and award of these grants,certifications of Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval should accompanyapplications for TRUs and individual/collaborative demonstration projects.It is recognized that some or all of the specific research studies to beconducted by a TRU may not have been developed at the time the applicationis submitted. However, IRBs should review the overall plan for the TRU,e.g., patient recruitment plans, types of treatment proposed, methodology,and study populations. To the extent that specific studies are describedin the application, these also must be reviewed and approved by the IRBprior to submission of the application. For specific studies, IRB reviewand approval must be obtained and documentation submitted to NIDA priorto involvement of human subjects in specific research studies conductedby TRUs. In addition, all applicants are advised to obtain from their IRB, a copyof the ``Guidance for Institutional Review Boards for AIDS Studies,'' whichwas disseminated from the Office for Protection from Research Risks (OPRR)on December 16, 1984. If a copy is not available locally, one may be obtainedfrom OPRR, Building 31, Room 4B09, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,MD 20892, or by telephone on (301) 496-7005. This office may be contactedfor advice on how to deal with difficult human subjects protections issuesin AIDS research.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Progress Reports and Final Report Requirements </ITAG>At 6-month intervals, grantees must provide reports describing their progress,problems encountered in implementing their TRU or project plan, proposedstrategies for resolving such problems, and data on modalities in whichtreatment is provided, number of new treatment slots created, utilizationof slots, retention rates, and number of clients or patients treated withineach modality. In addition, TRUs must provide descriptions of all projects and copiesof all protocols at the time they are approved by the Scientific AdvisoryGroup and before they are initiated. TRUs must provide copies of researchfindings (and resulting publications) from each project conducted in theTRU. At the end of the period of support for demonstration projects grants,3 copies of a final report should be submitted to NIDA within 90 days.This final report should include a complete description of the interventionprovided, number and characteristics of clients served, and research findings.Also, as appropriate, the final report should include a description ofcollaborative arrangements, special materials (such as therapy manuals)developed in implementing the intervention, implications for reducing thespread of HIV infection among drug abusers, etc.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Application Procedure  </ITAG>Eligibility <T3>Treatment Research Units.</T3> Applications for Treatment ResearchUnits may be submitted by public or private for profit or nonprofit organizationssuch as universities, colleges, hospitals, units of State or local governments,and eligible agencies of the Federal Government. Organizations headed bywomen and minority staff are encouraged to apply. <T3>Individual or Collaborative Projects.</T3> Applications for individualor collaborative research treatment demonstrations may be submitted bypublic or private nonprofit or profit-making community organizations suchas universities, colleges, hospitals, laboratories, units of State or localgovernments, and eligible agencies of the Federal Government. The term``community'' refers to geographic service areas, and may include Statesas well as metropolitan areas and rural districts. Organizations headedby women and minority staff are encouraged to apply.  Application Process State and local government agencies may use form PHS-5161 (revised 3/86).All other applicants should use the standard PHS-398 (revised 9/86) researchgrant application form. ``AIDS Research: `Research Demonstration Programto Reduce the Spread of AIDS by Improving Treatment for Drug Abuse'' shouldbe typed in Item andplusmin; 2 on the face page of the application. Separateapplications are required for TRUs and demonstration project grants. Application kits containing the necessary forms and instructions may beobtained from business offices or offices of sponsored research at mostuniversities, colleges, medical schools, and other major research facilities.If such a source is not available, the following office may be contactedfor the necessary application material:<ITAG tagnum="15">Grants Management Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse, 5600 FishersLane, Room 10-25, Rockville, Maryland 20857. (301) 443-6710 </ITAG>The narrative portion of the application (sections A-D of the PHS 398),including tables and charts should not exceed 20 pages. Those exceedingthis page limitation may be rejected by the Division of Research Grants,NIH. The signed original and 23 permanent legible copies of the completeapplication should be sent to:<ITAG tagnum="15">AIDS Coordinator, Division of Research Grants, NIH, Westwood Bldg.,Room 9, 5333 Westbard Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. </ITAG>Applicants are strongly advised to contact the Deputy Chief, TreatmentResearch Branch, NIDA, prior to submitting applications to discuss thenature and extent of their project plans. Further information and consultationon program requirements can be obtained from:<ITAG tagnum="15">Frank Tims, Ph.D., Deputy Chief, Treatment Research Branch, Divisionof Clinical Research, National Institute on Drug Abuse, 5600 Fishers Lane,Room 10A-30, Rockville, Maryland 20857. Telephone: (301) 443-4060  </ITAG>Letterof Intent Prospective applicants are asked to submit, by February 8, a letter ofintent that includes a descriptive title and a short abstract of the proposedresearch demonstration, the name and address of the principal investigator,and the names of other key personnel (if available), and the number ofthis Request for Applications (DA 89-01). Although a letter of intent is not required, is not binding, and does notenter into the review of subsequent applications, the information whichit contains is extremely helpful in planning for the review of applications.It allows NIDA staff to estimate the potential review workload, and toavoid possible conflict of interest in the review.The letter of intent should be sent to:<ITAG tagnum="15">Kursheed Asghar, Ph.D., Chief, Extramural Policy and Project ReviewBranch, Office of Science, National Institute on Drug Abuse, Parklawn Building,Room 10-42, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20857,   (301) 443-2755.</ITAG>IntergovernmentalReviewThe intergovernmental review requirements of Executive Order 12372, asimplemented through DHHS regulations at 45 CFR Part 100, are applicableto this program. Through this process, States, in consultation with localgovernments, are provided the opportunity to review and comment on applicationsfor Federal financial assistance. Applicants should contact the State'sSingle Point of Contact (SPOC) as early as possible to determine the applicableprocedure. A current listing of SPOCs will be enclosed with the applicationkit. SPOC comments should be forwarded to: Chief, Office of ExtramuralPolicy and Project Review, Office of Science, NIDA, 5600 Fishers Lane,Room 10-42, Rockville, Maryland 20857, by May 8, 1989.Review ProcessApplications received under this RFA will be reviewed for scientific meritby an Initial Review Group (IRG), consisting primarily of non-Federal technicaland scientific experts. However, applications that are incomplete for reviewor non-responsive to this RFA will be screened out by NIDA staff upon receiptand returned to the applicants without further consideration.Those applications which are complete and responsive may be subjected toa triage by an IRG to determine whether they are competitive relative toother applications received in response to this RFA. NIDA will withdrawfrom further review those applications judged to be noncompetitive andnotify the applicant and institutional business official. Those applicationsjudged to be competitive will be further evaluated for scientific/technicalmerit by an IRG convened for this purpose.Depending on the number of applications reaching the final peer reviewfor scientific merit, the summary statement prepared may reflect the useof a structured critique. This term refers to a format used to reduce theamount of written material submitted by the Initial Review Group membersin preparing their evaluations, while maintaining the requirement for thoroughnessin review by focusing on the major strengths and weaknesses of each applicationreviewed.Notification of the review outcome will be sent to the applicant afterthe initial review. Applications will receive a second-level review bythe National Advisory Council on Drug Abuse which may be based on policyas well as scientific merit considerations.Application Receipt and Review ScheduleApplications received under this RFA will be reviewed under the acceleratedspecial applications process (ASAP) provisions established for AIDS research.The deadlines and award dates shown below have been established by Divisionof Research Grants, NIH.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>4,L2,tp0,i1,s50,xls65,xls55,xs55</C> <H1>Receipt of Applications</H1><H1>Initial review</H1><H1>Advisory council review</H1><H1>Awards to be made by</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Mar. 8, 1989<D>May-June 1989</D><D>Aug. 1989</D><D>Sept. 8, 1989</D></ITAG></ITAG>Applications under this RFA not received by the March 8, 1989 deadlinecannot be accepted. Late applications will be returned to the applicantswithout further consideration.Review Criteria_Treatment Research UnitsCriteria for merit review of applications for Treatment Research Unitswill include the following:andbullet; Scientific, clinical, and technical merit;andbullet; Institutional commitment of adequate space and other resourcesnecessary for the establishing of a unit to support high-quality researchon the treatment of drug abuse;andbullet; Experience and demonstrated ability of the applicant institutionto establish and operate health care and research facilities of the highestquality;andbullet; Organizational arrangements of the TRU within the applicant institution,including lines of administrative authority and control, evidence of administrativesupport and institutional commitment to the unit;andbullet; Qualifications and experience of the scientific and clinic directorsand clinical and research staff, including previous peer-reviewed researchproject support;andbullet; Soundness of the plan for the establishment and operation of clinicaland research activities within the TRU;andbullet; Availability of a sufficient research client population;andbullet; Appropriateness and adequacy of plans for establishment and operationof an outside Scientific Advisory Group to review and approve researchplans and protocols, including provisions to ensure the selection of scientistswith appropriate expertise and to ensure the adoption of high standardsof excellence for review of protocols;andbullet; Establishment of appropriate review criteria for use by the ScientificAdvisory Group;andbullet; Potential of the proposed facility to provide new and programmaticallyrelevant knowledge regarding the efficacy and/or efficiency of specificinterventions for treatment of drug abusers;andbullet; Adequacy of provisions for assessment of treatment outcome, andimpact of treatment on HIV;andbullet; Adequacy of information dissemination plan;andbullet; The appropriateness of budget estimates; andandbullet; Adequacy of provisions for the protection of human subjects.Award Criteria_Treatment Research UnitsFunding to establish TRUs will be limited to institutions with organizationalcapability to establish, operate, and maintain a high-quality treatmentresearch facility. The institution must also be willing to provide administrativemanagement of the external review of research protocols to be conductedwithin the facility, and to provide administrative support and a strongcommitment to the goals and objectives of the TRU. TRU applications recommendedfor approval by the National Advisory Council on Drug Abuse will be consideredfor funding on the basis of:andbullet; Overall scientific, clinical, and technical merit of the proposedTRU, determined by peer review;andbullet; Potential contributions to reducing the spread of HIV infectionthrough investigation of more effective treatments for drug abusers;andbullet; Appropriateness of budget estimates;andbullet; National priorities in the drug abuse treatment field;andbullet; Adequacy of protection of human subjects;andbullet; Geographic and/or program balance;andbullet; Comments received from the State Single Point of Contact; andandbullet; Availability of funds.Review Criteria_Individual or Collaborative ProjectsCriteria for merit review of applications for individual and collaborativeresearch demonstration projects will include the following:andbullet; Scientific, clinical, and technical merit of the application;andbullet; Potential of the proposed project to provide new knowledge regardingthe efficacy and/or efficiency of specific interventions for treatmentof drug abusers;andbullet; Potential contribution of the project to curtailing the spreadof HIV infection among drug abusers and/or their sexual partners and/ortheir offspring. andbullet; Adequacy of provisions for assessment of treatment outcome, andpotential impact of treatment improvement on the spread of HIV infection;andbullet; Adequacy of information dissemination plan; andbullet; Qualifications and experience of the principal investigator, clinicdirector, clinical staff, and other key personnel; andbullet; Availability of adequate facilities, other resources, and collaborativearrangements necessary for the treatment demonstration; and andbullet; Adequacy of provisions for the protection of human subjects. Award Criteria_Individual or Collaborative Projects Applications recommended for approval by the National Advisory Councilon Drug Abuse will be considered for funding on the basis of: andbullet; Overall scientific, clinical, and technical merit of the proposedtreatment expansion, determined by peer review; andbullet; Potential contributions of the research area to reducing the spreadof HIV infection through development of more effective treatments for drugabusers; andbullet; Appropriateness of budget estimates; andbullet; National priorities in the drug abuse treatment field; andbullet; Program balance; andbullet; Adequacy of provisions for the protection of human subjects; andbullet; Comments received from the State Single Point of Contact; andandbullet; Availability of funds. <ITAG tagnum="84">Terms and Conditions of Support </ITAG>Grant funds may be used for expenses clearly related and necessary to establishand operate TRUs, and to conduct treatment demonstration projects, includingboth direct costs which can be specifically identified with the projectand allowable indirect costs of the institution. These costs must be justifiedin terms of research objectives, methods, and designs which promise toyield generalizable knowledge and/or make a significant contribution totheoretical concepts. Grants must be administered in accordance with the <T3>PHS Grants Policy Statement </T3>(DHHS Publication No. (OASH) 82-50-000GPO-017-020-00092-7 (rev.) January 1, 1987, available for $4.50 from theSuperintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,DC 20402). Title 42 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 52,``Grants for Research Projects,'' is applicable to these awards. Whilereferences to other applicable regulations may be found in the aforementionedreference, special attention is called to 42 CFR Part 2, ``Confidentialityof Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient Records.'' <ITAG tagnum="84">Period of Support </ITAG>Support will be provided for a period of up to five years (renewable forsubsequent periods) subject to continued availability of funds and progressachieved. <ITAG tagnum="6">Joseph R. Leone, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Administrator for Management, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-1310 Filed 1-19-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-20-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>