<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89607-0017 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-07-89.f2.A1016</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Parts 271, 272, 273, 274, and 277</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Amdt Number 316]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Food Stamp Program: Administrative Improvement and SimplificationProvisions From the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Agency:</T2> Food and Nutrition Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Action:</T2> Interim rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Summary:</T2> This rule amends Food Stamp Program regulations to implementseveral Food Stamp Program provisions contained in The Hunger PreventionAct of 1988. The provisions of that Act which are addressed in this ruleare: (1) Verification; (2) telephone access to certification offices inorder to receive program information or to report changes; (3) simplifiedapplications; (4) joint applications; (5) expanding the definition of disabled;(6) annualizing self-employment income and expenses from farming; (7) resourceexclusions for farm households in transition from farming; (8) simplifiedprocedures for claiming the excess medical deduction; (9) program informationfor low-income households; (10) optional training for volunteer and non-profitorganizations; (11) federally authorized demonstration projects which cashout benefits in other assistance programs; and (12) delivery of benefitsto households which apply after the fifteenth of the month.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Date:</T2> The provisions contained in andSection;274.2(b) of this ruleare effective retroactively to January 1, 1989 to be implemented by Stateagencies no later than January 1, 1990. The remaining provisions are effectiveJuly 1, 1989 and must be implemented by State welfare agencies on thatdate.Comments must be received on or before August 7, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Address:</T2> Comments should be addressed to Judith M. Seymour, Supervisor,Eligibility and Certification Regulations Section, Certification and PolicyBranch, Program Development Division, Food Stamp Program, Food and NutritionService, USDA, Alexandria, Virginia 22302. All written comments will beopen to public inspection during regular business hours (8:30 am to 5:00pm Monday through Friday) at 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Virginia,Room 705.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For further information contact:</T2> Questions regarding this interimrule should be directed to Ms. Seymour at the above address or by telephoneat (703) 756-3496.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Supplementary Information</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Classification</ITAG>Executive Order 12291/Secretary's Memorandum 1521-1This interim rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12291 and Secretary'sMemorandum No. 1521-1. The rule will affect the economy by less than $100million a year. The rule will not significantly raise costs or prices forconsumers, industries, government agencies or geographic regions. Therewill not be a significant adverse effect on competition, employment, investment,productivity, innovation or on the ability of United States-based enterprisesto compete with foreign-based enterprise in domestic or export markets.Therefore, the Department has classified the rule as ``not major''.Executive Order 12372The Food Stamp Program is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistanceunder No. 10.551. For the reasons set forth in 7 CFR 3015, Subpart V andrelated Notice (48 FR 29115), this Program is excluded from the scope ofExecutive Order 12372 which requires intergovernmental consultation withState and local officials.Regulatory Flexibility ActThis interim rule has been reviewed with regard to the requirements ofthe Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (5 U.S.C. 601-612). G. Scott Dunn,Acting Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service, has certified thatthis action will not have a significant economic impact on a substantialnumber of small entities. This interim rule will affect Program participantsand the State and local agencies which administer the Food Stamp Program.Paperwork Reduction ActThe reporting and recordkeeping burden associated with the certificationand continued eligibility of food stamp households is approved by the Officeof Management and Budget (OMB) under OMB control number 0584-0064.The food stamp application, as approved under this OMB number, alreadycontains several important verification statements to the household. Therequirement in andSection;273.2(c)(5) that State agencies develop a separatewritten general ``Notice of Verification'' versus including such informationon the food stamp application or verbally conveying such information tohouseholds does not alter or change the methodologies used to determinethe burden estimates approved under OMB No. 0584-0064.The requirements in andSection;272.2(a), andSection;272.2(d) and andSection;272.5relative to the submission and updating of an optional ``Program informationalactivities planning document'' as part of a State agency's Plan of Operationhave been submitted to OMB and have been approved under OMB approval number0584-0083. This rule amends the table at 7 CFR 271.8 ``Information collection/recordkeeping_OMBassigned control numbers'' to reflect the OMB control number for the approvalof burden associated with andSection;272.5 of this rule.The remaining provisions of this rule do not contain any reporting and/orrecordkeeping requirements subject to approval by OMB under the PaperworkReduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3507).Public Participation and Effective DateThis interim rule is being published without prior notice of proposed rulemakingor an opportunity for public comment prior to publication. Section 701(b)(5)(A)(i)of Pub. L. 100-435 mandates that except for the amendments in andSection;274.2,the provisions contained in this rule are effective on July 1, 1989. Theamendments to the Food Stamp Act reflected in andSection;274.2 of this ruleare effective January 1, 1989, to be implemented by the State agenciesnot later than January 1, 1990. Since prior notice and public comment procedurescannot be completed before the statutory effective date and because delaysin implementation could adversely affect food stamp households and Stateagencies, G. Scott Dunn, Acting Administrator of the Food and NutritionService, has determined, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B), that public commenton this interim rule prior to implementation is impracticable. The amendmentsreflected in the provisions of andSection;274.2 of this interim rule arenon-discretionary. However, because the Department believes that the administrationof those provisions may be improved by public comments, the Departmentis soliciting comments on the entire rule for 60 days. All comments receivedwill be analyzed and appropriate changes in the rule will be incorporatedin the subsequent publication of a final rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>The Hunger Prevention Act (HPA) of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-435, 102 Stat. 1645,Sept. 19, 1988) made a number of changes to the Food Stamp Act of 1977,as amended (7 U.S.C. 2011 et. seq.). This interim rulemaking pertains tothose provisions of Pub. L. 100-435 which simplify certain applicationprocedures in the program and improve the administration of the Food StampProgram. These provisions are discussed below.Definition of Elderly or Disabled_7 CFR 271.2The current definition of elderly or disabled persons contained in section3(r) of the Food Stamp Act and reflected in 7 CFR 271.2 of the food stampregulations includes recipients of certain old-age or disability benefits.Persons identified as elderly or disabled are provided with certain specialtreatment in the determination of their food stamp eligibility and couponallotment. Under 7 CFR 273.9, elderly or disabled persons: (1) Have theright to claim an allowable medical expense as a deduction from income;(2) may claim excess shelter costs as a deduction from income without regardto the shelter deduction limit imposed on other households; and (3) areexempted from the food stamp income eligibility test.Section 350 of Pub. L. 100-435 adds three categories to the definitionof elderly or disabled persons. These categories are: (1) Recipients ofinterim assistance benefits pending the receipt of supplemental securityincome; (2) recipients of disability-related medical assistance benefitsunder title XIX of the Social Security Act (SSA); and (3) recipients ofdisability-based State general assistance benefits. Recipients of any ofthese benefits must be treated as disabled persons for food stamp purposesprovided the eligibility to receive the benefits is based upon disabilityor blindness criteria which are at least as stringent as those used undertitle XVI of the SSA. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 271.2 to bringthe definition of disabled into conformance with the provisions of Pub.L. 100-435.In addition, current rules at 7 CFR 273.2(f)(1)(viii)(A) require that theState agency verify disability as defined in 7 CFR 271.2 and discusseswhat documentation would be acceptable verification. Consequently, thisrule makes a conforming amendment to 7 CFR 273.2(f)(1)(viii)(A) to adda new paragraph (A)(<T3>6</T3>) to specify the documentation the recipients of any of the benefitsdiscussed above must provide to verify the receipt of these benefits.Training_7 CFR 272(d)Section 322(a) of Pub. L. 100-435 amended section 11(e)(6) of the FoodStamp Act by adding a phrase to specify that comprehensive training shouldbe provided to state personnel ``* * * so that eligible households arepromptly and accurately certified to receive allotments for which theyare eligible * * *.'' Current regulations at 7 CFR 272.4(d)(1)(i) alreadyrequire State agencies to provide sufficient training. This statutory amendmentexpresses a Congressional concern that food stamps are delivered promptlyand accurately to eligible households. To relay this concern, this ruleamends 7 CFR 272.4(d)(1)(i) to specifically require that training providedby the State agency must convey the goals of and methods for promptly andaccurately certifying eligible households.In addition, section 322(b) of Pub. L. 100-435 added a new provision tosection 11(e)(6) of the Food Stamp Act. This new statutory provision allowsState agencies, at their option, to provide or contract to provide trainingand assistance to persons working with volunteer or nonprofit organizationsthat give information or perform eligibility screening to persons potentiallyeligible for food stamps.Current rules do not prohibit State agencies from opening their trainingsessions to the public, at their discretion. However, in order to relayCongressional intent and specifically address training and assistance directedto persons working with volunteer or nonprofit organizations, this ruleamends 7 CFR 272.4(d) to redesignate current paragraph (d)(2) as (d)(3)and add a new paragraph (d)(2) to allow State agencies, at their option,to offer training and assistance to persons working with certain volunteeror nonprofit organizations. This rule change also takes into considerationState agency staff and budget constraints, since the provision of thisassistance and training is optional.In addition, this rule adds a new paragraph (f) to 7 CFR 277.4 to providethat the expenses (e.g., travel costs, lodging, or meals) of the personsworking with the volunteer or nonprofit organizations who receive thistraining and assistance would not be reimbursed. For those State agencieschoosing to provide or contract for this training and assistance, allowablecosts would be matched at the fifty percent level by the Federal Governmentin accordance with 7 CFR 277.4. Procurement standards at 7 CFR 277.14 wouldapply if the State agency intends to contract to provide the training andassistance.Information for Low-Income Households_7 CFR 272.5(c)Section 204(a) of Pub. L. 100-435 amended section 11(e)(1)(A) of the FoodStamp Act to allow State agencies, at their option, to inform low-incomehouseholds about the availability, eligibility requirements, applicationprocedures and benefits of the Food Stamp Program and receive Federal fundingfor such outreach activities. Prior to Pub. L. 100-435, the Food StampAct generally prohibited Federal funding for outreach activities, but allowedState agencies the option of conducting informational activities directedonly at homeless individuals; the costs of which were eligible for 50 percentFederal reimbursement. The statutory amendment made by Pub. L. 100-435replaces the general prohibition and exception with a provision that Stateagencies, at their option, may conduct outreach activities aimed at low-incomehouseholds. Section 204(b) of Pub. L. 100-435 also amended section 16(a)(4)of the Food Stamp Act to specify that costs of such program informationalactivities are eligible for Federal reimbursement at the 50 percent reimbursementrate.Current rules at 7 CFR 272.5(c) provide that State agencies, at their option,may carry out program informational activities directed toward the homeless,that only such efforts specifically directed towards homeless individualsas defined in 7 CFR 271.2 will be funded according to procedures establishedat 7 CFR 277 and that State agencies must inform FNS in writing what theywill do to direct the informational activities only towards individualswho are actually homeless. Current procedures at 7 CFR 277, Appendix A,paragraph C.(14) specify that costs incurred as a result of State agencies'outreach programs are not allowable costs, with the exception of programinformational activities directed toward the homeless.In accordance with Pub. L. 100-435, this rule revises 7 CFR 272.5(c) tospecify that State agencies, at their option, may request reimbursementunder 7 CFR 277 for Program informational activities designed to informlow-income households about the availability, eligibility requirements,application procedures, and benefits of the Food Stamp Program.In addition, current rules at 7 CFR 272.5(b)(3) require that all Programinformational materials be available in languages other than English asspecified in the bilingual requirements at 7 CFR 272.4(b). Consequently,this rule makes a conforming amendment to 7 CFR 272.5(c) to specify thatif a State agency elects to request reimbursement for Program informationalmaterials directed at low-income households, those materials must meetthe bilingual requirements.Before allowing costs for the subject program informational activitiesto be eligible for reimbursement, the Department wants to know which Stateagencies plan to claim such costs for reimbursement. Consequently, thisrule further amends 7 CFR 272.5(c) to require that prior to claiming suchcosts, State agencies must receive FNS approval of an attachment to theirPlans of Operation. A conforming amendment is made to 7 CFR 272.2(a)(2)to add a reference to the optional ``Program informational activities plan''as a component of the States' Plan of Operation. A conforming amendmentis also made to 7 CFR 272.2(d)(1) to add the requirement that State agenciessubmit the optional ``Program informational activity'' planning documentto FNS for inclusion in the States' Plan of Operation. Lastly, a conformingamendment is also made to 7 CFR 277, Appendix A, to remove paragraph C.(14)which is made obsolete by this rule.Under rules published November 6, 1979 (44 FR 64386), State agencies wererequired to conduct extensive Food Stamp Program outreach activities, includingthe annual submission for FNS approval of a detailed plan for such activities.The revisions to 7 CFR 272.5(c) contained in this rule would not requirethat information be provided in the Plan of Operation beyond a descriptionof the socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the target population,types of media used, geographic areas warranting attention, and outsideorganizations which would be involved. At this time, the Department isnot requiring that State agencies report this Program activity on the ProgramActivity Statement (Form FNS-366B). However, in accordance with currentrules at 7 CFR 272.2 (c), (e) and (f), State agencies must update theirPlans of Operation to reflect significant changes in their Program informationalactivities plan. Also, current rules at 7 CFR 272.2(a) would require theState agency to report projected amounts budgeted for this program activityon the Budget Projection Statement (Form FNS-366A). The Department is notrevising Form FNS-366A to provide a separate reporting line for this budgetactivity. State agencies should report budget estimates for this activityin the section of Form FNS-366A identified as ``Other.''Waiver of the In-Office Interview_7 CFR 273.2(e)In order to be certified for food stamp benefits, applicant householdsmust complete an application and an interview and provide required documentationto verify statements on the application. Current rules at 7 CFR 273.2(c)require that an application must be submitted to the certification officeeither in person, by mail, or through an authorized representative (i.e.,an adult person other than a household member who has been designated bythe head of the household, or the head of the household's spouse, to representthe household during the certification process). Because benefits are calculatedfor eligible households as of the date the application is filed, Stateagencies are required to encourage households to file the application thesame day the household contacts the food stamp office. If the householdrequests that an application be mailed, the State agency must send an applicationon the same day the household makes the request.Current rules at 7 CFR 273.2(e) require all applicant households to havea face-to-face interview in a food stamp office or other certificationsite with an eligibility worker prior to all certification and recertificationactions. However, the in-office interview must be waived, if requestedby any household which is unable to appoint an authorized representativeand is unable to send a household member to the food stamp office becausethey: (1) Are elderly or disabled as defined in 7 CFR 271.2; live in alocation which is not served by a certification offfice; (3) are experiencingtransportation difficulties as determined by the State agency on a case-by-casebasis; or (4) are experiencing other hardships that the State agency determineswarrants a waiver of the in-office interview such as illness, care of ahousehold member, prolonged severe weather or work hours. If the in-officeinterview is waived, the State agency has the option to conduct a telephoneinterview or a home visit.Section 330 of Pub. L. 100-435 amends section 11(e)(2) of the Food StampAct to explicitly specify, as the current rules do, the circumstances underwhich an applicant household must be waived from the in-office interview.The amendments are intended to assist some applicants (e.g., the elderly,disabled or rural poor) who may be eligible for participation in the FoodStamp Program but fail to submit or complete the application process becauseof transportation-related difficulties. Section 330, for the most part,adopts the current policy at 7 CFR 273.2(e) which specifies who may bewaived from an in-office interview. However, in order for the regulationsto be completely consistent with the law, some modification to the currentrules is necessary.Section 330 specifies that, in addition to considering the currently specifiedserious hardships, the State agency must also consider the hardships associatedwith living in a rural area and employment or training hours which mayprevent an applicant from participating in a face-to-face interview inthe certification office. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.2(e)(2)to include these two conditions as serious hardships warranting waiverof the in-office interview.The Food Stamp Application Form_7 CFR 273.2(b)Under section 11(e)(2) of the Food Stamp Act, and the regulations at 7CFR 273.2(b), State agencies must use the food stamp application form designedby the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) unless the State agency receivesapproval from FNS to deviate from the FNS food stamp application form.State agencies may deviate from the FNS food stamp application form inorder to process joint applications with other assistance programs, meetthe requirements of a State agency computer system or accommodate otherState agency needs that are determined to be justifiable. State agencyapplications may be approved for these reasons provided the applicationis understandable and easy for applicants to use.Whether the State agency uses the FNS application form or designs it ownapplication, 7 CFR 273.2(b) requires that all applications contain: (1)A statement informing applicants that the information provided by the householdis subject to verification by Federal, State and local officials and theconsequences that may occur if information provided on the applicationis incorrect; (2) a description of the civil and criminal penalties forviolations of the Food Stamp Act; (3) a statement to be signed by one adulthousehold member which certifies, under penalty of perjury, the truth ofthe information contained in the application; and (4) a statement to besigned by all households members (adults must sign for children under 18years of age) attesting, under penalty of perjury, to their citizenshipor alien status.Section 310 of Pub. L. 100-435 amends section 11(e)(2) of the Food StampAct concerning the content of the food stamp application form. The legislativehistory (Senate Report No. 100-397, p. 24) to these provisions reflectsCongressional concern that some State agency designed applications_especiallyapplications which allow the household to simultaneously apply for benefitsin the Food Stamp, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), andMedicaid Programs_are either too lengthy and complex for applicants touse or do not provide applicants with sufficient information concerningthe food stamp application process. There is a concern that, as a resultof this complexity, eligible households may be discouraged from applyingfor benefits.The first provisions in section 310 concerns the approval of State agencyapplications which deviate from the FNS food stamp application form. Thisprovision mandates that, in addition to its current criteria for approvingState agency application forms, FNS must also ensure that the applicationis brief. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.2(b) to include brevityas a condition for approving deviations from the FNS food stamp applicationform.The second provision requires that the Department, in consultation withthe Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), to provide guidanceto those State agencies requesting assistance in the development of brief,simply-written application forms, including forms that allow for simultaneousapplication to participate in the Food Stamp, AFDC, and Medicaid Programs.Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.2(b) to advise the State agencyof its option to request assistance from FNS when developing its application.The Department intends for State agencies to request this assistance throughthe Deputy Administrator for the Food Stamp Program. The Deputy Administrator,or the Deputy Administrator's designee, would oversee the review of anapplication form by FNS officials at the Regional level and would coordinatethe review of the application form with the HHS. The Regional officialswill be responsible for coordinating between the State agency and NationalOffice. The last provision under section 310 requires that all applications forfood stamp benefits contain certain statements which advise the householdof important information about the application process. These requiredstatements include: (1) A place on the front cover where applicants canwrite their names, addresses, and signatures; (2) instructions that advisethe household of their right to file the application without finishingall parts; (3) a statement describing the expedited service procedures;and (4) a statement that informs the household that benefits are providedonly from the date of application. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR273.2(b) to require that the food stamp application form contain the aboveinformation. The Department is also taking this opportunity to restructure7 CFR 273.2(b) in its entirety in order to display all information requiredto be on the application form in a more readable and understandable format.The current six-page food stamp application form (FNS-385) designed byFNS contains statements advising the household of their right to file theapplication and a general description of the expedited service procedures.However, the application form does not contain a statement informing theapplicant household that benefits are provided from the date of application.The Department is currently revising the FNS-385 to include this statementand to provide a more specific description of the expedited service process.The Department will distribute the revised application to the State agenciesas soon as this revision is completed. Joint Processing of Applications_7 CFR 273.2(j) As previously mentioned, Congress has serious concerns about complex applicationprocedures which may discourage eligible households from participatingin the Program. Therefore, in addition to procedures which ensure thatthe application is simple and easy for applicants to use, section 352 ofPub. L. 100-435 includes provisions which ensure that applicants for publicassistance (PA) or general assistance (GA) are able to apply for food stampbenefits on the same application form. This section reinstates practicesthat were initially required under the original Food Stamp Act of 1977but were subsequently made optional. To clarify the current change, theDepartment is providing a brief history of these provisions from the enactmentof the Food Stamp Act of 1977 until the enactment of the Hunger PreventionAct of 1988. Under section 11(i) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (Pub. L. 95-113, 91 Stat.958, Sept. 29, 1977), the State agency was required to: (1) Conduct a singleinterview to determine the household's eligibility for food stamps andAFDC; (2) permit households in which all members are recipients of SupplementalSecurity Income (SSI) to apply for food stamp benefits by completing asimple application at the Social Security Office; (3) include the applicationfor food stamps in the application for PA or GA for households in whichall applicant household members were included in a PA or GA grant; and(4) certify households which had recently been denied or terminated fromPA or GA on the basis of information that was available in the PA or GAcasefile provided the information was sufficient for food stamp purposes.The intent of these provisions was to ensure that applicants would nothave to repeat similar application procedures when applying for PA or GAand food stamp benefits at the same time. In an attempt to relieve State agencies from certain administrative burdenswhile maintaining joint application procedures, the Omnibus Budget ReconciliationAct of 1982 (Pub. L. 97-253, 96 Stat. 763, Sept. 8, 1982) gave State agenciesthe option to implement sections 11(i) (3) and (4) noted above relativeto combining the food stamp application with the PA or GA application andcertifying recently denied or terminated PA or GA households based on informationfrom the PA or GA casefile. The requirements relative to the single interviewand the application procedures for pure SSI households continued to bemandatory. Section 352 of Pub. L. 100-435 reflects a renewed desire to streamlinethe application process for applicant food stamp households. As a result,State agencies are required to implement the previously optional provisionsunder section 11(i) (3) and (4) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended.In addition, section 352 requires that the State agency notify all AFDCapplicants of their right to apply for food stamps at the same time thatthey apply for AFDC benefits. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.2 (j) and (j)(1)(i) to requirethe State agency to combine the application for food stamps with the applicationfor PA and GA and to notify AFDC applicants of their right to file a jointapplication. This rule also amends 7 CFR 273.2(j)(1) to add a new paragraph(j)(1)(v), which specifies that households whose PA/GA applications aredenied or PA/GA eligibility terminated shall not be required to file anew application, but shall have their food stamp eligibility and benefitsdetermined by available information from the PA/GA casefile provided theinformation is suffient for food stamp purposes. Application Process_Verification_7 CFR 273.2(f) and 273.21(j) Current rules at 7 CFR 273.2(f) define verification as the use of third-partyinformation or documentation to establish the accuracy of statements onthe application. Information regarding gross non-exempt income, socialsecurity numbers, residency and the identity of the household member makingthe application must be verified by the State agency prior to certifyingany applicant household for benefits. If applicable, the State agency mustalso verify the household's utility expenses, medical expenses and thealien status or disability of individual household members. Finally, theState agency must verify other factors of eligibility it determines arequestionable, such as household composition. There are three sources of verification currently identified in 7 CFR 273.2(f)(4).The first source is documentary evidence which consists of the writtenconfirmation of a household's circumstances. The second source is a collateralcontact, or the oral confirmation of a household's circumstances. The lastsource_which is used only when the other sources are insufficient to makea firm determination of eligibility_is a prearranged home visit. Under the current rules at 7 CFR 273.2(f)(5), the household is primarilyresponsible for providing documentation to verify its income and to resolveany questionable information. However, if it would be difficult or impossiblefor the household to obtain documentary evidence in a timely manner, orif the household has provided insufficient documentation, the State agencymust either offer assistance to the household, use a collateral contact,or arrange a home visit. Section 311 of Pub. L. 100-435 contains five provisions which amend section11(e)(3) of the Food Stamp Act. The first provision, section 311(A), requiresthe State agency to provide all applicant households with a clear writtenstatement explaining what the household must do to cooperate in obtainingverification and completing the application. The second and third provisions,sections 311 (B) and (E), require the State agency to help households obtainrequired verification when the household is cooperating with the Stateagency to complete the application process. The fourth provision, section311(C), prohibits the State agency from requiring the applicant householdto submit additional verification when the household has provided adequatesources of verification unless the State agency determines that the verificationis inaccurate, incomplete, or inconsistent. Lastly, section 311(D) prohibitsthe denial of an application solely because a person outside of the household(who is not a person outside of the household because of a specific disqualificationaction or ineligible status) fails to cooperate with the State agency'sprocessing of the application. The legislative history (House Report No. 100-828, p. 23 and Senate ReportNo. 100-397, pp. 24-25) suggests that the above provisions should reduceerror rates, establish uniform verification standards, and remove the possibilitythat households will be subject to excessive verification requirements.In order to bring current rules into conformity with sections 311 (A),(B), and (E) of Pub. L. 100-435, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.2 to add anew paragraph (c)(5), which specifies the State agency requirements pertinentto the written statement. Under this provision, the State agency shallprovide the household at each certification and recertification with awritten statement that advises the household of the verification that mustbe submitted in order to be certified for food stamp benefits. In addition,the notice shall advise the household that the State agency will help thehousehold obtain the required verification provided the household is cooperatingwith the State agency to complete the application. Also, the notice shallbe written in clear and simple language and meet the bilingual requirementsdescribed in 7 CFR 272.4(b). The Department is allowing the State agencies to design their own writtenstatement. However, the Department encourages the State agencies to developa general written statement that could be given to all applicant households,rather than a written statement which would need to be tailored to eachapplicant household. This would ensure that applicant households are treatedconsistently and would prevent the possibility that households are subjectto multiple verification requests. In addition, current rules at 7 CFR 273.2(h)(1)(i) specify the criteriathe State agency must use to determine if the household or State agencycaused a delay in processing the application. Consequently, this rule makesa conforming amendment to 7 CFR 273.2(h)(1) to add a new paragraph (h)(1)(i)(C),which includes the requirement that the State agency must consider whetheror not the State agency provided the household with the statement of requiredverification when determining if a delay in the application process wascaused by the State agency or the household. In respect to the fourth provision, section 311(C), the legislative history(House Report No. 100-828, p. 23) indicates that the intent of this provisionis to prevent the State agency from requiring the household to providemultiple sources of verification when the household has already providedverification which adequately supports statements on the application. However,the State agency under this section may require the household to provideadditional verification when the State agency determines that existingverification is incomplete, inaccurate or inconsistent. Accordingly, this rule amends the verification standards for recertificationat 7 CFR 273.2(f)(8)(i) (A) and (C), when changes are reported betweencertification actions at 7 CFR 273.2(f)(8)(ii), and for households subjectto monthly reporting and retrospective budgeting (MRRB) at 7 CFR 273.21(i)(1) and (3) and (j)(3)(iii)(B). These changes specifically provide thatthe State agency cannot request verification for information when the householdhas provided sufficient verification or existing verification in the casefileadequately verifies the household's current circumstances. However, theState agency may request additional verification if the State agency determinesthat the verification provided by the household is incomplete, inaccurate,outdated, or inconsistent with recently reported information. Finally, in respect to section 311(D), this rule amends 7 CFR 273.2(d)(1)to provide that the household may not be determined ineligible when a memberoutside of the household fails to cooperate with a request for verification.However, in accordance with section 311(D), this provision of the ruleprovides that the provision shall not apply when the person refusing tocooperate: (1) Is a member outside of the household because the personis either an ineligible student, ineligible alien, or SSI recipient ina ``cash-out'' State; or (2) has been disqualified for an intentional Programviolation, a workfare sanction, or noncompliance with work requirements.The legislative history (Senate Report No. 100-397, pp. 24-25) indicatesthat these nonhousehold members cannot be considered as persons outsidethe household because they would othewise be a household member if notfor a specific disqualification or ineligible status. Because the legislativehistory is specific about the treatment of nonhousehold members who wouldothewise be included as a member in the food stamp household, it is theDepartment's view that two other categories of nonhousehold members whocannot be considered as a person outside of the household need to be included.These two categories are: individuals disqualified for failure to providean SSN and persons who fail to attest to their citizenship or alien status.Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.2(d)(1) to include a regulatoryreference to 7 CFR 273.1(b)(2) to reflect this decision. Demonstration Projects/Cash-Outs in Other Benefit Programs_7 CFR 273.9(c)(1)and 273.10(d)(1) Current rules at 7 CFR 273.9 identify the sources of income that are eitherincluded or excluded from income in the determination of a household'sfood stamp eligibility and benefit level. One income exclusion specifiedunder 7 CFR 273.9(c)(1) is any gain or benefit which is not in the formof money payable directly to the household, including nonmonetary or in-kindbenefits such as meals, clothing, public housing, or produce from a garden,and vendor payments. Direct cash payments, however, are not excluded fromincome under 7 CFR 273.9 and therefore must be included in the determinationof a household's food stamp eligibility and benefit level. In order to test methods which may improve benefit delivery in other assistanceprograms, State agencies may conduct federally authorized demonstrationprojects which are established through Federal legislation or which arecreated by the waiver of provisions of Federal law. Should a State agency,as a condition of the demonstration project, convert an in-kind or vendorpayment to a direct cash payment, the payments would no longer be excludedfrom income but would be included in the food stamp eligibility and benefitlevel computations. Thus, under current rules, if a food stamp householdis participating in a demonstration project which converts an indirectpayment to a direct cash payment, the household could experience a decreasein its food stamp benefit level or could lose its eligibility for foodstamps. The legislative history to Pub. L. 100-435 (Senate Report No. 100-397,pp. 27-28 and House Report No. 100-828, pp. 24-25) reveals Congressionalconcerns in ensuring that State agencies have the flexibility to test alternateways to deliver benefits in other assistance programs without adverselyaffecting those food stamp households which are participating in a federallyauthorized demonstration project. Section 340 of Pub. L. 100-435, in reponseto these concerns, amends section 5(d)(1) of the Food Stamp Act to specifythat any income which would normally be excluded under 7 CFR 273.9(c)(1),but has been converted in whole or in part to a direct cash payment underthe approval of a federally authorized demonstration project, must continueto be excluded from income in the determination of a household's food stampeligibility and benefit level. This would also apply to demonstration projectscreated by the waiver or provision of Federal law. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.9(c)(1) to specify that in-kindor vendor payments which would normally be excluded as income but are convertedin whole, or in part, to a direct cash payment under the approval of afederally authorized demonstration project (including demonstration projectscreated by waiver of the provisions of Federal law) shall continue to beexcluded from income. This rule also addresses how expenses would be handled if an excluded vendorpayment is converted to a direct cash payment under the approval of a federallyauthorized demonstration project. Under current rules at 7 CFR 273.10(d)(1)(i),any excluded vendor payment is not deductible as a household expense. Thus,in order to ensure that excluded vendor payments which have been convertedto a direct cash payment are treated as an excluded vendor payment, thisrule amends 7 CFR 273.10(d)(1)(i) to specify that expenses covered by anexcluded vendor payment which is converted to a direct cash payment underthe approval of a federally authorized demonstration project is not a deductiblehousehold expense. Specified Procedures for Claiming the Medical Deduction_7 CFR 273.9, 273.12and 273.21 Current rules at 7 CFR 273.9(d)(3) allow elderly and disabled householdmembers as defined in 7 CFR 271.2 to claim certain medical expenses exceeding$35 as an income deduction. Other household members who are not elderlyor disabled cannot claim their medical costs as a deduction. Unless the household is subject to Monthly Reporting and RetrospectiveBudgeting (MRRB), the State agency must, in accordance with 7 CFR 273.12(a),calculate the medical deduction based on expenses the household expectsto be billed for during the certification period. These households, inturn, are required to report any changes of more than $25 in allowablemedical expenses.Households subject to MRRB are required to report and verify their allowablemedical expenses monthly. However, because the MRRB procedures excludehouseholds in which all adult members are elderly and disabled and haveno earned income, most households which are eligible to receive an excessmedical deduction are excluded from MRRB procedures.The determination of the medical deduction and the requirements relatedto reporting changes in medical expenses have proven difficult for bothparticipating households and State agencies. For example, households sometimesneglect to report information which would ensure that they receive theamount of benefits to which they are entitled. Similarly, State agencieshave requested clarification of the requirements related to reporting changesin medical deductions because they are liable for errors resulting in thecalculation of the medical deduction.In order to reduce these administrative burdens and ensure that the medicaldeduction is properly applied to all households which are eligible to receivethe deduction, section 351 of Pub. L. 100-435 amends section 5(e) of theFood Stamp Act and requires the State agency to offer eligible householdsa method for claiming a deduction for recurring medical expenses in placeof provisions that require the household to report and verify expensesmonthly. Legislative history surrounding this provision in the Hunger PreventionAct (House Report No. 100-828, p. 26) indicates that Congress intendedthis method to replace current reporting and verification procedures forthose households subject to MRRB and, in its place, require these MRRBhouseholds to report changes in recurring medical expenses periodically.In order to conform to the requirements of section 351, the Departmentis changing current reporting and verification requirements for allowablemedical expenses under the MRRB system. Under this rule, households subjectto MRRB are now given the option of reporting and verifying all medicalexpenses monthly as currently required under the MRRB procedures, or ofreporting and verifying only those changes in medical expenses during thecertification period which exceed $25. Whichever option is chosen, thehousehold is only required to report changes on the monthly report. TheState agency is not allowed to require the household to report changesoutside of the monthly report. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.21(h)(3)(i) and (3)(ii), (i)(1), and (j)(3)(iii) to specify the household'soptions with regard to reporting and verifying medical expenses in an MRRBsystem.In addition to the above change which is required as a result of Pub. L.100-435, the Department believes that another change to the current regulationsat 7 CFR 273.12(a)(1)(vi) would simplify reporting changes in medical expenses.This rule requires that changes in total medical expenses greater than$25 must be reported, as opposed to a $25 change in each individual allowablemedical expense. For instance, under this requirement, if the householdincurs a new ongoing $50 medical expense at the same time the householdstops incurring an ongoing $40 expense, the household would not be requiredto report either change because the total change is $10. However, if thehousehold incurs two new ongoing expenses of $20 each, the household wouldbe required to report both changes because the total change is greaterthan $25. Currently, the household is required to report the two changesin the first example although the effect of the changes is minimal. Thechanges in the second example are not required to be reported under currentrules even though the total effect of the changes is a $40 difference.The Department has received numerous policy requests which indicate thatthe current requirements are confusing in certain situations. Accordingly,this rule amends 7 CFR 273.12(a)(1)(vi) to specify that changes greaterthan $25 in <T3>total</T3> medical expenses must be reported. A conforming amendmentis made to 7 CFR 273.21(h)(3) to also reflect this policy for MRRB households.Taken together, the Department believes the above changes satisfy the legislativerequirement that households be provided with a method to report and verifyrecurring medical expenses and further simplify the requirements surroundingthe medical deduction. However, given the complexity of this area, theDepartment welcomes any comments or recommendations which may provide alternativemethods for eligible households to claim the medical deduction.Reporting Responsibilities_7 CFR 273.12 and 273.21Certified households which are not subject to MRRB must report changesin household circumstances within 10 days of the date the change occurs.The current rules at 7 CFR 273.12(a) identify the types of changes in householdcircumstances these certified households are required to report duringthe certification period. This method is known as ``change reporting.''Households subject to change reporting must be provided with a report formunder 7 CFR 273.12(b)(1) at certification, recertification or wheneverthe household needs a new form. Households subject to the MRRB provisionsin 7 CFR 273.21 must report changes monthly on the monthly report.Section 323 of Pub. L. 100-435 amends section 11(e) of the Food Stamp Actand requires the State agency to provide a household, at the time of certificationand recertification, with a statement describing the household's reportingresponsibilities. Moreover, this section of the Act requires that the Stateagency provide all households with a toll-free number or a telephone numberwhere collect calls will be accepted in order for the household to reachan appropriate representative of the State agency. The legislative historyof Pub. L. 100-435 (Senate Report No. 100-397, p. 25) indicates that theintent of these provisions is to clearly inform a household of its reportingresponsibilities and to increase a household's access to the State agencyin order for the household to obtain information or report changes. Byproviding easier access to local offices, households would report moreaccurate information regarding their food stamp eligibility, and thus reducethe possibility of errors. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.12(b)(1)to specifically require the ``change report'' from to include a statementdescribing the household's reporting responsibilities as specified under7 CFR 273.12(a)(1). In addition, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.12(b)(1) tospecify that the ``change report'' from must contain the number of theFood Stamp Office and a toll-free number or a number where collect callswill be accepted.The Department's model ``change report'' form (Form FNS-387) already containsthe current list of changes households should be reporting in accordancewith 7 CFR 273.12. However, the form does not specifically provide thatthe household is required to report the changes listed. While State agenciesare not required to use this model form, some State agencies do use it,therefore, the Department will revise the form to clarify that the listof changes in household circumstances contained on the form are <T3>required</T3> to be reported by the household. The revised FNS-387will be distributed to the State agencies as soon as this revision is completed.In respect to MRRB, current rules at 7 CFR 273.21 require that the Stateagency provide MRRB households with a toll-free number at certificationin order for the households to ask questions regarding the monthly report.Current rules also require the State agency to provide the applicant householdswith a copy of a monthly report and a written description of how the reportmust be completed.As a result of section 323, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.21(c)(5) to allowthe State agency to provide either a toll-free number or a number wherecollect calls will be accepted. Also, because section 323 requires thata household be provided with the number for both certifications and recertifications,this rule amends 7 CFR 273.21(c) to specify that a toll-free or collect-callnumber must be provided at all certifications and recertifications. Finally,the current rules already require households subject to MRRB to receivea statement describing the household's reporting responsibilities. Therefore,the Department is not making any further revisions to 7 CFR 273.21(c)(5).The Department is also amending the provisions relative to the BilingualNotices, the Notice of Eligibility, the Notice of Denial, and the Noticeof Adverse Action. These notices currently contain the telephone numberof the Food Stamp Office. As a result of section 323 of Pub. L. 100-435,the Department believes that these notices also must include either a toll-freenumber or a number where collect calls will be accepted for those householdsliving outside the local calling area. Therefore, this rule amends 7 CFR272.4(b)(3)(ii)(B), 7 CFR 273.10(g)(1)(i)(A), 7 CFR 273.10(g)(1)(ii) and7 CFR 273.13(a)(2), respectively, to specify that notices must containeither a toll-free number or a number where collect calls will be accepted.Special Provisions for Farm Households_7 CFR 273.8, 273.11 and 273.21Public Law 100-435 contains two provisions which will extend eligibilityto farm households which are in need of program assistance but are determinedineligible due to current requirements relating to the treatment of income,deductions or resources.The first provision, section 341 of Pub. L. 100-435, amends section 5(f)(1)(A)and specifies that self-employed farm households which incur irregularexpenses must be given the option to average the income and expenses fromthe farm operation over a 12-month period. Under 7 CFR 273.11 of the currentrules, self-employed farmers who are not subject to MRRB and receive incomewhich represents the household's annual income, regardless of whether itis received monthly or more or less often than monthly, have the farm incomeannualized over a 12-month period. In accordance with current policy, self-employmentincome and expenses are annualized over a 12-month period.These standards do not apply to farm households which are subject to MRRBand receive self-employment farm income monthly. These households musthave their farm income counted in the month it is received and have theirexpenses counted in the month in which the expense is billed or otherwisebecomes due. Thus, farm households subject to MRRB which incur irregularexpenses may alternate between eligibility and ineligibility for food stampbenefits while other farm households which are allowed to average fluctuatingexpenses maintain their eligibility for food stamp benefits.In order to eliminate this inconsistency in the treatment of farm income,section 341 of Pub. L. 100-435 requires that self-employed farm householdsbe given the option of averaging income and expenses over a 12-month period(i.e., annualizing income and expenses). Accordingly, this rule amends7 CFR 273.21(f)(2)(i) to specify that self-employed farm households whichare subject to MRRB have the option to annualize their self-employmentincome and expenses over a 12-month period. A conforming amendment is madeto the self-employment provisions at 7 CFR 273.11 by adding a new paragraph(f)(1)(v) to address this specific household option.The second provision, section 342 of Pub. L. 100-435, addresses those householdswhich are in the process of terminating their self-employment from farming.Under current rules at 7 CFR 273.8(b), households with resources whichexceed $2000 ($3000 for households with an elderly member) are not eligibleto participate in the program. Current rules at 7 CFR 273.8 (c), (d), and(e) identify the resources which are included and excluded in the determinationof a household's eligibility. For self-employed households, property thatis essential to self-employment (e.g., farm land and farm equipment ortools of a tradesman) is excluded in the resource determination of thehousehold's eligibility as long as the household continues to be self-employed.Under current policy, once the household terminates its self-employment,excluded property continues to be excluded if the person intends to returnto farming. No specific timeframe is established. For households whichdo not intend to return to farming, the excluded property is included inthe resource determination from the date the household terminates its self-employment.To establish a time limit, section 342 of Pub. L. 100-435 provides thatproperty essential to the self-employment of a household member engagedin farming would continue to be excluded as a resource for one year aftera farm household has stopped farming.Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 273.8(e)(5) to specify that propertyessential to self-employment of a household member engaged in farming isexcluded as a resource for one year from the date the household memberterminates his/her self-employment from farming. A conforming amendmentis also made to 7 CFR 273.8(h)(1)(i) to specify that any licensed vehiclewhich had been used over 50 percent of the time in the self-employmentof a household member engaged in farming continues to be excluded as aresource for one year from the date the household member terminates his/herself-employment from farming.Delivery of Benefits to Households Applying After the Fifteenth of theMonth_7 CFR 274Section 203 of Pub. L. 100-435 amends section 8(c) of the Food Stamp Actand requires State agencies to make available to eligible households whichapply after the fifteenth of the month prorated benefits for the monthof application and benefits for the first full month of participation ina combined allotment. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 274.2 (b)(2)and (b)(3) to address this statutory requirement. The rule neither changesthe method of calculating benefit amounts, nor modifies current standardsfor application verification.For eligible households applying under regular certification procedures(i.e., non-expedited service households), this rule clarifies that thecombined allotment must be provided within thirty days after the date ofapplication. If the application has not been completed or all informationhas not been verified within 30 days, no combined benefits will be issued.Under current rules at 7 CFR 273.2(i), eligible households which are entitledto expedited service must receive the prorated initial benefits withinfive days after the date of application. Under section 203 of Pub. L. 100-435,if the application is complete and all verification has been made withinthat five-day period, the combined allotment shall be issued at that time.If, at the end of the five-day period after the date of application, allverification has not been made, only the prorated benefits for the monthof application will be issued. As soon as the verification has been completed,the benefits for the first full month of participation must be issued inaccordance with 7 CFR 273.2(i)(4)(iii).The verification requirements remain unchanged in the new benefit deliveryschedules because section 203 only applies to ``eligible households.''Adherence to the normal requirements for verification is underscored byfurther reference to eligible households in the legislative history forsection 203 of Pub. L. 100-435 (Senate Report No. 100-397, p. 23). Thereport states that, ``[t]he allotment is for the remaining portion of themonth in which they apply and for the next month (if they are eligiblefor benefits in that month).'' Therefore, the household's eligibility forbenefits in the first full month is not established until verificationis complete. Accordingly, this rule amends 7 CFR 274.2 to add a new paragraph(b)(4) which provides that the provision for a combined allotment doesnot apply to households for which missing or postponed verification hasnot been received or to households determined ineligible for benefits forthe initial application month or the next subsequent month.In discussing this section's requirement for an ``aggregate'' allotment,the Senate Report described the Congressional expectation to assure a moretimely delivery of initial benefits to eligible households, and to affordState agencies the opportunity to reduce costs associated with benefitdelivery (Senate Report No. 100-397, p. 23). In this light the Departmentwill allow State agencies the discretion as to the form of the combinedbenefit provided by the Section 203, so long as the total amount of benefitsis provided at the same time. This would mean that a State agency usingmail issuance, may mail the combined issuance in two envelopes; a Stateagency using an authorization document (ATP) system may issue two documents,for the two months, at the same time.Section 8(c) of the Food Stamp Act, as amended, and current regulationsat 7 CFR 273.10(iii)(C) provide that ``no allotment may be issued to ahousehold for the initial month or period if the value of the allotment* * * is less than $10.'' This provision is not superceded by Section 203of Pub. L. 100-435 and continues to apply. Therefore, under the provisionsof this rule, eligible households whose benefit amount is less than $10in the initial month of application would receive the next full month'sbenefit more quickly, but the allotment cannot include the initial month'sbenefit of less than $10. Accordingly, this rule adds a reference to 7CFR 273.10(iii)(C) to the new paragraph 7 CFR 274.2(b)(4) to clarify thispolicy.Section 203 of Pub. L. 100-435 supersedes the current provisions foundat 7 CFR 274.2, paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3), which stipulates that eligiblehouseholds (regular and expedited service) which apply after the fifteenthof the month shall receive benefits for the first full month of participationby the eighth day of the first full month, if any benefits were issuedin the month of application.Implementation_7 CFR 272.1(g)Under section 701 of Pub. L. 100-435, the provisions contained in andSection;274.2(b)of this rule are effective January 1, 1989, to be implemented by Statewelfare agencies no later than January 1, 1990.Under section 701 of Pub. L. 100-435, the remaining provisions of thisrule are effective July 1, 1989 and must be implemented on that date forall households which newly apply for Program benefits on or after thatdate. The rule provides that the current caseload will be converted tothese remaining provisions at recertification, at household request orwhen the case is next review, whichever occurs first and restored benefitsprovided back to July 1, 1989 or the date of the food stamp application,whichever occurred later. In addition, the rules provide that householdswhich applied for Program benefits between July 1, 1989 and the date theState agency implements these remaining provisions, and were denied benefits,shall be entitled to restored benefits back to July 1, 1989 or the dateof the food stamp application, whichever occurred later, if the householdis otherwise entitled to benefits, and requests a review of its case orthe State agency otherwise becomes aware that a review is needed.<ITAG tagnum="84">Quality Control</ITAG>Any variance resulting from the application of this regulation will behandled in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12 of the current rules.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>7 CFR Part 271Administative practice and procedure, Food stamps, Grant programs_Socialprograms.7 CFR Part 272Alaska, Civil rights, Food stamps, Grant programs_social programs, Reportingand recordkeeping requirements.7 CFR Part 273Administrative practice and procedure, Aliens, claims, Food stamps, Fraud,Grant programs_social programs, Penalties, Records, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Social Security, Students.7 CFR Part 274Administative practice and procedure, Food stamps, Grant programs_socialprograms, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.7 CFR Part 277Food stamps, Government procedure, Grant programs_social programs, Investigations,Records, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.Accordingly, 7 CFR Parts 271, 272, 273, 274 and 277 are amended as follows:1. The authority citation of Parts 271, 272, 273, 274 and 277 continuesto read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>7 U.S.C. 2011-2029. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 271_GENERAL INFORMATION AND REGULATIONS </ITAG>2. In andSection; 271.2 the definition of ``Elderly or disabled member''is amended by adding a new paragraph (11) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 271.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>``Elderly or disabled member'' * * * (11) Is a recipient of interim assistance benefits pending the receiptof Supplemented Security Income, disability related medical assistanceunder title XIX of the Social Security Act, or disability-based State generalassistance benefits <T3>provided </T3>that the eligibility to receive those benefits is basedupon disability or blindness criteria which are at least as stringent asthose used under title XVI of the Social Security Act. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. In andSection; 271.8, a paragraph designation and corresponding OMB ControlNumber for andSection; 272.5, paragraph (c), is added in numerical orderto read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 271.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Information collection/recordkeeping_OMB assigned control numbers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L1,tp0,i1,s25,10</C> <H1>7 CFR section where requirements are described </H1><H1>Current OMB control No.</H1><ITAG tagnum="28">*    *    *    *    * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">272.5(c) <D>0584-0083 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*    *    *    *    * </ITAG></ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 272_REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICIPATING STATE AGENCIES </ITAG>4. In andSection; 272.1, a new paragraph (g)(110) is added in numerical orderto read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General terms and conditions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(g) <T3>Implementation. * * * </T3>(110) <T3>Amendment No. 316. </T3>State welfare agencies shall implement theprovisions of <T3>Amendment No. 316 </T3>as follows: (i) the provisions contained in andSection; 274.2(b) of <T3>Amendment No. 316 </T3>are effective retroactively to January 1, 1989and shall be implemented by State welfare agencies no later than January1, 1990 for all households which newly apply for Program benefits or applyfor recertification on or after that date. (ii) The remaining provisions are effective July 1, 1989 and must be implementedon that date for all households which newly apply for Program benefitsor apply for recertification on or after that date. The current caseloadshall be converted to these provisions at household request, at the timeof recertification, or when the case is next reviewed, whichever occursfirst and restored benefits shall be provided, if appropriate, back toJuly 1, 1989 or the date of the application, whichever is later. Additionally,households which applied for Program benefits between July 1, 1989 andthe date the State agency implemented these provisions, and were deniedbenefits, shall be entitled to restored benefits back to July 1, 1989 orthe date of the application, whichever occurred later, if the household:(A) Is otherwise entitled to benefits, and (B) Requests a review of its case or the State agency otherwise becomesaware that a review is needed. 5. In andSection; 272.2, the seventh sentence of paragraph (a)(2) is amendedby adding the phrase ``the optional plan for Program informational activitiesdirected to low-income households,'' after the phrase ``Nutritional EducationPlan,'' and a new paragraph (d)(1)(ix) is added to read as follows: The additions read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plan of operation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) <T3>Planning Documents. </T3>(1) * * * (ix) A plan for Program informational activities as specified in andSection;272.5(c). <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>6. In andSection; 272.4: a. Paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(B) is amended by replacing the phrase, ``the telephonenumber to call for more information.'' with the phrase, ``the telephonenumber (toll-free number or a number where collect calls will be acceptedfor households outside the local calling area) which the household maycall to receive additional information.''. b. Paragraph (d)(1)(i) is amended by adding a sentence to the end of thatparagraph. c. Paragraph (d)(2) is redesignated as paragraph (d)(3) and a new paragraph(d)(2) is added. The additions and revisions read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Program administration and personnel requirements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) <T3>Training. </T3>(1) * * * (i) * * * Training must convey the goals and methods for promptly and accuratelycertifying eligible households. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(2) <T3>Additional training. </T3>At their option, State agencies may provideor contract to provide training and assistance to persons working withvolunteer or nonprofit organizations that provide program information activitiesor eligibility screening to persons potentially eligible for food stamps.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>7. In andSection; 272.5, paragraph (c) is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 272.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Program informational activities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) <T3>Program informational activities for low-income households. </T3>Attheir option State agencies may carry out and claim associated costs forProgram informational activities designed to inform low-income householdsabout the availablity, eligibility requirements, application procedures,and benefits of the Food Stamp Program. Program informational materialsused in such activities shall be subject to andSection; 272.4(b), which pertainsto bilingual requirements. Before FNS considers costs for such activitieseligible for reimbursement at the fifty percent rate under Part 277, Stateagencies shall obtain FNS approval for the attachment to their Plans ofOperation as specified in andSection; 272.2(d)(1)(ix). In such attachments,State agencies shall describe the subject activities with respect to thesocio-economic and demographic characteristics of the target population,types of media used, geographic areas warranting attention, and outsideorganizations which would be involved. State agencies shall update thisattachment to their Plans of Operation when significant changes occur andreport projected costs for this Program activity in accordance with andSection;272.2 (c), (e), and (f). <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 273_CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLDS </ITAG>8. In andSection; 273.2: a. Paragraph (b) is revised in its entirety. b. Paragraph (c)(5) is redesignated as paragraph (c)(6) and a new paragraph(c)(5) is added. c. Paragraph (d)(1) is amended by adding two new sentences to end of theparagraph. d. The fourth sentence of paragraph (e)(2) is revised. e. A new paragraph (f)(1)(viii)(A)(<T3>6</T3>) is added. f. Paragraph (f)(5)(i), paragraph (f)(8)(i)(A), the first two sentencesof paragraph (f)(8)(i)(C), and paragraph (f)(8)(ii) are revised. g. The last sentence of paragraph (g)(2) is amended by removing the phrase,``when required,''. h. The first sentence of paragraph (h)(1)(i)(C) is revised. i. The first and last sentences of the introductory text of paragrpah (j)are revised, the first two sentences of paragraph (j)(1)(i) are removedand three new sentences are added in their place, and a new paragraph (j)(1)(v)is added. The additions and revisions read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 273.2 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application processing. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) <T3>Food Stamp application form</T3>._(1) <T3>Content. </T3>Each application form shall contain: (i) In prominent and boldface lettering and understandable terms a statementthat the information provided by the applicant in connection with the applicationfor food stamp benefits will be subject to verification by Federal, Stateand local officials to determine if such information is factual; that ifany information is incorrect, food stamps may be denied to the applicant;and that the applicant may be subject to criminal prosecution for knowinglyproviding incorrect information; (ii) In prominent and boldface lettering and understandable terms a descriptionof the civil and criminal provisions and penalties for violations of theFood Stamp Act; (iii) A statement to be signed by one adult household member which certifies,under penalty of perjury, the truth of the information contained in theapplication; (iv) A statement to be signed by each household member attesting, underpenalty of perjury, to his or her citizenship or alien status (adults shallsign for household members under 18 years of age; however, if there areno adult members in the household, the applicant shall sign the statementfor himself or herself and for all other members in the household who areunder 18 years of age); (v) A place on the front page of the application where the applicant canwrite his/her name, address and signature; (vi) In plain and prominent language on the front page of the application,notification of the household's right to immediately file the applicationas long as it contains the applicant's name and address and the signatureof a responsible household member or the household's authorized representative;(vii) In plain and prominent language on the front page of the application,a description of the expedited service provisions described in paragraph(i) of this section; and (viii) In plain and prominent language on the front page of the application,notification that benefits are provided from the date of application. (2) <T3>Income and eligibility verification system (IEVS). </T3>All applicantsfor food stamp benefits shall be notified at the time of application andat each recertification through a written statement on or provided withthe application form that information available through the State incomeand eligibility verification (IEVS) will be requested, used and may beverified through collateral contact when discrepancies are found by theState agency, and that such information may affect the household's eligibilityand level of benefits. All applicants shall also be notified on the applicationform that the alien status of any household member may be subject to verificationby INS through the submission of information from the application to INS,and that the submitted information received from INS may affect the household'seligibility and level of benefits. (3) <T3>Deviations. </T3>All State agencies shall use an application form designatedby FNS. FNS may approve a deviation from that form to accommodate the useof a combined PA/food stamp application form, the requirements of a computersystem, or other exigencies for which the State agency can submit adequatejustification, provided the form is brief, understandable to applicantsand easy to use. State agencies may request assistance from FNS in thedevelopment of a brief, simply-written and readable application, includingapplication forms which cover the Food Stamp Program and the Aid to Familieswith Dependent Children Program or the Medicaid Program. (c) <T3>Filing an application. * * * </T3>(5) <T3>Notice of Required Verification. </T3>The State agency shall provideeach household at the time of application for certification and recertificationwith a notice that informs the household of the verification requirementsthe household must meet as part of the application process. The noticeshall also inform the household of the State agency's responsibility toassist the household in obtaining required verification provided the householdis cooperating with the State agency as specified in (d)(1) of this section.The notice shall be written in clear and simple language and shall meetthe bilingual requirements designated in andSection; 272.4(b) of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) <T3>Household Cooperation. </T3>(1) * * * The State agency shall not determinethe household to be ineligible when a person outside of the household failsto cooperate with a request for verification. The State agency shall notconsider individuals identified as nonhousehold members under andSection;273.1(b)(2) as individuals outside the household. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e) <T3>Interviews. </T3>* * *(2) * * * These hardship conditions include, but are not limited to: illness,care of a household member, hardships due to residency in a rural area,prolonged severe weather, or work or training hours which prevent the householdfrom participating in an in-office interview. * * *<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) <T3>Verification.</T3> * * * (1) <T3>Mandatory verification.</T3> * * * (viii) <T3>Disability.</T3>(A) * * * (<T3>6</T3>) For individuals to be considered disabled under paragraph (11)of the definition, the household shall provide proof that the individualreceives interim assistance benefits pending the receipt of SupplementalSecurity Income; or disability-related medical assistance under title XIXof the SSA; or disability-based State general assistance benefits. TheState agency shall verify that the eligibility to receive these benefitsis based upon disability or blindness criteria which are at least as stringentas those used under title XVI of the Social Security Act. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(5) <T3>Responsibility of obtaining verification. </T3>(i) The household hasprimary responsibility for providing documentary evidence to support statementson the application and to resolve any questionable information. The Stateagency shall assist the household in obtaining this verification providedthe household is cooperating with the State agency as specified under paragraph(d)(1) of this section. Households may supply documentary evidence in person,through the mail, or through an authorized representative. The State agencyshall not require the household to present verification in person at thefood stamp office. The State agency shall accept any reasonable documentaryevidence provided by the household and shall be primarily concerned withhow adequately the verification proves the statements on the application.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(8) <T3>Verification subsequent to initial certification. </T3>(i) <T3>Recertification</T3>_(A) At recertification the State agency shallverify a change in income or actual utility expenses if the source haschanged or the amount has changed by more than $25. Previously unreportedmedical expenses and total recurring medical expenses which have changedby more than $25 shall also be verified at recertification. The State agencyshall not verify income, total medical expenses, or actual utility expensesclaimed by households which are unchanged or have changed by $25 or less,unless the information is incomplete, inaccurate, inconsistent or outdated.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(C) Other information which has changed may be verified at recertification.Unchanged information shall not be verified unless the information is incomplete,inaccurate, inconsistent or outdated. * * * (ii) <T3>Changes. </T3>Changes reported during the certification period shallbe subject to the same verification procedures as apply at initial certification,except that the State agency shall not verify changes in income, totalmedical expenses or actual utility expenses which are unchanged or havechanged by $25 or less, unless the information is incomplete, inaccurate,inconsistent or outdated.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(h) <T3>Delays in processing. * * * </T3>(1) <T3>Determining cause. * * * </T3>(i) * * * (C) In cases where verification is incomplete, the State agency must haveprovided the household with a statement of required verification and offeredto assist the household in obtaining required verification and allowedthe household sufficient time to provide the missing verification. * ** <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(j) <T3>PA, GA and categorically eligible households. </T3>Households applyingfor public assistance (PA) shall be notified of their right to apply forfood stamp benefits at the same time and shall be allowed to apply forfood stamp benefits at the same time they apply for PA benefits. * * *Households in which all members are applying for State agency administeredGA benefits shall be allowed to apply for food stamps at the same timethey apply for GA benefits but shall not be considered catgorically eligiblefor food stamps. (1) <T3>Applicant PA households. </T3>(i) The application for PA shall containall the information necessary to determine a household's food stamp eligibilityand level of benefits. Information relevant only to food stamp eligibilityshall be contained in the PA form or shall be an attachment to it. Thejoint PA/food stamp application shall clearly indicate that the householdis providing information for both programs, is subject to the criminalpenalties of both programs for making false statements, waives the noticeof adverse action as specified by both programs for making false statements,and waives the notice of adverse action as specified in paragraph (j)(1)(iv)of this section. * * * <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(v) Households whose PA applications are denied shall not be required tofile new food stamp applications but shall have their food stamp eligibilitydetermined or continued on the basis of the original applications filedjointly for PA and food stamp purposes and any other documented informationobtained subsequent to the application which may have been used in thePA determination and which is relevant to food stamp eligibility or levelof benefits.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>9. In andSection;273.8:a. Paragraph (e)(5) is amended by adding one sentence to the end of theparagraph.b. Paragraph (h)(1)(i) is amended by replacing the semicolon with a periodand adding a new sentence to the end of the paragraph.The additions read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;273.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Resource eligibility standards.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e) <T3>Exclusions from resources. * * * </T3>(5) * * * Property essential to the self-employment of a household memberengaged in farming shall continue to be excluded for one year from thedate the household member terminates his/her self-employment from farming.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(h) <T3> Handling of licensed vehicles.</T3> * * * (1) * * * (i) * * * Licensed vehicles which have previously been used by a self-employedhousehold member engaged in farming but are no longer used over 50 percentof the time in farming because the household member has terminated his/herself-employment from farming shall continue to be excluded as a resourcefor one year from the date the household member terminated his/her self-employmentfrom farming;<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>10. In andSection;273.9, a new sentence is added between the first and secondsentences of paragraph (c)(1) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 273.9</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Income and deductions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) <T3>Income exclusions </T3>* * * (1) * * * In-kind or vendor payments which would normally be excluded asincome as specified in this section but are converted in whole or in partto a direct cash payment under the approval of a federally authorized demonstrationproject (including demonstration projects created by the waiver of provisionsof Federal law) shall also be excluded from income. * * * <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>11. In andSection;273.10:a. A new sentence is added between the second and third sentences of paragraph(d)(1)(i).b. The fourth sentence of paragraph (g)(1)(i)(A) and the first sentenceof paragraph (g)(1)(ii) are amended by adding the phrase, ``(a toll-freenumber or a number where collect calls will be accepted for householdsoutside the local calling area)'' after the phrase, ``the telephone numberof the food stamp office''.The addition reads as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;273.10</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Determining household eligibility and benefit levels.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) <T3>Determining deductions. </T3>* * * (1) <T3>Disallowed expenses.</T3> (i) * * * In addition, an expense which iscovered by an excluded vendor payment that has been converted to a directcash payment under the approval of a federally authorized demonstrationproject as specified under andSection;273.9(c)(1) shall not be deductible.* * * <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>12. In andSection;273.11, a new paragraph (a)(1)(v) is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;273.11</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Action on households with special circumstances.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Self-employment income. </T3>* * * (1) <T3>Annualizing self-employment income. </T3>* * * (v) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (i) through (iv) of thisparagraph, households subject to MRRB who derive their self-employmentincome from a farming operation and who incur irregular expenses to producesuch income shall have the option to annualize the allowable costs of producingself-employment income from farming when the self-employment farm incomeis annualized.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>13. In andSection;273.12:a. Paragraph (a)(1)(vi) is revised.b. Paragraph (b)(1)(ii) is amended by removing the word ``and'' followingthe semicolon.c. Paragraph (b)(1)(iii) is amended by replacing the period at the endof the sentence with a semicolon.d. Paragraph (b)(1) is amended by adding two new paragraphs (b)(1)(iv)and (b)(1)(v).The additions and revisions read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;273.12</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reporting changes.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Household responsibility to report.</T3>(1) * * * (vi) Changes greater than $25 in the total amount of allowable medicalexpenses.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) <T3>Report form.</T3>(1) * * * (iv) The number of the food stamp office and a toll-free number or a numberwhere collect calls will be accepted for households outside the local callingarea; and(v) A statement describing the changes in household circumstances containedin andSection;273.12(a)(1) that must be reported and a statement which clearlyinforms the household that it is required to report these changes.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>14. In andSection;273.13, paragraph (a)(2) is amended by replacing the phrase``the telephone number'' with the phrase, ``the telephone number of thefood stamp office (toll-free number or a number where collect calls willbe accepted for households outside the local calling area)''.15. In andSection;273.21:a. The introductory text of paragraph (c) and paragraph (c)(5) are revised.b. A new sentence is added to the end of paragraph (f)(2)(i).c. Paragraphs (h)(3)(i) and (h)(3)(ii) are amended by removing the word``medical,''.d. Paragraph (h)(3)(iii) is redesignated as paragraph (h)(4) and a newparagraph (h)(3)(iii) is added.e. Newly designated paragraph (h)(4) is amended by adding a heading afterthe designation of ``(4)'' to read, ``<T3>Combined form.</T3>''f. Paragraph (i)(1) is amended by adding the phrase ``changes in'' beforethe words ``utility expenses'' and by adding the phrase ``all allowablemedical expenses (unless the household elects the option of reporting changesof more than $25 in total allowable medical expenses),'' in place of thephrase, ``medical expenses,''.g. Paragraph (i)(3) is revised.h. Paragraph (j)(3)(iii)(B) is amended by adding the phrase ``a changein'' after the phrase, ``does not verify.''i. Paragraph (j)(3)(iii)(C) is revised, paragraph (j)(3)(iii)(D) is redesignatedas paragraph (j)(3)(iii)(E) and a new paragraph (j)(3)(iii)(D) is added.The additions and revisions read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;273.21</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Monthly Reporting and Retrospective Budgeting (MRRB).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) <T3>Information on MRRB.</T3> At the certification and recertificationinterview, the State agency shall provide the household with the following:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(5) A telephone number (toll-free number or a number where collect callswill be accepted outside the local calling area) which the household maycall to ask questions or to obtain help in completing the monthly report;and<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) <T3>Calculating allotments for households not suffering serious hardship.* * * </T3>(2) <T3>Income and deductions. * * * </T3>(i) * * * Except that, households which receive self-employment incomefrom a farm operation monthly but incur irregular expenses to produce suchself-employment farm income shall be given the option to annualize theself-employment farm income and expenses over a 12-month period.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(h) <T3>The monthly report form. * * * </T3>(3) <T3>Reporting information. * * * </T3>(iii) either all allowable medical expenses each month or changes of greaterthan $25 in total allowable medical expenses.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(i) <T3>Verification. * * * </T3>(3) The State agency may require the household to verify any other informationon the monthly report. However, the State agency shall not require thehousehold to verify such other information which has not changed sincethe last report unless the State agency believes the information is inaccurate,incomplete, outdated, or inconsistent with other casefile information.(j) <T3>State agency action on reports. * * * </T3>(3) <T3>Incomplete filing. * * * </T3>(iii) * * * (C) If the household which has elected to report allowable medical expensesmonthly does not verify its monthly allowable medical expenses, the Stateagency shall not allow a deduction.(D) If a household which has elected to report changes of greater than$25 in allowable medical expenses does not verify a reported change, theState agency shall not allow a deduction.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 274_ISSUANCE AND USE OF COUPONS</ITAG>15. In andSection;274.2, paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) are revised and a newparagraph (b)(4) is added.The addition and revisions read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;274.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Providing benefits to participants.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) <T3>Newly-certified households. * * * </T3>(2) <T3>Households certified under the normal processing timeframes.</T3> Householdswhich apply for initial months benefits (as described in andSection;273.10(a))during the last 15 days of the month who have completed the applicationand provided all required verification within 30 days of the date of application<T3>and</T3> have been determined eligible to receive benefits for theinitial month of application and the next subsequent month, shall receivetheir prorated allotment for the initial month of application and theirfirst full month's allotment at the same time. State agencies may opt toprovide both months' benefits in one combined allotment or as separateallotments so long as they are provided at the same time and within thetimeframe specified in andSection;273.2(g).(3) <T3>Households certified under the expedited service processing timeframes.</T3>Households which apply for initial benefits (as described in andSection;273.10(a))during the last 15 days of the month under the expedited service proceduresin andSection;273.2(i) who have completed the application and provided allrequired verification within the 5-day expedited service time limit <T3>and</T3> have been determined eligible to receive benefits for theinitial month of application and the next subsequent month, shall receivetheir prorated allotment for the initial month of application and theirfirst full month's allotment at the same time. State agencies may opt toprovide both months' benefits in one combined allotment or as separateallotments so long as they are provided at the same time and within thetimeframe specified in andSection;273.2(i).(4) <T3>Households not entitled to combined allotments.</T3> The provisionsof paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to householdsdetermined ineligible to receive benefits for the initial month of applicationor the next subsequent month or to households for which missing verificationor postponed verification have not been provided. Households eligible forexpedited service under andSection;273.2(i) may, however, receive benefitsfor the initial month under the verification standards set forth in andSection;273.2(i)(4).Additionally, in accordance with andSection;273.10(a)(iii)(C), benefits ofless than $10 shall not be issued under the provisions of paragraphs (b)(2)and (b)(3) of this section.<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 277_PAYMENTS OF CERTAIN ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF STATE AGENCIES</ITAG>16. In andSection;277.4, a new paragraph (f) is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;277.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Funding.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) The expenses (e.g. travel, lodging, meals) of persons working withthe organizations which receive training and assistance pursuant to andSection;272.4(d)(2)are not allowable.<ITAG tagnum="85">Appendix A to Part 277_[Amended]</ITAG>17. In appendix A to Part 277, under Standards for Selected Items of Cost,paragraph C.(14) is removed.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: May 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">G. Scott Dunn,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator, Food and Nutrition Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-13295 Filed 6-6-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-30-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>