<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89810-0084 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-10-89.f2.A1083</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Excepted Service; Consolidated Listing of Schedules A, B, and C Exceptions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Personnel Management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This gives a consolidated notice of all positions exceptedunder Schedules A, B, and C as of June 30, 1989, as required by Civil ServiceRule VI, Exceptions from the Competitive Service. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Civil Service Rule VI (5 CFR 6.1) requiresthe Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to publish notice of all exceptionsgranted under Schedules A, B, and C. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations,andSection;213.103(c) further requires that a consolidated listing, currentas of June 30 of each year, be published annually as a notice in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> That notice follows. OPM maintains continuinginformation on the status of all Schedule A, B, and C excepted appointingauthorities. Interested parties needing information about specific authoritiesduring the year may obtain information by contacting the Staffing OperationsDivision, Room 6A12, Office of Personnel Management, 1900 E Street, NW.,Washington, DC 20415, or by calling (202) 632-0728. The following exceptionswere current on June 30, 1989: <ITAG tagnum="84">Schedule A </ITAG>Section 213.3102 Entire Executive Civil Service (a) Positions of Chaplain and Chaplain's Assistant. (b) (Reserved). (c) Positions to which appointments are made by the President without confirmationby the Senate. (d) Attorneys. (e) Law clerk trainee positions. Appointments under this paragraph shallbe confined to graduates of recognized law schools or persons having equivalentexperience and shall be for periods not to exceed 14 months pending admissiointo the bar. No person shall be given more than one appointment under thisparagraph. However, an appointment which was initially made for less than14 months may be extended for not to exceed 14 months in total duration.(f) Chinese, Japanese, and Hindu interpreters. (g) Any nontemporary position the duties of which are part-time or intermittentin which the appointee will receive compensation during his or her serviceyear that aggregates not more than 40 percent of the annual salary ratefor the first step of grade GS-3. This limited compensation includes anypremium pay such as for overtime, night, Sunday, or holiday work. It doesnot, however, include any mandatory within-grade salary increases to whichthe employee becomes entitled subsequent to appointment under this authority.Appointments under this authority may not be for temporary project employment.(h) Positions in Federal mental institutions when filled by persons whohave been patients of such institutions and have been discharged and arecertified by an appropriate medical authority thereof as recovered sufficientlyto be regularly employed but it is believed desirable and in the interestof the persons and the institution that they be employed at the institution.(i) Subject to prior approval of OPM, positions requiring temporary, part-time,or intermittent employment in wage board type occupations (i.e., positionexcluded from Classification Act coverage by section 202(7) of the Act)on construction or repair work, where the activity is carried on in localitieswhere examination coverage for the positions has not been provided andwhere because of employment conditions there is a shortage of availablecandidates for the positions. Appointments under this paragraph shall notextend beyond 1 year and the employment thereunder shall not exceed 180working days a year. Seasonal employments of a recurring nature are notauthorized under this paragraph. (j) Positions filled by (1) appointment of persons previously employedas National Guard Technicians under 32 U.S.C. 709(a) in positions at thesame or equivalent grade level, or below, who are applying for or receivingan annuity under the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 8337(h) or 5 U.S.C. 8457 byreason of a disability that disqualifies them from membership in the NationalGuard or from holding the military grade required as a condition of theirNational Guard employment; or (2) reassignment, promotion, or demotionwithin the same agency of former National Guard Technicians originallyappointed under this authority. (k) Positions without compensation provided appointments thereto meet therequirements of applicable laws relating to compensation. (l) Positions requiring the temporary or intermittent employment of professional,scientific, or technical experts for consultation purposes. (m) Nonsupervisory positions of custodial laborer (levels 1, 2, and 3)and general laborer (levels 2 and 3) in field establishments outside centraloffice and regional office cities of OPM where examination coverage hasnot been provided for the positions, as follows: (1) For temporary, intermittent, or seasonal employment (exclusive of positionscovered by paragraph (1) of this section) not to exceed 180 working daysa year in the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, and Energy,in the Federal Aviation Agency, and in the International Boundary and WaterCommission; or (2) When it is specifically held by OPM that this authority is applicablefor employment in localities that are isolated with respect to labor supplyand where there is a shortage of available candidates for the positions.(n) Any local physician, surgeon, or dentist employed under contract oron a part-time or fee basis. (o) Positions of a scientific, professional, or analytical nature whenfilled by bona fide members of the faculty of an accredited college oruniversity who have special qualifications for the positions to which appointed.Employment under this provision shall not exceed 130 working days a year.(p) Positions of a scientific, professional, or analytical nature whenfilled by bona fide graduate students at accredited colleges or universitiesprovided that the work performed for the agency is to be used by the studentas a basis for completing certain academic requirements toward a graduatedegree. Appointments under this authority may not exceed 1 year, but maybe extended for additional period(s) not to exceed 1 year as long as theconditions for appointment continue to be met. The appointment of any individualunder this authority shall terminate upon the individual's completion ofrequirements for the graduate degree.(q) Positions at grade GS-7, or equivalent, and below when appointees areto assist scientific, professional, or technical employees. Persons employedunder this provision shall be (1) bona fide high school science or mathematicsteachers; or (2) bona fide students at high schools or accredited collegesor universities who are pursuing courses related to the field in whichemployed. The appointment of any individual under this authority shallterminate upon the individual's ceasing to be enrolled in a qualifyingeducational program or to be employed as a teacher. No one shall be employedunder this provision in routine clerical positions, routine trades andlabor positions_unless such employment clearly relates to a scientific,professional, or technical curriculum_or in excess of 1040 working hoursa year. Appointments under this authority may be made only to positionsfor which qualification standards established under 5 CFR Part 302 areconsistent with the education and experience standards established forcomparable positions in the competitive service. Appointments under thisauthority may not be used to extend the service limits contained in anyother appointing authority.(r)-(s) [Reserved].(t) Positions when filled by mentally retarded persons in accordance withthe guidance in Federal Personnel Manual chapter 306. Upon completion of2 years of satisfactory service under this authority, the employee mayqualify for conversion to competitive status under the provisions of ExecutiveOrder 12125 and implementing regulations issued by OPM.(u) Positions when filled by severely physically handicapped persons who:(1) Under a temporary appointment have demonstrated their ability to performthe duties satisfactorily; or (2) have been certified by counselors ofState vocational rehabilitation agencies or the Veterans Administrationas likely to succeed in the performance of the duties. Upon completionof 2 years of satisfactory service under this authority, the employee mayqualify for conversion to competitive status under the provisions of ExecutiveOrder 12125 and implementing regulations issued by OPM.(v) Between May 13 and September 30 only, temporary Summer-Aid positionsthe duties of which involve work of a routine nature not regularly coveredunder the General Schedule requiring no specific knowledge or skills, whenfilled by youths, either (1) appointed under economic needs standards prescribedby OPM; or (2) who are mentally retarded or severely physically handicapped.Youths may not be appointed unless they have reached their 16th birthday.This paragraph shall apply only to positions for which pay is fixed atthe highest Federal minimum wage rate established by the Fair Labor StandardsAct of 1938, as amended.(w) Part-time or intermittent positions, the duties of which involve routinework up to and including the GS-4 level of difficulty or equivalent underthe Federal Wage system, when filled by bona fide students appointed underthe Stay-in-School Program. Students may be appointed if they need theearnings from this employment to continue in school or if they are mentallyretarded or severely physically handicapped, provided that the followingconditions are met: (1) Appointees are enrolled in or accepted for enrollmentas a resident student in a secondary school (or other appropriate schoolfor mentally retarded students) or an institution of higher learning notabove the baccalaureate level, accredited by a recognized accrediting body;(2) Employment does not exceed 20 hours in any calendar week except thatstudents may work full time during any period in which their school isofficially closed and during any school vacation period.(3) While employed, appointees continue to maintain an acceptable schoolstanding, although they need not attend school during the summer;(4) Appointees meet the economic criteria prescribed by the Office of PersonnelManagement, except that this requirement does not apply to mentally retardedor severely physically handicapped students appointed under the authority;and(5) Salaries are fixed by the agency head at a level commensurate withthe duties assigned and the expected level of performance.Appointments under this authority may not extend beyond 1 year. However,such appointments may be made for additional periods of not to exceed 1year, each, if the conditions for initial appointment are still met. Studentsmay not be appointed under this authority unless they have reached their16th birthday. No new appointments may be made between May 13 and August31, inclusive.(x) Positions for which a local recruiting shortage exists when filledby inmates of Federal, District of Columbia, and State (including the Commonwealthof Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the TrustTerritory of the Pacific Islands) penal and correctional institutions underwork-release programs authorized by the Prisoner Rehabilitation Act of1965, the District of Columbia Work Release Act, or under work-releaseprograms authorized by the States. Initial appointments under this authoritymay not exceed 1 year. An initial appointment may be extended for one ormore periods not to exceed one additional year each upon a finding thatthe inmate is still in a work-release status and that a local recruitingshortage still exists. No person may serve under this authority longerthan 1 year beyond the date of that person's release from custody.(y) Positions at grade GS-2 and below for summer employment as definedin andSection; 213.3101(d), of assistants to scientific, professional, andtechnical employees, when filled by finalists in national science contests.(z) Not to exceed 30 positions of assistants to top-level Federal officialswhen filled by persons designated by the President as White House Fellows.(aa) Scientific and professional research associate positions at GS-11and above when filled on a temporary basis by persons having a doctoraldegree in an appropriate field of study for research activities of mutualinterest to appointees and their agencies. Appointments are limited topersons referred by the National Research Council under its post-doctoralresearch associate program, may not exceed 2 years, and are subject tosatisfactory outcome of evaluation of the associate's research during thefirst year.(bb) Positions when filled by aliens in the absence of qualified citizens.Appointments under this authority are subject to prior approval of OPMexcept when the authority is specifically included in a delegated examiningagreement with OPM.(cc) Positions at GS-15 and below when filled by persons identified asInterchange Executives by the President's Commission on Personnel Interchange.Apointments made under this authority may not extend beyond 2 years.(dd)-(ee) [Reserved](ff) Not to exceed 25 positions when filled in accordance with an agreementbetween OPM and the Department of Justice by persons in programs administeredby the Attorney General of the United States under Pub. L. 91-452 and relatedstatutes. A person appointed under this authority may continue to be employedunder it after he/she ceases to be in a qualifying program only as longas he/she remains in the same agency without a break in service.(gg)-(hh) [Reserved](ii) Positions of Presidential Intern, GS-9 and 11, in the PresidentialManagement Intern Program. Initial appointments must be made at the GS-9level. No one may serve under this authority for more than 2 years, unlessextended with OPM approval for up to one additional year. Upon completionof 2 years of satisfactory service under this authority, the employee mayqualify for conversion to competitive appointment under the provisionsof Executive Order 12364, in accordance with requirements published inthe Federal Personnel Manual.(jj) Legal intern positions. Appointments under this paragraph shall beconfined to bona fide students at recognized law schools who are candidatesfor J.D. or LL.B. degrees. Appointments under this authority may not exceed1 year, but may be extended for additional period(s) not to exceed 1 yearas long as the conditions for appointment continue to be met. The appointmentof any individual under this authority shall terminate upon the individual'sgraduation from law school.(kk) [Reserved](ll) Positions as needed of readers for blind employees, interpreters fordeaf employees and personal assistants for handicapped employees, filledon a full time, part-time, or intermittent basis.Section 213.3103 Executive Office of the President(a) <T3>Office of Administration.</T3> (1) Not to exceed 75 positions to provideadministrative services and support to the White House office.(b) <T3>Office of Management and Budget.</T3> (1) Not to exceed 10 positionsat grades GS-9/15.(c) <T3>Council on Environmental Quality.</T3> (1) Professional and technicalpositions in grades GS-13 through -15 on the staff of the Council.(d)-(f) [Reserved](g) <T3>National Security Council.</T3> (1) All positions on the staff of theCouncil.(h) <T3>Office of Science and Technology Policy.</T3> (1) Thirty positionsof Senior Policy Analyst, GS-15; Policy Analyst, GS-11/14; and Policy ResearchAssistant, GS-9, for employment of anyone not to exceed 5 years on projectsof a high priority nature.Section 213.3104 Department of State(a) <T3>Office of the Secretary.</T3> (1) All positions, GS-15 and below, onthe staff of the Family Liaison Office, Office of the Under Secretary forManagement.(2)-(5) [Reserved](b) <T3>American Embassy, Paris, France.</T3> (1) Chief, Travel and VisitorUnit. No new appointments may be made under this authority after August10, 1981.(c) (Reserved)(d) <T3>International Boundary Commission, United States and Canada.</T3> (1)Temporary and intermittent field employees such as instrumentmen, foremen,recorders, packers, cooks, and axemen, for not to exceed 180 working dayswithin any one calendar year.(e) <T3>Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs.</T3>(1) Two Physical Science Administration Officer positions at GS-16.(f) [Reserved](g) <T3>Office of Refugee and Migration Affairs. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 10positions at grades GS-5 through 11 on the staff of the office. (h) <T3>Bureau of Administration. </T3>(1) One Presidential Trip Specialist.No new appointments may be made under this authority after June 11, 1981.Section 213.3105 Department of the Treasury (a) <T3>Office of the Secretary. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 20 positions at theequivalent of GS-13 through GS-17 to supplement permanent staff in thestudy of complex problems relating to international financial, economic,trade, and energy policies and programs of the Government, when filledby individuals with special qualifications for the particular study beingundertaken. Employment under this authority may not exceed 4 years. (2) Not to exceed 20 positions, which will supplement permanent staff involvedin the study and analysis of complex problems in the area of domestic economicand financial policy. Employment under this authority may not exceed 4years. (b) <T3>U.S. Customs Service. </T3>(1) Positions in foreign countries designatedas ``interpreter-translator'' and ``special employees,'' when filled byappointment of persons who are not citizens of the United States; and positionsin foreign countries of messenger and janitor. (2) [Reserved] (3) Positions of part-time, intermittent, or temporary Customs Inspectors,and Port Directors in Alaska paid at a rate not above GS-9 and for notmore than 130 working days in a service year. (4) [Reserved] (5) Positions at GS-9 and below of Customs Enforcement Officer, CustomsInspector, Customs Marine Clerk/Officer, Customs Aid (sampling), CustomsWarehouse Officer, Port Director, Interpreter, and Laborer, with dutiesof a continuing nature that require the part-time or intermittent serviceof an employee for not more than 700 hours in his/her service year. Anindividual appointed under this exception may not be employed in the Bureauof Customs under a combination of this and any other exception for morethan 700 hours in his/her service year. (6) Twenty-five positions of Criminal Investigator for special assignments.(7)-(8) [Reserved] (9) Not to exceed 25 positions of Customs Patrol Officers in the PapagoIndian Agency in the state of Arizona when filled by the appointment ofpersons of one-fourth or more Indian blood. (c) <T3>Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. </T3>(1) Not to exceed sixpositions filled under the Professional Accounting Fellow Program. Appointmentsunder this authority may not exceed 2 years. (d) [Reserved]  (3) <T3>Internal Revenue Service. </T3>Twenty positions of investigator forspecial assignments. (2) Two positions of Senior Visiting Pension Actuary, GS-1510-14/15. Appointmentsto these positions must be for periods not to exceed 24 months. (f) [Reserved] (g) <T3>Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. </T3>(1) One hundred positionsof criminal investigator for special assignments. (h) [Reserved] (i) <T3>Bureau of Government Financial Operations. </T3>(1) Clerical positionsat grades GS-5 and below established in Emergency Disbursing Offices toprocess emergency payments to victims of catastrophes or natural disastersrequiring emergency disbursing services. Employment under this authoritymay not exceed 1 year. Section 213.3106 Department of Defense (a) <T3>Office of the Secretary. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 30 positions at gradesGS-6/15 in the Defense Mobilization Systems Planning Activity, Office ofthe Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Mobilization Planning and Requirements.)No new appointments may be made under this authority after March 31, 1993.(2)-(5) [Reserved] (6) One Executive Secretary, US-USSR Standing Consultative Commission andStaff Analyst (SALT), Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (InternationalSecurity Affairs). (b) <T3>Entire Department (including the Office of the Secretary of Defenseand the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force). </T3>(1) Professionalpositions in Military Dependent Schools Systems overseas.(2) Positions in attache 1 systems overseas, including all professionaland scientific positions in the Naval Research Branch Office in London.(3) Positions of clerk-translator, translator, and interpreter overseas.(4) Positions of Educational Specialist the incumbents of which will serveas Director of Religious Education on the Staffs of the Chaplains in themilitary services.(5) Positions under the program for utilization of alien scientists approvedunder pertinent directives administered by the Director of Defense Researchand Engineering of the Department of Defense when occupied by alien scientistsinitially employed under the program including those who have acquiredUnited States citizenship during such employment.(6) Positions in overseas installations of the Department of Defense whenfilled by dependents of military or civilian employees of the U.S. Governmentresiding in the area. Employment under this authority may not extend longerthan 2 months following the transfer from the area or the separation ofa dependent's sponsor: <T3>Provided, </T3>That (i) a school employee may be permitted to completethe school year; and (ii) an employee other than a school employee maybe permitted to serve up to one additional year when the military departmentconcerned finds that the additional employment is in the interest of management.(7) Fifteen secretarial and staff support positions at GS-12 or below onthe White House Support Group.(8) Positions in DOD research and development activities occupied by participantsin the DOD Science and Engineering Apprenticeship Program for High SchoolStudents. Persons employed under this authority shall be bona fide highschool students, at least 14 years old, pursuing courses related to theposition occupied and limited to 1040 working hours a year. Children ofDOD employees may be appointed to these positions, notwithstanding thesons and daughters restriction, if the positions are in the field activitiesat remote locations. Appointments under this authority may be made onlyto positions for which qualification standards established under 5 CFRPart 302 are consistent with the education and experience standards establishedfor comparable positions in the competitive service. Appointments underthis authority may not be used to extend the service limits contained inany other appointing authority.(c) <T3>Defense Contract Audit Agency.</T3> (1) Not to exceed two positionsof Accounting Fellow, Auditor, GM-511-14, filled under the Accounting FellowshipProgram. Appointments under this authority may not exceed 2 years.(d) <T3>General. </T3>(1) Positions concerned with advising, administering,supervising or performing work in the collection, processing, analysis,production, evaluation, interpretation, dissemination, and estimation ofintelligence information, including scientific and technical positionsin the intelligence function; and positions involved in the planning, programming,and management of intelligence resources when, in the opinion of OPM, itis impracticable to examine. This authority does not apply to positionsassigned to cryptologic and communications intelligence activities/functions.(2) Positions involved in intelligence-related work of the cryptologicintelligence activities of the military departments. This includes allpositions of intelligence research specialist, and similar positions inthe intelligence classification series; all scientific and technical positionsinvolving the applications of engineering, physical or technical sciencesto intelligence work; and professional as well as intelligence technicianpositions in which a majority of the incumbent's time is spent in advising,administering, supervising, or performing work in the collection, processing,analysis, production, evaluation, interpretation, dissemination, or estimationof intelligence information or in the planning, programming, and managementof intelligence resources.(e) <T3>Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.</T3> (1) Positionsof Dean, Associate Dean, Assistant Dean, faculty members, postdoctoralfellows, research associates, senior research associates, and visting scientists.(2) Positions established to perform work on projects funded from grants.(f) <T3>National Defense University. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 16 positions ofsenior policy analyst, GS-15, at the strategic Concepts Development Center.Initial appointments to these positions may not exceed 6 years, but maybe extended thereafter in 1-, 2-, or 3-year increments, indefinitely. (g) <T3>Defense Communications Agency. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 10 positionsat grades GS-10/15 to staff and support the Crisis Management Center atthe White House. (h) <T3>Defense Systems Management College, Fort Belvoir, VA. </T3>(1) The Provost and professors in grades GS-13 through 15. Section 213.3107 Department of the Army (a) <T3>General. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 30 positions on the faculty and staffwhich are classified in the GS-1700 occupational group and the GS-1410Librarian series, located at the U.S. Army Russian Institute, Garmisch,Germany, and the U.S. Army Foreign Language Training Center Europe, Munich,Germany.(b) <T3>Aviation Systems Command. </T3>(1) One scientific and professionalresearch position in the U.S. Army Research and Technology Laboratories,the duties of which require specific knowledge of aviation technology innon-allied nations. (c) <T3>Corps of Engineers. </T3>(1) [Reserved] (2) Nonsupervisory trades, crafts, and manual labor positions at gradesWG-6 and below on survey, construction, short-term maintenance, or floating-plantoperations, where because of turnover, lack of housing facilities, mobilityof work site, or remoteness of personnel servicing facilities, an adequatelabor force can be recruited only by immediate gate hiring on a local basis.This authority can be used only when OPM has determined that it is specificallyapplicable to a given situation; ordinarily, it will not be used for employmentin OPM central office, regional, and branch office cities or in citieswhere there is a local OPM area office to service the employing establishment.(d) <T3>U.S. Miltary Academy, West Point, New York. </T3>(1) Civilian professors,instructors, teachers (except teachers at the Children's School), CadetSocial Activities Coordinator, chapel organist and choir-master, Directorof Intercollegiate Athletics, Associate Director of Intercollegiate Athletics,Facility Manager, Building Manager, three Physical Therapists (AthleticTrainers), Associate Director of Admissions for Plans and Programs, DeputyDirector of Alumni Affairs; and librarian when filled by an officer ofthe Regular Army retired from active service, and the military secretaryto the Superintendent when filled by a U.S. Military Academy graduate retiredas a regular commissioned officer for disability. (e) <T3>U.S. Army School of the Americas, Fort Benning, Georgia. </T3>(1) Positionsof Translator (Typing), GS-1040-5/9, and Supervisory Translator, GS-1040-11.No new appointments may be made under this authority after December 31,1985. (f) <T3>Central Identification Laboratory. </T3>(1) One position of ScientificDirector, GM-190-15, and four positions of Forensic Scientists, GM-190-14.Initial appointment to these positions is NTE 3-5 years, with provisionfor indefinite numbers of renewals in 1-, 2-, or 3-year increments. (g) <T3>Defense Language Institute. </T3>(1) All positions on the faculty andstaff which are classified in the GS-1700 occupational group, the GS-1040Language Specialist series, and the GS-303 Bilingual Clerk series, thatrequire either a proficiency in a foreign language or a knowledge of foreignlanguage teaching methods. (h) <T3>Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, Pa. </T3>(1) Five positions ofEducational Specialist for employment of not to exceed 1 year: <T3>Provided, </T3>That such employment may, with the prior approval ofOPM, be extended for not to exceed one additional year. (2) Nine senior policy analyst positions, GS-14/15, at the Strategic StudiesInstitute, Army War College, with appointments to be made initially forup to 3 years and thereafter extended annually if needed. (3) Five research oriented faculty positions, GS-14/15, with the U.S. ArmyWar College, at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania, with appointments to bemade initially for up to 3 years and thereafter extended annually if needed.(i) [Reserved](j) <T3>U.S. Military Academy Preparatory School, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.</T3>(1) Positions of Academic Director, Department Head and Instructor.Section 213.2108 Department of the Navy (a) <T3>General. </T3>(1) [Reserved] (2) Positions of Student Pharmacist for temporary, part-time, or intermittentemployment in U.S. naval regional medical centers, hospitals, clinics anddepartments when filled by students who are enrolled in an approved pharmacyprogram in a participating non-Federal institution, and whose compensationis fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. Employment under this authority may notexceed one year. (3) [Reserved](4) Not to exceed 50 positions of resident-in-training at U.S. naval regionalmedical centers, hospitals, and dispensaries which have residency trainingprograms, when filled by residents assigned as affiliates for part of theirtraining from non-Federal hospitals. Assignments shall be on a temporary(full-time or part-time) or intermittent basis, shall not amount to morethan 6 months for any person, and shall be applied only to persons whosecompensation is fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. (5) [Reserved] (6) Positions of Student Operating Room Technician for temporary, part-timeor intermittent employment in U.S. naval regional medical centers and hospitals,when filled by students who are enrolled in an approved operating roomtechnician program in a participating non-Federal institution, whose compensationis fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. Employment under this authority may notexceed 1 year. (7) Positions of student social worker for temporary, part-time, or intermittentemployment in U.S. naval regional medical centers, hospitals, and dispensaries,when filled by bona fide students enrolled in academic institutions: <T3>Provided, </T3>That the work performed in the agency is to be usedby the student as a basis for completing certain academic requirementsby such educational institution to qualify for a graduate degree in socialwork. This authority shall be applied only to students whose compensationis fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. (8) Positions of student practical nurse for temporary, part-time, or intermittentemployment in U.S. naval regional medical centers, hospitals, and dispensaries,when filled by trainees enrolled in a non-Federal institution in an approvedprogram of educational and clinical training which meets the requirementsfor licensing as a practical nurse. This authority shall be applied onlyto trainees whose compensation is fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. (9) [Reserved] (10) Positions of medical technology intern in U.S. naval regional medicalcenters, hospitals, and dispensaries, when filled by students enrolledin approved programs of training in non-Federal institutions. Employmentunder this authority may be filled on a full-time, part-time, or intermittentbasis but may not exceed 1 year. This authority shall be applied only tostudents whose compensation is fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54.  (11) Positions of medical intern at U.S. naval regional medical centers,hospitals, and dispensaries, when filled by persons who are serving medicalinternships at participating non-Federal hospitals and whose compensationis fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. Employment under this authority may notexceed 1 year.(12) Positions of student speech pathologist at U.S. naval regional medicalcenters, hospitals, and dispensaries, when filled by persons who are enrolledin participating non-Federal institutions and whose compensation is fixedunder 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. Employment under this authority may not exceed1 year.(13) Positions of student dental assistant in U.S. naval dental centers,clinics, and departments, when filled by students who are enrolled in anapproved dental assistant program in a participating non-Federal institution,and whose compensation is fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-54. Employment underthis authority may not exceed 1 year.(14) [Reserved](15) Marine positions assigned to a coastal or seagoing vessel operatedby a naval activity for research or training purposes.(16) All positions necessary for the administration and maintenance ofthe official residence of the Vice President.(b) <T3>Naval Academy, Naval Postgraduate School, and Naval War College.</T3>(1) Professors, instructors, and teachers; the Director of Academic Planning,Naval Postgraduate School; and the librarian, organist-choirmaster, registrar,the dean of admissions, and social counselors at the Naval Academy.(c) <T3>Chief of Naval Operations. </T3>(1) One position at grade GS-12 orabove that will provide technical, managerial, or administrative supporton highly classified functions to the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations(Plans, Policy, and Operations).(d) <T3>Military Sealift Command. </T3>(1) All positions on vessels operatedby the Military Sealift Command.(e) <T3>Pacific Missile Range Facility, Barking Sands, Hawaii. </T3>(1) Allpositions. This authority applies only to positions that must be filledpending final decision on contracting of Facility operations. No new appointmentsmay be made under this authority after July 29, 1988.(f) [Reserved](g) <T3>Office of Naval Research.</T3> (1) Not to exceed five positions ofLiaison Scientists, GS-13/15, in the Naval Research Branch Office in Japan,when filled by research scientists who have specialized experience in scientificdisciplines of current interest to the Department and who have a demonstratedability to deal with the Japanese scientific community in their disciplines.An appointment under this authority may be made initially for a periodnot to exceed 2 years. With the prior approval of OPM, total employmentunder this authority may be for as long as 3 years.Section 213.3109 Department of the Air Force(a) <T3>Office of the Secretary. </T3>(1) One Special Assistant in the Officeof the Secretary of the Air Force. This position has advisory rather thanoperating duties except as operating or administrative responsibilitiesmay be exercised in connection with the pilot studies.(b) <T3>General.</T3> (1) Professional, technical, managerial and administrativepositions supporting space activities, when approved by the Secretary ofthe Air Force.(2) Sixty-five positions engaged in interdepartmental defense projectsinvolving scientific and technical evaluations.(c) Not to exceed 20 professional positions, GS-11 through GS-15, in Detachments6 and 51, SM-ALC, Norton and McClellan Air Force Bases, California, whichwill provide logistic support management to specialized research and developmentprojects.(d) <T3>U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado.</T3> (1) Positions of Cadet Hostesses,Instructors in Physical Education, Instructors in Music (choirmasters),one Training Instructor (Parachuting), one Training Instructor (Code ofConduct and Evasion), and two Physical Therapists (Athletic Trainers).(e) Not to exceed five positions, GS-12 through GS-15, in the SpecializedManagement Office (WR-ALC/QL) at Robins Air Force Base, Georgia, whichwill provide logistic support management staff guidance for highly sensitiveand high priority programs and projects. Employment under this authorityis not to exceed May 30, 1988.(c) <T3>Drug Enforcement Administration. </T3>(1) [Reserved] (2) One hundred and fifty positions of Intelligence Research Agent and/orIntelligence Operation Specialist in the GS-132 series, grades GS-9 through GS-15.(3) Not to exceed 200 positions of Criminal Investigator (Special Agent).New appointments may be made under this authority only at grades GS-7/11Section 213.3112 Department of the Interior(a) <T3>General.</T3> (1) Technical, maintenance, and clerical positions ator below grades GS-7, WG-10, or equivalent in the field service of theDepartment of the Interior, when filled by the appointment of persons whoare certified as maintaining a permanent and exclusive residence within,or contiguous to, a field activity or district, and as being dependentfor livelihood primarily upon employment available within the field activityof the Department.(2) All positions on Government-  owned ships or vessels operated by theDepartment of the Interior.(3) Temporary or seasonal caretakers at temporarily closed camps or improvedareas to maintain grounds, buildings, or other structures and prevent damagesor theft of Government property. Such appointments shall not extend beyond130 working days a year without the prior approval of OPM.(4) Temporary, intermittent, or seasonal field assistants at GS-7, or itsequivalent, and below in such areas as forestry, range management, soils,engineering, fishery and wildlife management, and with surveying parties.Employment under this authority may not exceed 180 working days a year.(5) Temporary positions established in the field service of the Departmentfor emergency forest and range fire prevention or suppression and blisterrust control for not to exceed 180 working days a year: <T3>Provided, </T3>That an employee may work as many as 220 working daysa year when employment beyond 180 days is required to cope with extendedfire seasons or sudden emergencies such as fire, flood, storm, or otherunforeseen situations involving potential loss of life or property.(6) Persons employed in field positions, the work of which is financedjointly by the Department of the Interior and cooperating persons or organizationsoutside the Federal service.(7) All positions in the Bureau of Indian Affairs and other positions inthe Department of the Interior directly and primarily related to providingservices to Indians when filled by the appointment of Indians. The Secretaryof the Interior is responsible for defining the term ``Indian.''(8) Temporary, intermittent, or seasonal positions at GS-7 or below inAlaska, as follows: Positions in non-professional mining activities, suchas those of drillers, miners, caterpillar operators, and samplers. Employmentunder this authority shall not exceed 180 working days a year and shallbe appropriate only when the activity is carried on in a remote or isolatedarea and there is a shortage of available candidates for the positions.(9) Temporary, part-time, or intermittent employment of mechanics, skilledlaborers, equipment operators and tradesmen on construction, repair, ormaintenance work not to exceed 180 working days a year in Alaska, whenthe activity is carried on in a remote or isolated area and there is ashortage of available candidates for the positions.(10) Seasonal airplane pilots and airplane mechanics in Alaska, not toexceed 180 working days a year.(11) Temporary staff positions in the Youth Conservation Corps Centersoperated by the Department of the Interior. Employment under this authorityshall not exceed 11 weeks a year except with prior approval of OPM.(12) Positions in the Youth Conservation Corps for which pay is fixed atthe Federal minimum rate. Employment under this authority may not exceed10 weeks.(b) [Reserved](c) <T3>Indian Arts and Crafts Board. </T3>(1) The Executive Director.(d) [Reserved](e) <T3>Office of the Assistant Secretary, Territorial and International Affairs.</T3>(1) [Reserved](2) Not to exceed four positions of Territorial Management Interns, gradesGS-5, GS-7, or GS-9, when filled by territorial residents who are U.S.citizens from the Virgin Islands or Guam; U.S. nationals from AmericanSamoa; or in the case of the Northern Marianas, will become U.S. citizensupon termination of the U.S. trusteeship. Employment under this authoritymay not exceed 6 months.(3) [Reserved](4) Special Assistants to the Governor of American Samoa who perform specializedadministrative, professional, technical, and scientific duties as membersof his or her immediate staff.(f) <T3>National Park Service.</T3> (1) Park Ranger positions (appropriatespecializations) at salaries equivalent to GS-2 through GS-5 to performpractical and technical work supporting the management of Park Serviceareas and resources in the functional areas of interpretation, resourcesmanagement, visitor protection, and visitor services; and positions atsalaries equivalent to grades GS-6 and GS-7 in which the duties are supervisoryor consist of highly specialized technical work in support of NationalPark Service operations in the functional areas delineated above. The totalnumber of Park Ranger and Park Technician positions at salaries equivalentto GS-6 and GS-7 excepted under this paragraph shall not exceed 200. Employmentunder this paragraph is limited to persons who meet the qualification standardsfor each salary level which have been agreed upon by OPM and the Department.These standards include as a minimum the following number of previous seasons'experience at a salary equivalent to the next lower grade or equivalentexperience, in a Federal, State, or local park:(i) For IGS-7: Two seasons at IGS-6 level in the National Park Service.(ii) For IGS-6: Two seasons at IGS-5 level in the National Park Service.(iii) For IGS-5: One season at IGS-4 level or its equivalent in experience.(iv) For IGS-4: One season at IGS-3 level or its equivalent in experience.(v) For IGS-3: One season at IGS-2 level or its equivalent in experience.Employment under this paragraph shall be only for duty that is temporary,intermittent, or seasonal, and no person shall be employed by the sameappointing office in the National Park Service under this paragraph ora combination of this and any other excepting authorities in excess of180 working days a year.(2) [Reserved](3) Seven full-time permanent and 31 temporary, part-time, or intermittentpositions in the Redwood National Park, California, which are needed forrehabilitation of the park, as provided by Public Law 95-250.(4) One Special Representative of the Director.(g) <T3>Bureau of Reclamation</T3>. (1) Appraisers and examiners employed ona temporary, intermittent, or part-time basis on special valuation or prospective-entrymen-reviewprojects where knowledge of local values or conditions or other specializedqualifications not possessed by regular Bureau employees are required forsuccessful results. Employment under this provision shall not exceed 130working days a year in any individual case: <T3>Provided</T3>, That such employment may, with prior approval of OPM,be extended for not to exceed an additional 50 working days in any singleyear.(h) <T3>Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Territorial Affairs</T3>.(1) Positions of Territorial Management Interns, GS-5, when filled by personsselected by the Government of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.No appointment may extend beyond 1 year.Section 213.3113 Department of Agriculture(a) <T3>General</T3>. (1) Agents employed in field positions the work of whichis financed jointly by the Department and cooperating persons, organizations,or governmental agencies outside the Federal service. Except for positionsfor which selection is jointly made by the Department and the cooperatingorganization, this authority is not applicable to positions in the AgriculturalResearch Service or the Statistical Reporting Service. This authority isnot applicable to the following positions in the Agricultural MarketingService: Agricultural Commodity grader (grain) and (meat), (poultry), and(dairy) agricultural commodity aid (grain), and tobacco inspection positions.(2)-(4) [Reserved](5) Temporary, intermittent, or seasonal employment in the field serviceof the Department in positions at and below GS-7 and WG-10 in the followingtypes of positions; Field assistants for subprofessional services; caretakersat temporarily closed camps or improved areas; forest workers engaged primarilyfor fire prevention or suppression activities and other forest workersemployed at headquarters other than forest supervisor and regional offices;State performance assistants in the Agricultural Stabilization and ConservationService; agricultural helpers, helper-leaders, and workers in the AgriculturalResearch Service and the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, andsubject to prior OPM approval granted in the calendar year in which theappointment is to be made, other clerical, trades, crafts, and manual laborpositions. Total employment under this subparagraph may not exceed 180working days in a service year: <T3>Provided</T3>, That an employee may work as many as 220 working daysin a service year when employment beyond 180 days is required to cope withextended fire seasons or sudden emergencies such as fire, flood, storm,or other unforeseen situations involving potential loss of life or property.This paragraph does not cover trades, crafts, and manual labor positionscovered by paragraphs (i) and (m) of andSection; 213.3102.(6) [Reserved](7) Not to exceed 34 Program Assistants, whose experience acquired in positionsexcepted from the competitive civil service in the administration of agriculturalprograms at the State level is needed by the Department for the more efficientadministration of its programs. No new appointment may be made under thisauthority after December 31, 1985.(b) [Reserved](c) <T3>Forest Service</T3>. (1) [Reserved](2) Positions in Alaska of Laborers, Boat Operations, Mechanics, EquipmentOperators, and Carpenters whose duties require the operation of boats incoastal waters and/or the establishment and maintenance of work camps inremote areas.(d) <T3>Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service</T3>.(1) Not to exceed 34 positions of Agricultural Program Specialist, GS-1145-7/12,engaged in conversion of ASCS' directives and information system to a completelyautomated format. Appointments to these positions may be made initiallyat the GS-7/11 levels and may not exceed September 30, 1989.(2) Members of State Committees: <T3>Provided</T3>, That employment under this authority shall be limitedto temporary intermittent (WAE) positions whose principal duties involveadministering farm programs within the State consistent with legislativeand Departmental requirements and reviewing national procedures and policiesfor adaptation at State and local levels within established parameters.Individual appointments under this authority are for 1 year and may beextended only by the Secretary of Agriculture or his designee. Membersof State Committees serve at the pleasure of the Secretary.(e) <T3>Farmers Home Administration. </T3>(1) [Reserved](2) County committeemen to consider, recommend, and advise with respectto the Farmers Home Administration program.(3) Temporary positions whose principal duties involve the making and servicingof natural disaster emergency loans pursuant to current statutes authorizingnatural disaster emergency loans. Appointments under this provision shallnot exceed 1 year unless extended for one additional period not to exceed1 year, but may, with prior approval of OPM, be further extended for additionalperiods not to exceed 1 year each.(4)-(5) [Reserved](6) Professional and clerical positions in the Trust Territory of the PacificIslands when occupied by indigenous residents of the Territory to providefinancial assistance pursuant to current authorizing statutes.(f) <T3>Agricultural Marketing Service. </T3>(1) Positions of: AgriculturalCommodity Graders, Agricultural Commodity Technicians, and AgriculturalCommodity Aids at grades GS-9 and below in the tobacco, dairy, and poultrycommodities; Meat Acceptance Specialists at grades GS-11 and below; Clerks,Clerk-Typists, and Computer Clerks at grades GS-4 and below; and Laborersunder the Wage System. Employment under this authority is limited to either1280 hours or 180 days in a service year.(2) Positions of Agricultural Commodity Graders, Agricultural CommodityTechnicians, and Agricultural Commodity Aids at grades GS-11 and belowin the cotton, raisin, and processed fruit and vegetable commodities. Employmentunder this authority may not exceed 180 days in a service year. In unforeseensituations such as bad weather or crop conditions, unanticipated plantdemands, or increased imports, employees may work up to 240 days in a serviceyear. Cotton Agricultural Commodity Graders, GS-5, may be employed as traineesfor the first appointment for an initial period of 6 months for trainingwithout regard to the service year limitation.(3) Milk Market Administrators.(4) All positions on the staffs of Milk Market Administrators.(g)-(i) [Reserved](j) <T3>Food and Nutrition Service. </T3>(1) [Reserved](2) Three hundred fifty positions of food assistance program specialist,GS-5/7, under the Child Nutrition Summer Feeding Program, for temporaryemployment not to begin before March 1 and not to exceed September 30 ofeach year, on a full-time, part-time, or intermittent basis.(k) [Reserved](l) <T3>Food Safety and Inspection Service. </T3>(1)-(2) [Reserved].(3) Positions of meat and poultry inspectors (veterinarians at GS-11 andbelow and nonveterinarians at appropriate grades below GS-11) for employmenton a temporary, intermittent, or seasonal basis, not to exceed 1,280 hoursa year.(m) <T3>Federal Grain Inspection Service. </T3>(1) One hundred and fifty positionsof Agricultural Commodity Aid (Grain), GS-2/4; 100 positions of AgriculturalCommodity Technician (Grain), GS-4/7; and 60 positions of AgriculturalCommodity Grader (Grain), GS-5/9, for temporary employment on a part-time,intermittent, or seasonal basis not to exceed 1,280 hours in a serviceyear.Section 213.3114 Department of Commerce(a) <T3>General. </T3>(1)-(2) [Reserved](3) Not to exceed 50 scientific and technical positions whose duties areperformed primarily in the Antarctic. Incumbents of these positions maybe stationed in the continental United States for periods of orientation,training, analysis of data, and report writing.(b) <T3>Office of the Secretary. </T3>(1) One position of Administrative Assistant,GS-301-8, in the Office of Economic Affairs. New appointments may not bemade after March 30, 1979.(c) [Reserved](d) <T3>Bureau of the Census. </T3>(1) Managers, supervisors, technicians,clerks, interviewers, and enumerators in the field service, for (1) temporary,part-time or intermittent employment in connection with major economicand demographic censuses or with surveys of a nonrecurring or noncyclicalnature; and (2) indefinite employment for the duration of each decennialcensus for key employees located at the Master District Offices (MDO) andProcessing Offices (PO): <T3>Provided, </T3>That temporary, part-time employment of the nature describedin (1) above will be for periods not to exceed 1 year; and that such appointmentsmay be extended for additional periods of not to exceed 1 year each; butthat prior Office approval is required for extension of total service beyond2 years.(2) Current Program Interviewers employed on an intermittent or part-timebasis in the field service.(3) Not to exceed 20 professional and scientific positions at grades GS-9through GS-12 filled by participants in the ASA research trainee program.Employment of any individual under this authority may not exceed 2 years.(e)-(h) [Reserved](i) <T3>Office of the Under Secretary for International Trade. </T3>(1) Thirtypositions at GS-12 and above in specialized fields relating to internationaltrade or commerce in units under the jurisdiction of the Under Secretaryfor International Trade. Incumbents will be assigned to advisory ratherthan to operating duties, except as operating and administrative responsibilitymay be required for the conduct of pilot studies or special projects. Employmentunder this authority will not exceed 2 years for an individual appointee.(2) Not to exceed 40 positions of Managers and Deputy Managers of InternationalTrade Fairs and Exhibit Programs in foreign countries when the duties requirea considerable portion of the employee's time to be spent in foreign countries.(3) Not to exceed 30 positions in grades GS-12 through GS-15, to be filledby persons qualified as industrial or marketing specialists; who possessspecialized knowledge and experience in industrial production, industrialoperations and related problems, market structure and trends, retail andwholesale trade practices, distribution channels and costs, or businessfinancing and credit practices applicable to one or more of the currentsegments of U.S. industry served by the Under Secretary for InternationalTrade, and the subordinate components of his organization which are involvedin Domestic Business matters. Appointments under this authority may bemade for a period of not to exceed 2 years and may, with prior approvalof OPM, be extended for an additional period of 2 years.(j) <T3>National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. </T3>(1) Subject toprior approval of OPM, which shall be contingent upon a showing of inadequatehousing facilities, meteorological aid positions at the following stationsin Alaska: Barrow, Bethal, Kotzebue, McGrath, Northway, and St. Paul Island.(2) [Reserved](3) All civilian positions on vessels operated by the National Ocean Survey.(4) Temporary positions required in connection with the surveying operationsof the field service of the National Ocean Survey. Appointment to suchpositions shall not exceed 8 months in any one calendar year.(5) Field positions, GS-9 and below, in the National Marine Fisheries Serviceconducting fish and processed fish products inspection, funded by the privatesector. New appointments under this authority may not be made after July1, 1990.(k) [Reserved](l) <T3>National Telecommunication and Information Administration. </T3>(1)Seventeen professional positions in grades GS-13 through GS-15.Section 213.3115 Department of Labor(a) <T3>Office of the Secretary. </T3>(1) Chairman and five members, Employees'Compensation Appeals Board.(2) Chairman and eight members, Benefits Review Board.(b) <T3>Bureau of Labor Statistics. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 500 positions involvingpart-time and intermittent employment for field survey and enumerationwork in the Bureau of Labor Statistics. This authority is applicable topositions where the salary is equivalent to GS-6 and below. Employmentunder this authority may not exceed 1,600 work hours in a service year.No new appointment may be made under this authority after December 31,1984.(c) [Reserved](d) <T3>Employment and Training Administration. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 10 positionsof supervisory manpower development specialist and manpower developmentspecialist, GS-7/15, in the Division of Indian and Native American Programs,when filled by the appointment of persons of one-fourth or more Indianblood. These positions require direct contact with Indian tribes and communitiesfor the development and administration of comprehensive employment andtraining programs.Section 213.3116 Department of Health and Human Services(a) [Reserved](b) <T3>Public Health Service. </T3>(1) Not to exceed five positions a yearof Medical Technologist Resident, GS-644-7, in the Blood Bank Department,Clinical Center, of the National Institutes of Health. Appointments underthis authority will not exceed 1 year.(2) Positions at Government sanatoria when filled by patients during treatmentor convalescence.(3) All positions in the Public Health Service Hospital, Carville, La.(4) Positions concerned with problems in preventive medicine financed orparticipated in by the Department of Health and Human Services and a cooperatingState, county, municipality, incorporated organization, or an individualin which at least one-half of the expense is contributed by the cooperatingagency either in salaries, quarters, materials, equipment, or other necessaryelements in the carrying on of the work.(5) Medical and dental interns, externs, and residents; and student nurses.(6) Positions of scientific, professional, or technical nature when filledby bona fide students enrolled in academic institutions: <T3>Provided,</T3> That the work performed in the agency is to be usedby the student as a basis for completing certain academic requirementsrequired by an educational institution to qualify for a scientific, professional,or technical field. This authority shall be applied only to positions withcompensation fixed under 5 U.S.C. 5351-5356.(7) Not to exceed 50 positions associated with health screening programsfor refugees.(8) All positions in the Public Health Service and other positions in theDepartment of Health and Human Services directly and primarily relatedto providing services to Indians when filled by the appointment of Indians.The Secretary of Health and Human Services is responsible for definingthe term ``Indian.''(9) Twelve positions of Therapeutic Radiologic Technician Trainee in theRadiation Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute. Employment underthis authority shall not exceed 1 year for any individual. This authorityshall be applied only to positions with compensation fixed under 5 U.S.C.5351-5356.(10) Health care positions of the National Health Service Corps for employmentof any one individual not to exceed 4 years of service in health manpowershortage areas.(11) Pharmacy Resident positions at GS-7 in the National Institutes ofHealth's Clinical Center, Pharmacy Department. Employment in these positionsis confined to graduates of approved schools of pharmacy and is limitedto a period not to exceed 12 months pending licensure.(12) Hospital Administration Resident positions at GS-9 in the NationalInstitutes of Health's Clinical Center, Bethesda, Maryland. Employmentin these positions is confined to graduates of approved hospital or healthcare administration programs and is limited to a period not to exceed 1year.(13) Not to exceed 30 positions of Cancer Control Science Associate inthe Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, National Cancer Institute,National Institutes of Health, for assignments at a level of difficultyand responsibility at or equivalent to GS-11/13. No one may be employedunder this authority for more than 3 years, and no more than 10 appointmentswill be made under the authority in any 1 year.(14) Not to exceed 30 positions at grades GS-11/13 associated with thepostdoctoral training program for interdisciplinary toxicologists in theNational Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutesof Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.(c) [Reserved](d) <T3>Social Security Administration. </T3>(1) Six positions of social insurancerepresentative in the district offices of the Social Security Administrationin the State of Arizona when filled by the appointment of persons of one-fourthor more Indian blood.(2) Seven positions of social insurance representative in the districtoffices of the Social Security Administration in the State of New Mexicowhen filled by the appointment of persons of one-fourth or more Indianblood.(3) Two positions of social insurance representative in the district officesof the Social Security Administration in the State of Alaska when filledby the appointment of persons of one-fourth or more Alaskan Native blood(Eskimos, Indians, or Aleuts).(e) [Reserved](f) <T3>The President's Council on Physical Fitness. </T3>(1) Four staff assistants,The President's Council on Physical Fitness.(g)-(i) [Reserved](j) <T3>Health Care Financing Administration. </T3>(1) [Reserved](2) Not to exceed 10 professional positions, GS-9 through GS-15, to befilled under the Health Care Financing Administration Professional ExchangeProgram. Appointments under this authority will not exceed 1 year.(k) <T3>Office of the Secretary. </T3>(1) [Reserved].(2) Not to exceed 10 positions at grades GS-9/14 in the Office of the AssistantSecretary for Planning and Evaluation filled under the Policy ResearchAssociate Program. New appointments to these positions may be made onlyat grades GS-9/12. Employment of any individual under this authority maynot exceed 2 years.Section 213.3117 Department of Education(a) Positions concerned with problems in education financed and participatedin by the Department of Education and a cooperating State educational agency,or university or college, in which there is joint responsibility for selectionand supervision of employees, and at least one-half of the expense is contributedby the cooperating agency in salaries, quarters, materials, equipment,or other necessary elements in the carrying on of the work.Section 213.3124 Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System(a) All positions.Section 213.3127 Department of Veterans Affairs(a) <T3>Construction Divison.</T3> (1) Temporary construction workers paidfrom ``purchase and hire'' funds and appointed for not to exceed the durationof a construction project.(b) Not to exceed 400 positions of rehabilitation counselors, GS-3 throughGS-11, in Alcoholism Treatment Units and Drug Dependence Treatment Centers,when filled by former patients.(c) [Reserved](d) Not to exceed 600 positions at grades GS-3 through GS-11, involvedin the Department's Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Counseling Service.Section 213.3128 U.S. Information Agency(a) <T3>Office of Congressional and Public Liaison.</T3> (1) Two positionsof Liaison Officer (Congressional), GS-14.(b) Five positions of Supervisory International Exchange Officer (ReceptionCenter Director), GS-13 and GS-14, located in USIA's field offices of NewOrleans, New York, Miami, San Francisco and Honolulu. Initial appointmentswill not exceed December 31 of the calendar year in which appointment ismade with extensions permitted up to a maximum period of 4 years.Section 213.3130 Securities and Exchange Commission(a)-(b) [Reserved](c) Positions of accountant and auditor, GS-13 through 15, when filledby persons selected under the SEC Accounting Fellow Program, as follows:(1) Five positions, for employment of any one individual not to exceed2 years; and(2) Two additional identical positions, for employment of any one individualnot to exceed 90 days, which may be used to provide a period of transitionand orientation between Fellowship appointments. These additional identicalpositions must be filled by persons who either have completed a 2-yearFellowship or have been selected as replacement Fellows for a 2-year term.Appointments of outgoing Fellows under this authority must be made withouta break in service of 1 workday following completion of their 2-year terms;incoming Fellows apointed under this provision must be appointed to 2-yearFellowships without a break in service of 1 workday following their 90-dayappointments.(d) Positions of Economist, GS-13 through 15, when filled by persons selectedunder the SEC Economic Fellow Program. No more than four positions maybe filled under this authority at any one time. An employee may not serveunder this authority longer than 2 years unless selected under provisionsset forth in the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), 5 U.S.C. 3372(b)(2)(e) Not to exceed 10 positions of accountant, GS-12/13, when filled bypersons selected as SEC Accounting Fellows for the Full Disclosure Program.Employment under this authority may not exceed 2 years.Section 213.3131 Department of Energy(a) [Reserved](b) <T3>Bonneville Power Administration.</T3> (1) Five Area Managers.Section 213.3132 Small Business Administration(a) When the President under 42 U.S.C. 1855-1855g, the Secretary of Agricultureunder 7 U.S.C. 1961, or the Small Business Administration under 15 U.S.C.636(b)(1) declares an area to be a disaster area, positions filled by temporaryappointment of employees to make and administer disaster loans in the areaunder the Small Business Act, as amended. Service under this authoritymay not exceed 4 years, and no more than 2 years may be spent on a singledisaster. Exception to this time limit may only be made with prior Officeapproval. Appointments under this authority may not be used to extend the2-year service limit contained in paragraph (b) below. No one may be appointedunder this authority to positions engaged in long-term maintenance of loanportfolios.(b) When the President under 42 U.S.C. 1855-1855g, or the Secretary ofAgriculture under 7 U.S.C. 1961 or the Small Business Administration under15 U.S.C. 636(b)(1), declares an area to be a disaster area, positionsfilled by temporary appointment of employees to make and administer disasterloans in that area under the Small Business Act, as amended. No one mayserve under this authority for more than an aggregate of 2 years withouta break in service of at least 6 months. Persons who have had more than2 years of service under paragraph (a) of this section must have a breakin service of at least 8 months following such service before appointmentunder this authority. No one may be appointed under this authority to positionsengaged in long-term maintenance of loan portfolios.(c) Positions of Community Economic-Industrial Planner, GS-7 through 12,when filled by local residents who represent the interest of the groupsto be served by the Minority Entrepreneurship Teams of which they are members.No new appointments may be made under this authority after May 1, 1977.Section 213.3133 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation(a) All Liquidation Graded, temporary field positions concerned with thework of liquidating the assets of closed banks, of liquidation loans tobanks, or of paying the depositors of closed insured banks. New appointmentsmay be made under this authority only during the 5-year period followinga bank closing and/or establishment of a consolidated liquidation site.Section 213.3136 U.S. Soldiers' and Airmen's Home(a) [Reserved](b) Positions when filled by member-residents of the Home.Section 213.3137 General Services Administraton(a) [Reserved](b) Not to exceed 25 positions at grades GS-14/15, in order to bring intothe agency current industry expertise in various program areas. Appointmentsunder this authority may not exceed 2 years.Section 213.3141 National Labor Relations Board(a) Election Examiners for temporary, part-time or intermittent employmentin connection with elections under the Labor-Management Relations Act.Section 213.3142 Export-Import Bank of the United States(a) One Special Assistant to the Board of Directors, grade GS-14 and above.Section 213.3146 Selective Service System(a) State Directors.(b)-(c) [Reserve](d) Executive Secretary, National Selective Service Appeal Board.Section 213.3148 National Aeronautics and Space Administration(a) One hundred and fifty alien scientists having special qualificationsin the fields of aeronautical and space research where such employmentis deemed by the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administrationto be necessary in the public interest.(b) Not to exceed 40 positions of fully qualified pilot and mission specialistsastronauts.(c)-(e) [Reserved](f) Positions of Program Coordinator/Counselor at grades GS-7/9/11 forpart-time and summer employment in connection with the High School StudentsSummer Research Apprenticeship Program.Section 213.3152 U.S. Government Printing Office(a) Not to exceed three positions of Research Associate at grades GS-15and below, involved in the study and analysis of complex problems relatingto the reduction of the Government's printing costs and to provision ofmore efficient service to customer agencies and the public. Appointmentsunder this authority may not exceed 1 year, but may be extended for notto exceed one additional year.(b) Positions in the printing trades when filled by students majoring inprinting technology employed under a cooperative education agreement withthe University of the District of Columbia.Section 213.3154 Federal Home Loan Bank Board(a) One Secretary, Federal Home Loan Bank Board.(b) [Reserved](c) Positions in the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation concernedwith the work of liquidating the assets of closed insured institutionsor the liquidation of loans or the handling of contributions to insuredinstitutions and the purchase of assets therefrom; and positions of theFederal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation the work of which is concernedwith paying the depositors of closed insured institutions. Appointmentsunder this authority may not exceed 3 years.Section 213.3156 Commission on Civil Rights(a) Twenty-five positions at grade GS-11 and above of employees who collect,study, and appraise civil rights information to carry out the nationalclearinghouse responsibilities of the Commission under Pub. L. 88-352,as amended. No new appointments may be made under this authority afterMarch 31, 1976.Section 213.3174 Smithsonian Institution(a) Not to exceed 25 positions at grades GS-11 and below which supportplanning and production of the Annual American Folklife Festival. Employmentunder this authority may not exceed 6 months in connnection with any oneFestival.(b) All positions located in Panama which are part of or support the SmithsonianTropical Research Institute.Section 213.3175 Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars(a) One East Asian Studies Program Administrator, one International SecurityStudies Program Administrator, one Latin American Program Administrator,one Russian Studies Program Administrator, one West European Program Administrator,and one Social Science Program Administrator.Section 213.3182 National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities(a) <T3>National Endowment for the Arts.</T3> (1) Until September 30, 1990,one position of Assistant Director, Artists-in-Education Programs, Officefor Partnership, GS-301-14.(2) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director for StatePrograms.(3) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Literature Programs.(4) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of TheatrePrograms.(5) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Folk Arts Programs.(6) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director, Opera/Musical TheatrePrograms.(7) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of Opera/MusicalThreatre Programs.(8) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of LiteraturePrograms.(9) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Locals Test Programs,Office of the Deputy to the Chairman for Public Partnership.(10) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Deputy Chairman for PublicPartnership.(11) Until September 30, 1990, four Project Evaluators.(12) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Museum Programs.(13) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of FolkArts, Office of the Deputy Chairman for Programs.(14) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of MusicPrograms.(15) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Expansion ArtsPrograms.(16) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Media Arts Programs.(17) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director, Challenge andAdvancement Grant Program.(18) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director, Challengeand Advancement Grant Programs.(19) (Reserved)(20) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Inter Arts Program.(21) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of Expansionof Arts Programs.(22) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of MediaArts Programs.(23) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of DesignArts Program.(24) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of DancePrograms.(25) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of VisualArts Programs.(26) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director of MuseumPrograms.(27)-(29) [Reserved](30) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Education Programs.(31) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Music Programs.(32) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Theater Programs.(33) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Dance Programs.(34) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Visual ArtsPrograms.(35) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director of Design ArtsProgram.(36) [Reserved](37) Until September 30, 1990, one Director for State Programs.(38) Until September 30, 1990, one Director for Artists-in-Education Programs.Section 213.3184 Department of Housing and Urban Development(a) One position of Special Advisor to the Regional Administrator, GS-301-14,in San Francisco. Employment under this authority may not exceed 2 years.Section 213.3191 Office of Personnel Management(a) Not to exceed 500 positions in Federal Job Information Centers, tobe filled under the Community Outreach Information Network program. Appointmentsunder this authority may not exceed 90 days, and no one may receive morethan one appointment under the authority.(b)-(c) [Reserved](d) Part-time and intermittent positions of test examiners at grades GS-8and below.Section 213.3194 Department of Transportation(a) <T3>U.S. Coast Guard. </T3>(1) Not to exceed 25 positions of Marine TrafficController (Pilot), at grade GS-11 and below for temporary, intermittentor seasonal employment in the State of Louisiana. Temporary appointmentsmay not exceed 1 year, and temporary appointees may be reappointed underthis authority only after a break in service of at least 6 months. Intermittentor seasonal employment may not exceed 180 working days in a service year,except that this limitation for an individual employee may be extendedto 220 days when necessitated by emergencies caused by unusual floodingconditions or high river stages.(2) Lamplighters.(3) Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors, Instructors,one Principal Librarian, one Cadet Hostess, and one Psychologist (Counseling)at the Coast Guard Academy, New London, Conn.(b) [Reserved](c) <T3>Federal Highway Administation. </T3>(1) Temporary, intermittent, orseasonal employment in the field service of the Federal Highway Administrationat grades not higher than GS-5 for subprofessional engineering aide workon the highway surveys and construction projects, for not to exceed 180working days a year, when in the opinion of OPM, appointment through competitiveexamination is impracticable.(d) [Reserved](e) <T3>Maritime Administation. </T3>(1)-(2) [Reserved](3) All positions on Government-owned vessels or those bareboats charteredto the Government and operated by or for the Maritime Administration.(4)-(5) [Reserved](6) U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, positions of: Professors, Instructors,and Teachers: including heads of Departments of Physical Education andAthletics, Humanities, Mathematics and Science, Maritime Law and Economics,Nautical Science, and Engineering; Coordinator of Shipboard Training; theCommandant of Midshipmen, the Assistant Commandant of Midshipmen; Directorof Music; three Battalion Officers; three Regimental Affairs Officers;and one Training Administrator.(7) U.S. Merchant Marine Academy positions of: Associate Dean; Registrar;Director of Admissions; Assistant Director of Admissions; Director, Officeof External Affairs; Placement Officer; Administrative Librarian; ShipboardTraining Assistant; three Academy Training Representatives; and one EducationProgram Assistant.Section 213.3195 Federal Emergency Management Agency(a) Field positions at grades GS-15 and below, or equivalent, which areengaged in work directly related to unique response efforts to environmentalemergencies not covered by the Disaster Relief Act of 1974, Pub. L. 93-288,as amended. Employment under this authority may not exceed 36 months onany single emergency. Persons may not be employed under this authorityfor long-term duties or for work not directly necessitated by the emergencyresponse effort.(b) Not to exceed 30 positions at grades GS-15 and below in the Officesof Executive Administration, General Counsel, Inspector General, Comptroller,Public Affairs, Personnel, Acquisition Management, and the State and LocalProgram and Support Directorate which are engaged in work directly relatedto unique response efforts to environmental emergencies not covered bythe Disaster Relief Act of 1974, Pub. L. 93-288, as amended. Employmentunder this authority may not exceed 36 months on any single emergency,or for long-term duties or work not directly necessitated by the emergencyresponse effort. No one may be reappointed under this authority for servicein connection with a different emergency unless at least 6 months haveelapsed since the individual's latest appointment under this authority.(c) Not to exceed 350 professional and technical positions at grades GS-5through GS-15, or equivalent, in Mobile Emergency Response Support Detachments(MERS).Section 213.3199 Temporary organizations(a) Positions at GS-15 and below on the staffs of temporary boards andcommissions which are established by law or Executive order for specifiedperiods not to exceed 4 years to perform specific projects. A temporaryboard or commission originally established for less than 4 years and subsequentlyextended may continue to fill its staff positions under this authorityas long as its total life, including extension(s) does not exceed 4 years.No board or commission may use this authority for more than 4 years tomake appointments and position changes unless prior approval of the Officeis obtained. (b) Positions at GS-15 and below on the staffs of temporary organizationsestablished within continuing agencies when all of the following conditionsare met: (1) The temporary organization is established by an authorityoutside the agency, usually by law or Executive order: (2) the temporaryorganization is established for an initial period of 4 years or less and,if subsequently extended, its total life including extension(s) will notexceed 4 years; (3) the work to be performed by the temporary organizationis outside the agency's continuing responsibilities; and (4) the positionsfilled under this authority are those for which other staffing resourcesor authorities are not available within the agency. An agency may use thisauthority to fill positions in organizations which do not meet all of theabove conditions or to make appointments and position changes in a singleorganization during a period longer than 4 years only with prior approvalof the Office. <ITAG tagnum="84">Schedule B </ITAG>Section 213.3202 Entire executive civil service The provisions established under paragraphs (a) through (i) are authorizedunder provisions of E.O. 12015 and support career-related work-study programs.OPM's requirements relating to appointment under paragraphs (a) through(i) will be published in the Federal Personnel Manual. Further, appointmentsunder paragraphs (a) through (i) are subject to all the requirements andconditions governing career or career-conditional appointments, includinginvestigation by OPM to establish an appointee's qualifications and suitability.Appointments of participants may be converted to career or career-conditionalat any time within a 120-day period after satisfactory completion of acareer-related work-study program. (a) Student positions established in connection with a bachelor's degreecooperative education program which provide for a formally arranged scheduleof attendance at an institution of higher learning combined with at least26 weeks, or 1040 hours, of study-related work in a Federal agency. Theperiods of work and study together must satisfy requirements for a bachelor'sdegree and must provide the experience necessary for a career or career-conditionalappointment to administrative, professional or technical positions in theFederal career service upon the student's graduation. (b) Student positions established in support of cooperative education programsfor graduate students which provide for scheduled periods of attendanceat a graduate school combined with at least 16 weeks or 640 hours of study-relatedwork in a Federal agency. The periods of work and study must satisfy requirementsfor the graduate degree and provide experience necessary for career orcareer-conditional appointment in the Federal career service upon the student'sgraduation. (c) Student positions established in connection with associate degree cooperativeeducation programs which provide for a formally arranged schedule of attendanceat a recognized 2-year educational institution combined with at least 26weeks or 1040 hours of study-related work in a Federal agency. The periodsof work and study together must satisfy requirements for graduation andmust provide the experience necessary for career of career-conditionalappointment in selected occupations in the Federal career service uponthe student's graduation. (d) Student positions established in connection with the Harry S. TrumanFoundation Scholarship Program under the provisions of Public Law 93-624to permit scheduled periods of attendance at institutions of higher educationcombined with at least 26 weeks or 1040 hours of study-related work ina Federal agency. The periods of work and study must satisfy requirementsof programs established by agreement between the Harry S. Truman ScholarshipFoundation and the employing agency and provide the experience necessaryfor career or career-conditional appointment in the Federal career serviceupon the student's graduation. (e) Student positions established in support of the Cooperative Education(Vocational Education) Programs for high school students which providefor scheduled periods of classroom study combined with at least 16 weeksor 640 hours of study-related work in a Federal agency. The periods ofstudy and work must satisfy requirements for a high school diploma andprovide experience necessary for career or career-conditional appointmentinto office and administrative support, technician, assistant, helper,and preapprentice occupations in the Federal career service upon the student'sgraduation. (f) Positions under the Federal Junior Fellowship Program, a career-relatedwork-study program covered under the provisions of Executive Order 12015.(g) Student positions established in support of the Cooperative EducationProgram in which the student is enrolled in an undergraduate certificateor diploma program in an accredited college, technical, trade, vocational,or business school which provides for scheduled periods of classroom studycombined with at least 16 weeks or 640 hours of study-related work in aFederal agency. The periods of study and work must satisfy requirementsfor an undergraduate certificate or diploma and provide experience necessaryfor career or career-conditional appointment into office and administrativesupport, technician, assistant, helper, and preapprentice occupations inthe Federal career service upon the student's graduation. (h)-(i) [Reserved] (j) Special executive development positions established in connection withSenior Executive Service candidate development programs which have beenapproved by OPM. A Federal agency may make new appointments under thisauthority for any period of employment not exceeding three years for oneindividual. (k) Positions at grades GS-15 and below when filled by individuals who(1) are placed at a severe disadvantage in obtaining employment becauseof a psychiatric disability evidenced by hospitalization or outpatienttreatment and have had a significant period of substantially disruptedemployment because of the disability; and (2) are certified to a specificposition by a State vocational rehabilitation counselor or a Veterans Administrationcounseling psychologist (or psychiatrist) who indicates that they meetthe severe disadvantage criteria stated above, that they will be appointed,and that any residual disability is not job related. Employment of anyindividual under this authority may not exceed 2 years following each significantperiod of mental illness. (l) Professional and administrative career (PAC) positions at the GS-5or GS-7 grade level which are subject to the decree entered on November19, 1981, by the United States District Court for the District of Columbiain the civil action known as <T3>Luevano </T3>v. <T3>Devine </T3>and numbered as No. 79-271, which were not removed fromcoverage of the Professional and Administrative Career Examination (PACE)prior to the effective date of the consent decree, and which are to befilled, under the conditions described below, by appointment of individualsother than those who at the time of such appointment already have competitivestatus in the Federal civil service. When a Federal agency needs to filla PAC position that was not removed from PACE coverage before the consentdecree became effective, and the agency has made maximum use of priorityplacement sources and has given appropriate consideration to availableand qualified status applicants, then OPM may authorize the agency to makea new appointment under this paragraph. Such appointments shall be authorizedand made pursuant to such Schedule B requirements for PAC positions asshall be prescribed in the Federal Personnel Manual. Terms of use of thisappointment authority shall be established by an appointment authorityagreement to be executed for each position excepted from the competitiveservice pursuant to this authority. The appointment authority agreementwill remain in effect with respect to particular GS-5 and GS-7 PAC positionsonly so long as there is no competitive examination available to fill thosepositions. Establishment of a register under an alternative competitiveexamination for any PAC position(s) at grades GS-5 and GS-7 will immediatelyterminate all agreements permitting new Schedule B appointments to suchposition(s) under this authority. Individuals appointed before terminationof the agreements, however, may continue to serve under those appointmentsat grades GS-5 and GS-7 until they are appointed to a competitive positionin accordance with applicable civil service laws, rules, and regulations.An incumbent of a Schedule B PAC position may be converted to a careeror career-conditional appointment under the provisions of Executive Order12596, subject to the conditions set out in andSection;315.710 of this chapter.(m) Positions when filled under any of the following conditions: (1) Appointment at grades GS-15 and above, or equivalent, in the same ora different agency without a break in service from a career appointmentin the Senior Executive Service (SES) of an individual who: (i) Has completed the SES probationary period; (ii) Has been removed from the SES because of less than fully successfullyexecutive performance or a reduction in force; and (iii) Is entitled to be placed in another civil service position under5 U.S.C. 3594(b). (2) Appointment in a different agency without a break in service of anindividual originally appointed under paragraph (m)(1). (3) Reassignment, promotion, or demotion within the same agency of an individualappointed under this authority. Section 213.3203 Executive Office of the President (a) [Reserved] (b) <T3>Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations. </T3>(1)Seventeen positions of economist at grades GS-12 through GS-15. Section 213.3204 Department of State (a)-(c) (Reserved) (d) Fourteen positions on the household staff of the President's GuestHouse (Blair and Blair-Lee Houses). (e) Four Physical Science Administration Officer positions at GS-11 andGS-12 under the Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and ScientificAffairs' Science, Engineering and Diplomacy Fellowship Program. Employmentunder this authority is not to exceed 1 year. (f) Scientific, professional, and technical positions at grades GS-12 toGS15 when filled by persons having special qualifications in foreign policymatters. Total employment under this authority may not exceed 4 years.Section 213.3205 Department of the Treasury (a) Positions of Deputy Comptroller of the Currency, Chief National BankExaminer, Assistant Chief National Bank Examiner, Regional Administratorof National Banks, Deputy Regional Administrator of National Banks, Assistantto the Comptroller of the Currency, National Bank Examiner, Associate NationalBank Examiner, and Assistant National Bank Examiner, whose salaries arepaid from assessments against national banks and other financial institutions.(b) Not to exceed 10 positions engaged in functions mandated by PublicLaw 99-190, the duties of which require expertise and knowledge gainedas a present or former employee of the Synthetic Fuels Corporation, asan employee of an organization carrying out projects or contracts for theCorporation, or as an employee of a Government agency involved in the SyntheticFuels Program. Appointments under this authority may not exceed 4 years.(c) Not to exceed two positions of Accountant (Tax Specialist) at gradesGS-13 and above to serve as specialists on the accounting analysis andtreatment of corporation taxes. Employments under this paragraph shallnot exceed a period of 18 months in any individual case. (d) Positions concerned with the protection of the life and safety of thePresident and members of his immediate family, or other persons for whomsimilar protective service are prescribed by law, when filled in accordancewith special appointment procedures approved by OPM. Service under thisauthority may not exceed (1) a total of 4 years; or (2) 120 days followingcompletion of the service required for conservation under Executive Order11203, whichever occurs first. Section 213.3206 Department of Defense (a) <T3>Office of the Secretary. </T3>(1) [Reserved] (2) Professional positions at GS-11 through GS-15 involving systems, costs,and economic analysis functions in the Office of the Assistant Secretary(Program Analysis and Evaluation); and in the Office of the Deputy AssistantSecretary (Systems Policy and Information) in the Office of the AssistantSecretary (Comptroller). (3)-(4) [Reserved] (5) For Net Assessment Analysts. (b) <T3>Interdepartmental activities. </T3>(1) Five positions to provide generaladministration, general art and information, photography, and/or visualinformation support to the White House Photographic Service. (c) <T3>National Defense University. </T3>(1) Sixty-one positions of professor,GS-13/15, for employment of any one individual on an initial appointmentnot to exceed 3 years, which may be renewed in 1-, 2-, or 3-year incrementsindefinitely thereafter. (d) <T3>General. </T3>(1) One position of Law Enforcement Liaison Officer (Drugs),GS-301-15, U.S. European Command. (e) <T3>Office of the Inspector General. </T3>(1) Positions of Criminal Investigator,GS-1811-5/15. (f) <T3>Department of Defense Polygraph Institute, Fort McClellan, Alabama.</T3>(1) One Director, GM-15.Section 213.3207 Department of the Army(a) <T3>U.S. Army Command and General Staff College.</T3> (1) Seven positionsof professors, instructors, and education specialists. Total employmentof any individual under this authority may not exceed 4 years.(b) <T3>Brooke Army Medical Center, Fort Sam Houston, Texas.</T3> (1) Two MedicalOfficer (Surgery) positions, GS-12, in the Clinical Division, U.S. ArmyInstitute of Surgical Research, whose incumbents are enrolled in medicalschool surgical residency progams. Employment under this authority shallnot exceed 12 months.Section 213.3208 Department of the Navy(a) <T3>Naval Underwater Systems Center, New London, Connecticut.</T3> (1)One position of oceanographer, grade GS-14, to function as project directorand manager for research in the weapons systems applications of ocean eddies.(b) All civilian faculty positions of professors, instructors, and teacherson the staff of the Armed Forces Staff College, Norfolk, Virginia.(c) One Director and four Research Psychologists at the professor or GS-15level in the Defense Personnel Security Research and Education Center.Section 213.3209 Department of the Air Force(a) Not to exceed eight interdisciplinary positions for the Air ResearchInstitute at the Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, for employmentto complete studies proposed by candidates and acceptable to the Air Force.Initial appointments are made not to exceed 3 years, with an option torenew or extend the appointments in increments of 1, 2, or 3 years indefinitelythereafter.(b) [Reserved](c) One Director of Instruction and 14 civilian Instructors at the DefenseInstitute of Security Assistance Management, Wright-Patterson Air ForceBase, Dayton, Ohio. Individual appointments under this authority will befor an initial 3-year period, which may be followed by an appointment ofindefinite duration.(c) Eighteen positions of professor, associate professor, or professionalacademic staff at the Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama,for employment of any one individual on an initial appointment not to exceed3 years, which may be renewed in 1-, 2-, or 3-year increments indefinitelythereafter.Section 213.3210 Department of Justice(a) Criminal Investigator (Special Agent) positions in the Drug EnforcementAdministration. New appointments may be made under this authority onlyat grades GS-5 through 11. Service under the authority may not exceed 4years. Appointments made under this authority may be converted to careeror career-conditional appointments under the provisions of Executive Order12230, subject to conditions agreed upon between the Department and OPM.(b) Positions of Port Receptionist and Supervisory Port Receptionist, Immigrationand Naturalization Service.(c) Not to exceed 400 positions at grades GS-5 through 15 assigned to regionaltask forces established to conduct special investigations to combat drugtrafficking and organized crime.(d) Until September 30, 1987, positions, other than those providing routineclerical and admininstrative support, on the staff of the offices of UnitedStates Trustees. Terms of service under this authority shall be establishedin accordance with provisions of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 andsubsequent applicable legislation.Section 213.3213 Department of Agriculture(a) <T3>Office of International Cooperation and Development.</T3> (1) Positionsof a project nature involved in international technical assistance activities.Service under this authority may not exceed 2 years on a single projectfor any individual. No more than 20 new appointments may be made underthis authority in any 12-month period.(b) <T3>General.</T3> (1) Temporary positions of professional Research Scientists,GS-15 or below, in the Agricultural Research Service and the Forest Service,when such positions are established to support the Research AssociateshipProgram and are filled by persons having a doctoral degree in an appropriatefield of study for research activities of mutual interest to appointeesand the agency. Appointments are limited to proposals approved by the appropriateAdministrator. Appointments may be made for initial periods not to exceed2 years and may be extended for up to two additional years.Section 213.3214 Department of Commerce(a) <T3>Bureau of the Census.</T3> (1) [Reserved](2) Not to exceed 50 Community Services Specialist positions at the equivalentof GS-5 through GS-12.(3) Not to exceed 300 Community Awareness Specialist positions at the equivalentof GS-7 through GS-12. Employment under this authority may not exceed December31, 1992.(b) [Reserved](c) <T3>Minority Business Development Agency.</T3> (1) One position of minoritybusiness opportunity specialist at grades GS-9 through GS-15. This authoritymay not be used for new appointments after December 31, 1977.(d) <T3>National Telecommunications and Information Administration.</T3> (1)Not to exceed 10 positions of Telecommunications Policy Analysts, gradesGS-11 through 15. Employment under this authority may not exceed 2 years.Section 213.3215 Department of Labor(a) Positions of Chairman and Member, Wage Appeals Board.(b) <T3>Office of the Inspector General.</T3> (1) Not to exceed 110 positionsof Criminal Investigator (Special Agent), GS-1811-5/15, in the Office ofLabor Racketeering.Section 213.3216 Department of Health and Human Services(a) <T3>Public Health Service.</T3> (1) Not to exceed 68 positions at GS-11and below on the Health and Nutrition Examination Survey teams of the NationalCenter for Health Statistics.(2) One Public Health Education Specialist, GS-1725-15, in the Center forDisease Control, Atlanta, Georgia.(b)-(c) (Reserved)(d) <T3>National Library of Medicine. </T3>(1) Ten positions of Librarian,GS-7, the incumbents of which will be trainees in the Library AssociateTraining Program in Medical Librarianship and Biomedical Communications.Employment under this authority is not to exceed 1 year.Section 213.3217 Department of Education(a) Seventy-five positions, not in excess of GS-13, of a professional oranalytical nature when filled by persons, other than college faculty membersor candidates working toward college degrees, who are participating inmidcareer development programs authorized by Federal statute or regulation,or sponsored by private nonprofit organizations, when a period of workexperience is a requirement for completion of an organized study program.Employment under this authority shall not exceed 1 year.(b) Fifty positions, GS-7 through GS-11, concerned with advising on educationpolicies, practices, and procedures under unusual and abnormal conditions.Persons employed under this provision must be bona fide elementary schooland high school teachers. Appointments under this authority may be madefor a period of not to exceed 1 year, and may, with the prior approvalof the Office of Personnel Management, be extended for an additional periodof 1 year.Section 213.3227 Department of Veterans Affairs(a) Not to exceed 800 principal investigatory, scientific, professionaland technical positions at grades GS-11 and above in the medical researchprogram. Employment under this authority may not exceed 7 years for anyindividual.Section 213.3228 U.S. Information Agency (a) <T3>Voice of America:</T3> (1) Not to exceed 150 positions at grades GS-15and below in the Cuba Service. Appointments may not be made under thisauthority to administrative, clerical, and technical support positions.(b) Positions of English Language Radio Broadcast Intern, GS-1001-5/7/9.Employment is not to exceed 2 years for any intern.Section 213.3231 Department of Energy (a) Twenty Exceptions and Appeals Analyst positions at grades GS-7 through11, when filled by persons selected under DOE's fellowship program in itsOffice of Hearings and Appeals, Washignton, DC. Appointments under thisauthority shall not exceed 3 years.Section 213.3234 Federal Trade Commission(a) Positions filled under the Economic Fellows Program. No more than fivenew appointments may be made under this authority in any fiscal year. Serviceof an individual Fellow may not exceed 4 years.Section 213.3236 U.S. Soldiers' and Airmen's Home(a) Three GS-11 Medical Officer positions under a fellowship program ongeriatrics.(b) Director, Health Care Services; Director, Member Services; Director,Logistics; and Director, Plans and Programs.Section 213.3237 General Services Administration.(a) One position of Deputy Director of Network Services.Section 213.3242 Export-Import Bank of the U.S.(a) One position of Food Service Worker WG-7804-3/4/5, in the Office ofthe President and Chairman.Section 213.3248 National Aeronautics and Space Administration(a) Not to exceed 40 positions of Command Pilot, Pilot and Mission Specialistcandidates at grades GS-7 through 15 in the Space Shuttle Astronaut program.Employment under this authority may not exceed 3 years. Section 213.3254 Federal Home Loan Bank Board(a) Positions of Accounting Policy Analyst, GS-13/14/15, in the Officeof Examinations and Supervision filed in connection with a fellowship program.Appointments under this authority may not exceed 2 years. No more thanthree new appointments may be made under this authority during any consecutive12-month perid. (b) Up to 569 positions at GS-15 and below in the Federal Home Loan BankBoard engaged in exploring methods to promote stability in the thrift industry,restore the industry to profitability, and protect individual savers. Noadditional appointments may be made under this authority after September30, 1990.Section 213.3257 National Credit Union Administration (a) <T3>Central Liquidity Facility.</T3> (1) All managerial and supervisoryposition at pay levels greater than the equivalent of GS-13.Section 213.3259 ACTION(a) <T3>Office of Domestic and Anti-Poverty Operations.</T3> (1) Not to exceed25 positions of Program Specialist at grades GS-9 thrugh GS-15. (b) <T3>Office of Policy and Research. </T3>(1) Three positions of ProgramSpecialist at grades GS-7 through GS-15.Section 213.3264 U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency(a) Twenty-five scientific, professional, and technical positions at gradesGS-12 through GS-15 when filled by persons having special qualificationsin the fields of foreign policy, foreign affairs, arms control, and relatedfields. Total employment under this authority may not exceed 4 years. Section 213.3272 Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (a) Not to exceed 18 positions of Federal Probation System Administratorin the Division of Probation, when filled by Federal Probation Officersand/or Pretrial Services Officers on active service in the U.S. Courts.(b) [Reserved](c) Six positions of Clerks Liaison Officer in the Division of Clerks ofCourt. Section 213.3274 Smithsonian Institution(a) <T3>National Zoological Park</T3>. (1) Four positions of Veterinary Intern,GS-8/9/11. Employment under this authority is not to exceed 36 months.(b) <T3>Freer Gallery of Art</T3>. (1) Not to exceed four positions of OrientalArt Restoration Specialist at grades GS-9 through GS-15.Section 213.3276 Appalachian Regional Commission(a) Two Program Coordinators. Section 213.3282 National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities(a) [Reserved](b) <T3>National Endowment for the Humanities</T3>. (1) Until September 30,1990, Humanities Administrator, Reference Materials Programs, Divisionof Research Programs. (2) Until September 30, 1990, Humanities Administrator (Assistant Director),Humanities Projects in Higher Education Program, Division of EducationPrograms. (3) Until September 30, 1990, Deputy Director, Division of Education Programs.(4) Until September 30, 1990, Director, Division of Research Grants. (5) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director, GS-1701-15, oneposition of Deputy Director, GS-1701-14, and seven positions of HumanitiesAdministrator, GS-1701-13, Division of State Programs. (6) Until September 30, 1990, one Director and one Deputy Director, Divisionof Fellowships and Seminars. (7) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Fellowshipsfor College Teachers, Division of Fellowships. (8) Until September 30, 1990, seven positions of Humanities Administrator,Media Program, Division of General Programs. (9) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Humanities Administrator,Humanities Projects in Higher Education Program, Division of EducationPrograms. (10) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director for theElementary and Secondary Education Program, Division of Education Programs.(11) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Assistant Director for theMuseums and Historical Organizations Program, Division of General Programs.(12) Until September 30, 1990, four positions of Humanities Administrator,Museums and Historical Organizations Program, Division of General Programs.(13) Until September 30, 1990, four positions of Humanities Administrator,Elementary and Secondary Education Program, Division of Education Programs.(14) Until September 30, 1990, Director of General Programs. (15) Until September 30, 1990, one Assistant to the Director, General Programs.(16) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Younger ScholarsPrograms, Division of General Programs. (17) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Public HumanitiesProjects, Division of General Programs. (18) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Director, Division of EducationPrograms. (19) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator (AssistantDirector), Texts Programs, Division of Research Programs. (20) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator,Centers forAdvanced Study, Division of Research Programs. (21) Until September 30, 1990, one Challenge Grants Officer. (22) Until September 30, 1990, one Assistant Director, Media Program, Divisionof General Programs. (23) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Humanities Administrator,Publications Program, Division of Research Grants. (24) Until September 30, 1990, one Deputy Director, Division of ResearchGrants. (25) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Summer Seminarsfor College Teachers, Division of Fellowships and Seminars. (26) Until September 30, 1990, two positions of Humanities Administrator,Humanities Libraries Projects, Division of General Programs. (27) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Humanities Projects AssessmentOfficer and one position of Humanities Administrator, Office of the AssistantChairman for Programs. (28) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Humanities Administrator,Public Humanities Projects, Division of General Programs, GS-14. (29) Until September 30, 1990, one position of Humanities Administrator,GS-1701-14, in the Interpretive Research Programs, Division of ResearchPrograms. (30) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Office ofChallenge Grants. (31)-(33) [Reserved](34) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, GS-1701-12,Humanities Projects in Higher Education Program, Division of EducationPrograms. (35) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, HumanitiesProjects in Higher Education Program, Division of Education Programs. (36) Until September 30, 1990, three Humanities Administrators, HumanitiesProjects in Higher Education Program, Division of Education Programs. (37) Until September 30, 1990, two Humanities Administrators, Summer Seminarsfor Secondary School Teachers, Division of Fellowships and Seminars. (38) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Summer Stipends,Division of Fellowships and Seminars. (39) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Travel toCollections, Division of Fellowships and Seminars. (40) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, TranslationProgram, Reference Works Program, Division of Research Programs. (41) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Editions Program,Reference Works Program, Division of Research Programs. (42) [Reserved](43) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Foundationsof American Society Program, Division of Fellowships and Seminars. (44) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, HumanitiesProjects in Museums and Historical Organizations, Division of General Programs.(45) Until September 30, 1990, four Humanities Administrators, Office ofPreservation.(46) Until September 30, 1990, one Director, Office of Preservation.(47) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator (Program Officer),Regrant Programs, Division of Research Programs.(48) Until September 30, 1990, one Director, Office of Planning and Budget.(49) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Access Program,Reference Materials Program, Division of Research Programs.(50) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Access Program,Reference Materials Program, Division of Research Programs.(51) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Project Research,interpretive Research Program, Division of Research Programs.(52) Until September 30, 1990, one Humanities Administrator, Humanities,Science, and Technology Program, Interpretive Research Program, Divisionof Research Programs.Section 213.3285 Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation(a) One position of Civil Engineer (Construction Manager).Section 213.3291 Office of Personnel Management(a) Not to exceed eight positions of Associate Director at the ExecutiveSeminar Centers at grades GS-13 and GS-14. Appointments may be made forany period up to 3 years and may be extended without prior approval forany individual. Not more than half of the authorized faculty positionsat any one Executive Seminar Center may be filled under this authority.(b) Twelve positions of faculty members at grades GS-13 through 15, atthe Federal Executive Institute. Initial appointments under this authoritymay be made for any period up to 3 years and may be extended in 1-, 2-,or 3-year increments indefinitely thereafter.Section 213.3294 Department of Transportation(a) <T3>Federal Railroad Administration.</T3> (1) Regional Director of RailroadSafety, Fort Worth Texas.<ITAG tagnum="84">Schedule C</ITAG>Section 213.3303 Executive Office of the President<ITAG tagnum="81">Council of Economic Advisers</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CEA 4 Secretary to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CEA 5 Secretary to the Council Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">Council on Environmental Quality</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CEQ 2 Executive Assistant to a Council Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CEQ 3 Confidential Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CEQ 4 Confidential Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">Office of Management and Budget</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 8 Special Assistant to the Deputy Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 10 Secretary to the Associate Director for Natural Resources,Energy, and Science.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 11 Secretary to the Associate Director, National Security andInternational Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 50 Legislative Assistant to the Assistant Director for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 59 Public Affairs Assistant to the Assistant Director for ExternalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 66 Secretary to the Associate Director for Economic Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 68 Secretary to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 71 Confidential Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 74 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OMB 75 Deputy Director of External Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">Office of Science and Technology Policy</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OSTP 1 Public Information Assistant to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OSTP 8 Confidential Secretary to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">President's Commission on Executive Exchange</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCEE 1 Confidential Assistant to the Executive Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCEE 2 Special Assistant to the Executive Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCEE 5 Public Affairs Specialist to the Executive Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCEE 6 Staff Assistant (Typing) to the Executive Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCEE 7 Staff Assistant (Typing) to the Executive Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCEE 8 Secretary (Typing) to the Executive Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">Office of the United States Trade Representative</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USTR 7 Public Affairs Specialist to the Ambassador/United States TradeRepresentative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USTR 14 Confidential Secretary to the Ambassador/United States TradeRepresentative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USTR 20 Deputy Assistant United States Trade Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USTR 25 Confidential Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USTR 28 Congressional Affairs Officer to the Assistant United StatesTrade Representative for Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USTR 29 Director, Office of Private Sector Liaison, to the AssistantUnited States Trade Representative for Public and Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USTR 30 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy United States Trade Representative_Geneva.</ITAG>Section213.3304 Department of State<ITAG tagnum="15">ST 59 Secretary (Steno) to the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 67 Secretary (Steno) to the Director, Bureau of Politico-MilitaryAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 79 Special Assistant to the United States Representative to theUnited Nations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 83 Foreign Affairs Officer to the Chief of Protocol.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 86 Foreign Affairs Officer to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau ofInternational Organization Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 100 Secretary (Steno) to the United States Representative to theUnited Nations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 106 Protocol Officer to the Chief of Protocol.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 107 Secretary (Typing) to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Economicand Business Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 112 Member, Policy Planning Staff, to the Director, Policy PlanningStaff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 116 Special Assistant to the Counselor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 117 Confidential Clerk to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 122 Staff Assistant to the Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 132 Secretary (Typing) to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of InternationalOrganization Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 134 Secretary (Steno) to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 149 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Inter-AmericanAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 155 Protocol Officer (Visits) to the Chief of Protocol.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 161 Secretary (Steno) to the Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 162 Secretary (Steno) to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of ConsularAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 167 Protocol Officer to the Chief of Protocol.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 168 Staff Assistant to the Legal Adviser.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 170 Special Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 172 Staff Assistant to the Under Secretary for Management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 173 Special Assistant to the Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 174 Public Affairs Specialist to the Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 175 Legislative Management Officer to the Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Congressional Relations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 176 Staff Assistant to the Under Secretary for Management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 177 Special Assistant to the Chairman, International Joint Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 178 Secretary (Steno) to the Assistant Secretary for InternationalNarcotics Matters. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 179 Congressional Relations Officer to the Assistant Secretary,Office of Congressional Relations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 180 Director of Programs to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau ofHuman Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 181 Director/Coordinator of Intergovernmental Affairs to the AssistantSecretary, Bureau of Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 182 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of ConsularAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 183 Public Affairs Advisor to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau ofHuman Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 188 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for InternationalNarcotics Matters. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 190 Special Assistant to the Ambassador-at-Large and Special Advisorto the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 191 Secretary (Steno) to the Executive Secretary/Special Assistantto the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 192 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 195 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for CongressionalRelations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 202 Special Assistant to the Ambassdor-at-Large. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 203 Staff Assistant to the Counselor. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 208 Foreign Affairs Officer to the Assistant Secretary, Bureauof International Organization Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 209 Protocol Officer to the Assistant Chief of Protocol. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 213 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Human Rightsand Humanitarian Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 217 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Inter-AmericanAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 224 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of EastAsian and Pacific Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 226 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of NearEastern and South Asian Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 229 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Inter-AmericanAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 243 Program Specialist to the Chief of Protocol. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 244 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Inter-AmericanAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 246 Secretary (Steno) to the Ambassador-at-Large for Cultural Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 248 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for InternationalSocial and Humanitarian Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 250 Public Information Officer to the Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor International Social and Humanitarian Affairs, Bureau of InternationalOrganization Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 251 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policyand Counter Terrorism, Bureau of Diplomatic Security. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 253 Secretary (Steno) to the Ambassador-at-Large for Counter Terrorism.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 256 Policy and Press Advisor to the U.S. Permanent Representativeto the U.S. Mission to the Organization of American States. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 258 Secretary (Steno) to the Inspector General. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 260 Special Assistant to the Under Secretary for Security Assistance,Science, and Technology. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 261 Special Assistant to the Under Secretary for Security Assistance,Science, and Technology. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 262 Associate Director to the Deputy Assistant Secretary, Officeof Equal Employment Opportunity and Civil Rights. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 267 Secretary to the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 268 Staff Assistant to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 269 Supervisory Protocol Officer to the Chief of Protocol. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 270 Staff Assistant to the Director, Policy Planning Staff. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ST 274 Special Assistant to the Head of the U.S. Delegation to Genevafor Arms Reduction Negotiations. </ITAG>Section 213.3305 Department of theTreasury<ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 27 Executive Assistant to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 28 Special Assistant to the Director of the Mint. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 44 Legislative Manager to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 56 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 79 Legislative Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 92 Director, Consumer Affairs, to the Assistant Secretary forPublic Affairs and Public Liaison. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 93 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for PublicAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 94 Executive Assistant to the Commissioner of Customs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 113 Executive Assistant to the Special Assistant to the Commissionerof Customs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 115 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for FinancialSystems. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 120 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy,Planning and Communications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 122 Public Affairs Specialist to the Assistant Secretary forPolicy, Planning and Communications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 126 Staff Assistant to the Director of the Mint. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 128 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 139 Director of Scheduling to the Assistant Secretary for PublicAffairs and Public Liaison. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 144 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairsand Public Liaison. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 145 Travel Assistant to the Assistant Director for Travel andSpecial Event Services. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 146 Legislative Aid to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 148 Director, Special Operations Division, to the Deputy AssistantSecretary for Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 150 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for DevelopingNations, Office of the Assistant Secretary for International Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 153 Legislative Specialist to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 156 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy Development.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 157 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Associate Commissionerof Customs for Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 158 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for PublicAffairs and Public Liaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 166 Travel Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 170 Assistant Director for Travel and Special Event Services,to the Director, Special Operations Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 171 Executive Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 174 Senior Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for LawEnforcement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 177 Special Assistant to the Executive Director, U.S. SavingsBonds Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 179 Legislative Manager to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 183 Staff Assistant to the Director of the Mint.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 185 Legislative Manager to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 186 Public Affairs Specialist to the Treasurer of the UnitedStates.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 188 Special Assistant (Policy Analysis) to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 189 Special Assistant (Personnel) to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 190 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy Development.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 191 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for DepartmentalFinance and Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 192 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 193 Director, Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, to the DeputyAssistant Secretary (Public Liaison).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 194 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for PublicAffairs and Public Liaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 195 Review Officer to the Assistant Secretary for Policy Development.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 196 Confidential Assistant to the Executive Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 197 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for DepartmentalFinance and Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 198 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 199 Executive Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 200 Legislative Manager to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 201 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 203 Staff Assistant to the Executive Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 205 Director, Office of Corporate Finance, to the Deputy AssistantSecretary (Corporate Finance).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TREA 206 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary (Enforcement).</ITAG>Section213.3306 Department of Defense<ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 5 Private Secretary to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 19 Personal and Confidential Assistant to the Director, ProgramAnalysis and Evaluation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 22 Private and Confidential Secretary to the Assistant to theSecretary (Atomic Energy).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 23 Confidential Assistant to the Military Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 24 Chauffeur to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 30 Secretary (Steno) to the Defense Advisor to U.S. NATO.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 32 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 33 Personal Secretary to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 34 Private Secretary to the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor International Security Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 35 Confidential Assistant to the Executive Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 51 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Reserve Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 54 Private Secretary to the Judge, U.S. Court of Military Appeals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 55 Private Secretary to the Chief Judge, U.S. Court of MilitaryAppeals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 56 Private Secretary to the Judge, U.S. Court of Military Appeals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 62 Management Officer to the Chairman, President's IntelligenceOversight Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 66 Private Secretary to the Physician to the President, WhiteHouse Support Group.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 89 Secretary (Typing) to the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary(Public Affairs).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 119 Private Secretary to the Principal Deputy Director, ProgramAnalysis and Evaluation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 133 Public Affairs Specialist to the Assistant Secretary (PublicAffairs).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 171 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary (ReserveAffairs).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 175 Personal and Confidential Assistant to the Judge, U.S. Courtof Military Appeals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 178 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 194 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary (InternationalSecurity Policy).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 205 Personal and Confidential Assistant to the Judge, U.S. Courtof Military Appeals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 212 Private Secretary to the Deputy Under Secretary, Researchand Engineering (International Programs and Technology).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 217 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary (Command, Control,Communications, and Intelligence).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 229 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for InternationalSecurity Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 236 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 238 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 250 Speechwriter to the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 252 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 254 Special Assistant for Emergency Planning to the AssistantSecretary (Acquisition and Logistics).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 256 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary (Force Managementand Personnel).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 261 Special Assistant for European Security and Political Affairsto the Deputy Assistant Secretary (European and NATO Policy).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 270 Private Secretary to the Director, Strategic Defense InitiativeOrganization.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 274 Security Advisor to the Deputy Assistant to the President,White House Support Group.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 275 Assistant for European Security Negotiations to the DeputyAssistant Secretary (Negotiations Policy).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 279 Personal and Confidential Assistant to the Director, OperationalTesting and Evaluation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 283 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 284 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Civilian Healthand Medical Programs of the Uniformed Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 287 Special Assistant for Strategic Defense and Space Arms ControlPolicy to the Deputy Assistant Secretary (Nuclear Forces and Arms ControlPolicy).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 290 Public Affairs Specialist to the Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 294 Staff Specialist to the Deputy Director, Strategic DefenseInitiative Organization.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 295 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary (Force Managementand Personnel).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 298  Confidential Assistant to the Under Secretary for Acquisition.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 301 Personal and Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretaryfor Production and Logistics.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 305 Special Assistant to the Director, Strategic Defense InitiativeOrganization.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 308 Director, Low-Intensity Conflict, to the Deputy AssistantSecretary for Low-Intensity Conflict.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 310 Staff Assistant to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 311 Staff Assistant to the Assistant to the Chairman, Joint Chiefsof Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 313 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary (FamilySupport, Education, and Safety).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 314 Personal and Confidential Assistant to the Under Secretaryfor Acquisition.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 316 Law Clerk to the Judge, U.S. Court of Military Appeals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 319 Executive Assistant to the Special Assistant to the AssistantSecretary (Production and Logistics) for Stockpile Policy and Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOD 320 Executive Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG>Section 213.3307Department of the Army<ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 1 Staff Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 2 Secretary (Steno) to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 3 Secretary (Steno) to the Assistant Secretary for Manpower andReserve Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 6 Secretary (Typing) to the Assistant Secretary, Research, Development,and Acquisition.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 21 Secretary (Steno) to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 38 Plans Coordinator to the Chief of Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 41 Assistant Director to the Chairman and Executive Directorof the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ARMY 55 Secretary (Typing) to the Assistant Secretary, Financial Management.</ITAG>Section213.3308 Department of the Navy<ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 2 Staff Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 5 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Financial Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 7 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Research andEngineering.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 20 Special Assistant to the Military Assistant to the President.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 23 Special Assistant to the Military Assistant to the President.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 24 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Manpower andReserve Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 27 Special Assistant for Emergency Planning to the Military Assistantto the President.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 30 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 31 Staff Assistant to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 38 Private Secretary to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NAV 40 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary (Policy).</ITAG>Section213.3309 Department of the Air Force<ITAG tagnum="15">AF 1 Secretary (Steno) to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AF 3 Secretary (Steno) to the Assistant Secretary for Manpower, ReserveAffairs, and Installations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AF 5 Secretary (Steno) to the Assistant Secretary for Research andDevelopment Logistics.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AF 8 Secretary (Steno) to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AF 20 Secretary (Steno) to the Military Assistant to the President.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AF 21 Special Assistant to the Military Assistant to the President.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AF 28 Special Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG>Section 213.3310Department of Justice<ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 70 Special Assistant to the Assistant Attorney General, CivilRights Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 83 Confidential Assistant to the Attorney General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 85 Special Assistant to the Director, Community Relations Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 100 Confidential Assistant to the Director of Congressional andPublic Affairs, Immigration and Naturalization Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 104 Special Assistant to the Director, Community Relations Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 152 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the U.S. Attorney.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 158 Secretary (Stenographer) to the U.S. Attorney.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 166 Special Assistant to the Attorney General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 200 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the U.S. Attorney.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 224 Special Assistant to the Deputy Attorney General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 227 Staff Assistant to the Director, Community Relations Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 240 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Attorney General,Civil Rights Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 241 Confidential Assistant and Private Secretary to the Chairman,Foreign Claims Settlement Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 248 Missing Children Program Coordinator to the Administrator,Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 262 Staff Assistant to the Director, Bureau of Justice Statistics.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 266 Public Affairs Specialist to the Deputy Director, Office ofPublic Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 270 Special Assistant to the Assistant Attorney General, CivilRights Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 271 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Attorney General,Office of Legal Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 277 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Attorney General/Chief ofStaff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 294 Special Assistant to the Assistant Attorney General, Tax Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 301 Attorney-Advisor (Special Assistant) to the Principal DeputyAssistant Attorney General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 314 Senior Liaison Officer to the Director, Office of LiaisonServices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 315 Confidential Assistant to the Director, National ObscenityEnforcement Unit, Criminal Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 316 General Attorney to the Director, Office of Victims of Crime.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 319 Supervisory Attorney-Advisor (Associate Director), NationalObscenity Enforcement Unit, Criminal Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 320 Special Assistant to the Assistant Attorney General, AntitrustDivision.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 331 Special Assistant to the Director, National Institute of Justice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 335 Special Assistant to the Assistant Attorney General, CivilDivision.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 339 Executive U.S. Marshal.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 340 Chief of Staff to the Director, Community Relations Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 341 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Executive Office forU.S. Attorneys.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 342 Executive Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner, Immigrationand Naturalization Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 343 Special Assistant to the Attorney General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 344 Confidential Assistant to the Attorney General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">JUS 345 Special Assistant to the Director, Community Relations Service.</ITAG>Section213.3311 Federal Judicial Center<ITAG tagnum="15">FJC2 Staff Assistant to the Director.</ITAG>Section 213.3312 Departmentof the Interior<ITAG tagnum="15">INT 116 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policyand Analysis.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 152 Special Assistant to the Deputy Director, National Park Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 155 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of SurfaceMining.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 165 Special Assistant to the Director, Bureau of Land Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 190 Special Assistant to the Director, Bureau of Mines.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 191 Special Assistant to the Director, Bureau of Mines.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 208 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Director, Minerals ManagementService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 212 Special Assistant to the Assistant to the Secretary and Director,External Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 215 Confidential Assistant to the Executive Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 232 Staff Assistant to the Assistant to the Secretary and Director,External Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 235 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Fish and WildlifeService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 238 Director, Office of External Affairs, to the Commissionerof Reclamation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 246 Public Affairs Specialist to the Director, Minerals ManagementService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 256 Staff Assistant to the Associate Director, Bureau of LandManagement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 264 Confidential Assistant to the Special Assistant (Field Representative)to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 265 Special Assistant to the Director, Bureau of Land Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 268 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Surface Miningand Reclamation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 272 Special Assistant to the Assistant to the Secretary and Director,Office of External Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 274 Congressional Liaison Specialist to the Director, Office ofSurface Mining and Reclamation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 282 Confidential Assistant to the Solicitor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 287 Assistant to the Director, Bureau of Land Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 292 Special Assistant to the Director, Bureau of Land Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 294 Special Assistant to the Director, Fish and Wildlife Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 298 Special Assistant to the Assistant to the Secretary and Director,Office of External Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 300 Special Assistant to the Solicitor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 309 Special Assistant to the Director, Fish and Wildlife Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 311 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Budget,and Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 312 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 313 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Budget,and Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 315 Staff Assistant to the Commissioner of Reclamation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 317 Special Assistant to the Assistant Director of External Affairs,Fish and Wildlife Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 323 Confidential Assistant to the Director of Security and DrugEnforcement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 324 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant to the Secretary andDirector, Office of Congressional and Legislative Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 327 Special Assistant to the Director, National Park Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 328 Staff Assistant to the Director, Geological Survey.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 329 Special Assistant to the Assistant to the Secretary and Director,External Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 330 Deputy Director, Office of Public Affairs, to the Assistantto the Secretary and Director, Office of Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">INT 331 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Minerals ManagementService.</ITAG>Section 213.3313 Department of Agriculture<ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 1 Staff Assistant to the Executive Assistant for Operations andCorrespondence to the Seretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 8 Chauffeur to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 12 Private Secretary to the Under Secretary for InternationalAffairs and Commodity Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 28 Members, Board of Directors, to the Secretary, Federal CropInsurance Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 29 Member, Board of Directors, to the Secretary, Federal CropInsurance Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 31 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 33 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 34 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 44 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Economics.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 48 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Food and NutritionService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 56 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 61 Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Special Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 62 Confidential Assistant to the Under Secretary for Small Communityand Rural Development.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 64 Confidential Assistant to the Under Secretary of Small Communityand Rural Development.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 81 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Farmers Home Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 96 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 102 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Foodand Consumer Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 103 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Foreign AgriculturalService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 106 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 108 Private Secretary to the Deputy Under Secretary for InternationalAffairs and Commodity Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 110 Confidential Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 111 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 128 Private Secretary to the Administrator, Federal Grain InspectionService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 129  Private Secretary to the Assistant Secretary, Marketing andInspection Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 130 Private Secretary to the Deputy Assistant Secretary, Marketingand Inspection Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 137 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Economics.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 139  Staff Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 154 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Food and NutritionService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 164 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Scienceand Education.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 182 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Rural ElectrificationAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 188 Northeast Area Director to the Deputy Administrator, Officeof State and County Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 189 Southeast Area Director to the Deputy Administrator, Officeof State and County Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 190 Midwest Area Director to the Deputy Administrator, Officeof State and County Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 191 Northwest Area Director to the Deputy Administrator, Officeof State and County Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 192  Southwest Area Director to the Deputy Administrator, Officeof State and County Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 194  Private Secretary to the Under Secretary for Small Communityand Rural Development. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 201 Confidential Assistant to the Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 206 Director, Office of the Consumer Advisor to the AssistantSecretary for Food and Consumer Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 207  Member, Board of Directors, to the Secretary, Federal CropInsurance Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 208 Member, Board of Directors, to the Secretary, Federal CropInsurance Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 210 Staff Assistant to the Administrator, Office of InternationalDevelopment and Cooperation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 212 Speical Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 218 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 220 Private Secretary to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 222 Confidential Assistant to the Manager, Federal Crop InsuranceCorporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 224 Director, Congressional and Public Affairs Division, to theManager, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 226 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Food and NutritionService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 229 Staff Assistant/Correspondence Review Officer to the Director,Executive Secretariat.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 231 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 232 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Farmers HomeAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 235 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, AgriculturalMarketing Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 236 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Animal and PlantHealth Inspection Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 238 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 242 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 243 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 244 Confidential Assistant to the Chief, Soil Conservation Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 247 Private Secretary to the Inspector General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 257 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Food andConsumer Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 260 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 261 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 262 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Scienceand Education.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 263 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for SpecialServices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 267 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Governmentaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 273 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Foreign AgriculturalService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 275 Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 276 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, AgriculturalResearch Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 277 Confidential Assistant to the Chief, Soil Conservation Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 279 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Foreign AgriculturalService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 282 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Foreign AgriculturalService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AGR 283 Staff Assistant to the Administrator, Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service.</ITAG>Section 213.3314 Department of Commerce<ITAG tagnum="15">COM 2 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 3 Deputy to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 5 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Executive Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 12 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 20 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 21 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Assistant Secretary forCongressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 22 Deputy Director, Congressional Affairs, to the Deputy AssistantSecretary for Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 73 Congressional Liaison Specialist to the Director, Office ofCongressional Relations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 147 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutivePrograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 156 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, EconomicDevelopment Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 158 Director of Public Affairs to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 162 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, for InternationalEconomic Poliy, International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 165 Director of Business Liaison to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 184 Confidential Assistant to the Director, National Bureau ofStandards.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 191 Confidential Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 200 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Assistant Secretary forCongressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 203 Congressional Liaison Specialist to the Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 220 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forEast Asia and the Pacific, International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 224 Confidential Assistant to the Under Secretary, InternationalTrade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 225 Director, Congressional Affairs Staff, to the Under Secretaryfor Export Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 232 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Economic DevelopmentAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 248 Special Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 263 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for TradeDevelopment, International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 268 Executive Assistant to the Associate Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 272 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for TradeDevelopment, International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 274 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of BusinessLiaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 284 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 285 Deputy Director, Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, to theDeputy Assistant Secretary for Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 287 Congressional Liaison Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 288 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of BusinessLiaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 289 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 293 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for IntergovernmentalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 294 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 295 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutivePrograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 303 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 311 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutivePrograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 312 Confidential Assistant to the Director General, U.S. and ForeignCommercial Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 313 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of Executiveprograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 321 Director, Office of Public Affairs to the Under Secretaryfor International Trade.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 325 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forAfrica, Near East, and South Asia, International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 329 Congressional Liaison Assistant to the Director of CongressionalAffairs, International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 332 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forCapital Goods and International Construction, International trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 334 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 337 Congressional Liaison Assistant to the Deputy Director, CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 350 Deputy Director to the Director, Office of Business Liaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 359 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forAfrica, Near East, and South Asia, International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 365 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Minority BusinessDevelopment Agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 370 Chief of Congressional Affairs to the Director, Minority BusinessDevelopment Agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 374 Congressional Affairs Specialist to the Congresional AffairsAdvisor, Bureau of the Census.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 376 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutivePrograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 378 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Under Secretary for EconomicAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 382 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutivePrograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 390 Confidential Assistant to the Under Secretary for EconomicAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 397 Congressional Affairs Advisor to the Director, Bureau of theCensus.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 410 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of Public Affairs,International Trade Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 415 Congressional Affairs Specialist to the Director, Office ofLegislative Affairs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 416 Director, Office of Consumer Affairs, to the Director, Officeof Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 422 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Commercial Space Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 429 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutivePrograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 430 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Export Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 432 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Commercial Space Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 433 Senior Advisor to the Assistant Administrator for Ocean Servicesand Coastal Zone Management, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 434 Executive Assistant to the Under Secretary for Export Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 436 Director, Office of Private Sector Initiatives, to the Director,Office of Business Liaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">COM 438 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutivePrograms.</ITAG>Section 213.3315 Department of Labor<ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 3 Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 17 Senior Liaison Officer to the Assistant Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 25 Legislative Officer to the Assistant Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 44 Senior Liaison Officer to the Assistant Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 49 Special Assistant to the assistant Secretary, OccupationalSafety and Health Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 55 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 64 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, OccupationalSafety and Health Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 91 Confidential Staff Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretaryfor Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 99 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Educationand Training.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 100 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for InternationalLabor Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 103 Secretary's Representatives to the Associate Deputy UnderSecretary for Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 104 Secretary's Representative to the Deputy Under Secretary forIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 106 Secretary's Representative to the Associate Deputy Under Secretaryfor Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 107 Secretary's Representative to the Deputy Under Secretary forIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 108 Secretary's Representative to the Associate Deputy Under Secretaryfor Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 109 Secretary's Representative to the Associate Deputy Under Secretaryfor Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 110 Secretary's Representative to the Deputy Under Secretary forIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 111 Secretary's Representative to the Deputy Under Secretary forIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 115 Secretary (Typing) to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 116 Secretary (Typing) to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 118 Secretary (Typing) to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 122 Secretary (Typing) to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 127 Staff Assistant to the Director, Office of Workers' CompensationPrograms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 130 Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 132 Senior Legislative Officer to the Assistant Secretary forCongressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 137 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public andIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 146 Confidential Assistant to the Solicitor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 152 Special Assistant to the Deputy Director, Women's Bureau.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 160 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 169 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 171 Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 179 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, EmploymentStandards Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 184 Special Assistant for Public Affairs to the Deputy Under Secretaryfor Employment Standards.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 189 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, OccupationalSafety and Health Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 190 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 191 Staff Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 192 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Pension andWelfare Benefits Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 195 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Employmentand Training.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 196 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Veterans'Employment and Training.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 199 Deputy Liasison Officer to the Assistant Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 200 Special Assistant (Speech Writer) to the Assistant Secretaryfor Employment and Training.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 208 Deputy Liaison Officer to the Assistant Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 209 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Veterans'Employment and Training.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 210 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 212 Staff Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 215 Staff Assistant to the Director, Women's Bureau.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 219 Special Assistant to the Associate Deputy Under Secretaryfor Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 221 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public andIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 230 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public andIntergovernment Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 231 Special Assistant to the Associate Deputy Under Secretaryfor Intergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 234 Senior Liaison Officer to the Deputy Under Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 237 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 238 Assistant to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 240 Assistant to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 243 Deputy Liaison Officer to the Deputy Under Secretary for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 244 Staff Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 245 Assistant to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 246 Assistant to the Secretary's Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 248 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public andIntergovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 251 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for MineSafety and Health.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">LAB 254 Associate Assistant Secretary for Congressional Affairs.</ITAG>Section213.3316 Department of Health and Human Services<ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 213 Steward to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 230 Attorney-Advisor (Special Assistant) to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 273 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 293 Special Assistant to the Commissioner, Administration forChildren, Youth and Families, Office of Human Development Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 331 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Health Care FinancingAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 332 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Human DevelopmentServices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 336 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislation(Human Services).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 354 Associate Commissioner, Administration for Children, Youthand Families, Office of Human Development Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 358 Congressional Liaison Specialist to the Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Legislation (Congressional Liaison).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 394 Confidential Assistant to the Executive Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 419 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 446 Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 448 Staff Assistant to the Associate Commissioner for GovernmentalAffairs, Social Security Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 452 Special Assistant for Advisory Committees to the Special Assistant/AdvisoryCommittee Officer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 455 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of Legislationand Policy, Health Care Financing Adminsitration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 462 Special Assistant for Liaison Activities to the Administrator,Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health Administration, Public Health Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 467 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of CommunityServices, Family Support Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 477 Special Assistant for Policy Development to the Director,Policy Development Staff, Social Security Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 484 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of Legislationand Policy, Health Care Financing Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 487 Confidential Assistant to the Administrator, Health Care FinancingAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 491 Associate Commissioner, Head Start Bureau, Administrationfor Children, Youth and Families.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 509 Director, Youth 2000 Program, to the Assistant Secretary forHuman Development Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 510 Deputy Director, Office of Public Liaison, Health Care FinancingAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 512 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for HumanDevelopment Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HHS 517 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Family Assistance.</ITAG>Section213.3317 Department of Education<ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 1 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Planning,Budget, and Evaluation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 4 Special Assistant to the Director, Intergovernmental Affairs,Office of Intergovernmental and Interagency Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU  Confidential Assistant to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 8 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Office ofCivil Rights.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 14 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 15 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 20 Steward to the Executive Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 21 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forLegislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 37 Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 38 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for PostsecondaryEducation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 46 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Vocationaland Adult Education.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 67 Special Assistant Chief of Staff/Counselor to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 71 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Legislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 72 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Legislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 74 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Legislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 77 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 78 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 87 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Elementaryand Secondary Education.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 91 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 94 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for PostsecondaryEducation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 96 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Bilingual Educationand Minority Languages Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 101 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 105 Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 108 Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 109 Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 110 Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 111 Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 112 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for EducationalResearch and Improvement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 115 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for HigherEducation Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 131 Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 146 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for SpecialEducation and Rehabilitative Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 147 Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 149 Special Assistant to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 152 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 153 Special Assistant to the Director, Intergovernmental AffairsStaff, Office of Intergovernmental and Interagency Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 154 Executive Director, Intergovernmental Advisory Council onEducation, to the Deputy Under Secretary for Intergovernmental and IntergencyAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 155 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Intergovernmentaland Interagency Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 158 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Intergovernmentaland Interagency Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 167 Diretor, Operations Support Services, to the Deputy AssistantSecretary for Operations, Office of Civil Rights.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 168 Special Assistant to the Under Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 171 Director, Legislative Liaison, to the Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Legislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 185 Staff Assistant to the Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 186 Special Assistant to the Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 188 Staff Assistant to the Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 193 Executive Secretary to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 195 Executive Assistant to the Comptroller, Office of the DeputyUnder Secretary for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 196 Special Assistant to the Director, Special Education Programs,Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 204 Deputy Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 205 Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 209 Special Assistant to the Secretary for Educational Researchand Improvement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 214 Special Assistant to the Secretary's Regional Representative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 218 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for HigherEducation, Office of Postsecondary Education.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 248 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for PostsecondaryEducation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 249 Staff Assistant to the Director, Programs for the Improvementof Practice, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 251 Special Assistant to the Director, Intergovernmental AffairsStaff, Office of Intergovernmental and Interagency Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 254 Director, Postsecondary Relations Staff, to the Deputy AssistantSecretary for Higher Education, Office of Postsecondary Education. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 256 Special Assistant to the Director, Legislative Liaison Staff,Office of Legislation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 266 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for PostsecondaryEducation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 267 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Vocationaland Adult Education. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 275 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Vocationaland Adult Education. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 295 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for StudentFinancial Assistance Programs, Office of Postsecondary Education. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 297 Confidential Assistant to the Secretary's Senior Special Assistant.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 301 Confidential Assistant to the Director, IntergovernmentalAffairs, Office of Intergovernmental and Interagency Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 302 Confidential Assistant to the Chief of Staff. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 303 Special Assistant to the Executive Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 305 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Private Sector InitiativeStaff. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 306 Confidential Assistant to the Chief of Staff/Counselor tothe Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 307 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Private Sector InitiativeStaff. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 308 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Private Sector InitiativeStaff. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 310 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Intergovernmentaland Interagency Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 312 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for EducationalResearch and Improvement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EDU 313 Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for Management.</ITAG>Section 213.3318 Environmental Protection Agency <ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 5 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 58 Congressional Liaison Specialist to the Director, Office ofCongressional Liaison. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 61 Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Administrationand Resource Management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 69 Deputy Director, Office of Congressional Liaison. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 70 Congressional Relations Officer to the Director, Office ofCongressional Liaison. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 94 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 100 Staff Assistant to the Associate Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 106 Staff Assistant to the Director, Office of Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 109 Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for SolidWaste and Emergency Response. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 111 Special Assistant to the Director of Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 112 Staff Assistant to the General Counsel. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 116 Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Administrationand Resources Management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EPA 118 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Enforcementand Compliance Monitoring. </ITAG>Section 213.3322 Interstate Commerce Commission<ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 1 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 3 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 5 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 6 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 8 Confidential Assistant to a Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 45 Congressional Liaison Representative to the Director, Officeof Legislative and Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 47 Government Affairs Assistant to the Director, Office of Governmentand Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ICC 48 Congressional Liaison Representative to the Director, Officeof Government and Public Affairs. </ITAG>Section 213.3325 Tax Court of theUnited States <ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 40 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 41 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 42 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 43 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 44 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 45 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 46 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 47 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 48 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 49 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 50 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 51 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 52 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 53 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 54 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 55 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 56 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 57 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 58 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 59 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 60 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 61 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 62 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 63 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 65 Secretary and Confidential Assistant to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 66 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 67 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 68 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 69 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 70 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 71 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 72 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 73 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 74 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 75 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 76 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 77 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">TCOUS 78 Trial Clerk to the Judge. </ITAG>Section 213.3327 Departmentof Veterans Affairs <ITAG tagnum="15">VA 34 Director, Congressional Affairs, to the Associate Deputy Administratorfor Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">VA 42 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">VA 48 Confidential Assistant to the Chief of Staff. </ITAG>Section213.3328 United States Information Agency <ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 2 Executive Assistant to the Director. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 22 Director, New York Foreign Press Center, to the AssociateDirector for Programs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 29 Public Affairs Specialist to the Deputy Counselor for Pressand Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 56 Staff Specialist to the Director, Office of Private SectorLiaison. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 57 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for Educationaland Cultural Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 58 Special Assistant to the Deputy Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 67 Chief, Voluntary Visitor Division, to the Associate Directorfor Educational and Cultural Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 73 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for Educationaland Cultural Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 75 Special Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 77 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 91 Program Officer to the Coordinator, U.S.-Soviet Exchange Initiative.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 98 Special Assistant to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 101 Program Officer to the Director, New York Foreign Press Center.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 103 Equal Employment Manager to the Associate Director for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">USIA 104 Special Assistant to the Director, Private Sector Committees.</ITAG>Section213.3330 Securities and Exchange Commission<ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 2 Executive Aide (Typing) to the Executive Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 5 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 6 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 9 Secretary to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 12 Public Information Officer to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 14 Secretary (Typing) to the Director of Economic and Policy Research.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 15 Secretary (Steno) to the Director, Division of Market Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 18 Secretary (Steno) to the Director, Division of Investment Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 19 Secretary (Typing) to the Director, Division of Corporate Finance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SEC 24 Secretary (Typing) to the Chief Economist.</ITAG>Section 213.3331Department of Energy<ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 2 Secretary (Confidential Assistant) to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 40 Legal Advisor to a Member, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 41 Legal Advisor to a Member, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 42 Legal Advisor to a Member, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 47 Technical Advisor to a Member, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 55 Staff Assistant to the Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 60 Confidential Assistant to a Member, Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 68 Confidential Assistant to a Member, Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 74 Secretary (Confidential Assistant) to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 75 Legal Advisor to a Member, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 77 Staff Assistant to the Administrative Assistant to the Secretaryand Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 87 Staff Assistant to the Associate Director, Office of ResourceManagement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 95 Staff Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 103 Attorney Advisor (Public Utilities), to the Chairman, FederalEnergy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 105 Confidential Assistant to a Member, Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 106 Confidential Assistant to a Member, Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 172 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Conservationand Renewable Energy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 174 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 185 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExternalAffairs, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 197 Director, Division of Congressional Affairs, to the Director,Office of External Affairs, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 198 Director, Senate Liaison Branch, to the Director, Office ofExternal Affairs, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 199 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of Consumerand Public Affairs, Federal Energy and Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 200 Special Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 214 Staff Assistant to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 218 Director, Intergovernmental Affairs Division, to the Director,Office of External Affairs, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 243 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for InternationalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 250 Director, Division of Public Affairs, to the Director, Officeof External Affairs, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 264 Staff Assistant to the Administrator, Energy Information Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 269 Deputy Assistant Secretary to the Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Congressional, Intergovernmental, and Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 274 Staff Assistant to the Special Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 276 Secretary (Confidential Assistant) to the Special Assistantto the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 292 Chauffeur to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 294 Special Programs Liaison Specialist to the Director, Divisionof Public Liaison, Office of Congressional, Intergovernmental and PublicAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 306 Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 307 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Environment,Safety and Health.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 314 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for InternationalAffairs and Energy Emergencies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 328 Senior Policy Assistant to the Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Congressional, Intergovernmental and Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 339 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for EnergyEmergencies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 344 Senior Policy Assistant to the Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Congressional, Intergovernmental, and Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 350 Associate Director to the Director, Office of Policy, Planning,and Analysis.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 357 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for InternationalAffairs and Energy Emergencies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 358 Staff Assistant to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 359 Staff Assistant to the Executive Assistant to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 360 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Defense Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 361 Staff Assistant to the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Conservation and Renewable Energy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 362 Confidential Assistant to the Executive Assistant Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 363 Staff Assistant to the Deputy General Counsel for Environment,Conservation, and Legislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 365 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for ExternalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 366 Speechwriter to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for ExternalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 367 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 368 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, Management andAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOE 369 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for EnergyEmergencies.</ITAG>Section 213.3332 Small Business Administration<ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 4 Special Assistant to the Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 11 Deputy Assistant Administrator for Congressional and LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 43 Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Congressionaland Legislative Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 45 Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for ProcurementAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 66 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 69 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 71 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 73 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 76 Executive Assistant to the Director of Women's Business Ownership.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 97 Confidential Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 100 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 106 Director, Office of Private Sector Initiatives, to the AssociateDeputy Administrator for Special Programs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 122 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 128 Director of Women's Business Ownership to the Associate Administratorfor Business Development.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 132 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 134 Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for BusinessDevelopment.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 135 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 139 Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for BusinessDevelopment.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 140 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">SBA 141 Staff Assistant to the Associate Deputy Administrator forSpecial Programs.</ITAG>Section 213.3333 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation<ITAG tagnum="15">FDIC 2 Secretary to a Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FDIC 7 Special Assistant to the Director, Congressional Liaison Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FDIC 9 Legislative Attorney and Advisor to the Director, Office ofCongressional Relations and Public Information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FDIC 10 Legislative Advisor to the Director of Legislative Affairs.</ITAG>Section213.3334 Federal Trade Commission<ITAG tagnum="15">FTC 2 Director, Office of Public Affairs, to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FTC 6 Director Congressional Relations to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FTC 7 Deputy Director, Office of Congressional Relations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FTC 9 Staff Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG>Section 213.3337 GeneralServices Administration<ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 16 Confidential Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 24 Special Assistant to the Commissioner, Public Building Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 26 Confidential Assistant to the Commissioner, Public BuildingService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 51 Special Assistant to the Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 63 Director, Office of Business and Industry Affairs, to the AssociateAdministrator for Congressional Affairs and Industry Relations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 72 Confidential Assistant to the Commissioner, Federal SupplyService.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 73 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 83 Confidential Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 86 Confidential Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 89 Confidential Assistant to the Director of Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 90 Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 93 Executive Assistant to the Administrator for Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 99 Confidential Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 100 Director, Office of the Executive Secretariat, to the Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 103 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of the ExecutiveSecretariat.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 106 Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for PublicAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 107 Special Assistant to the Executive Director, Office of InformationResources Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 109 Confidential Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">GSA 114 Confidential Assistant to the Regional Administrator.</ITAG>Section213.3338 Federal Communications Commission<ITAG tagnum="15">FCC 9 Confidential Assistant to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCC 13 Congressional Liaison Specialist to the Director, Office ofLegislative Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCC 15 Chief, News Media Division to the Director, Office of PublicAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCC 17 Confidential Staff Assistant to the Chief, Office of Plansand Policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCC 18 Confidential Staff Assistant to the Director, Office of LegislativeAffairs.</ITAG>Section 213.3339 U.S. International Trade Commission<ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 1 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 3 Staff Assistant (Economics) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 5 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 6 Staff Assistant (Economics) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 7 Special Assistant (Economics) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 9 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 12 Staff Assistant (Economics) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 13 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 14 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 15 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 17 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 18 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 19 Staff Assistant (Economics) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 22 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 24 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 25 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 26 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 29 Staff Assistant (Legal) to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 30 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 31 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 32 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 33 Staff Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ITC 34 Staff Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG>Section 213.3340National Archives and Records Administration<ITAG tagnum="15">NARA 4 Assistant to the Archivist of the United States.</ITAG>Section213.3341 National Labor Relations Board<ITAG tagnum="15">NLRB 5 Confidential Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NLRB 17 Attorney Advisor (Labor) to the Chairman.</ITAG>Section 213.3342Export-Import Bank of the United States<ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 2 Private Secretary to the First Vice President and Vice Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 3 Administrative Assistant to a Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 4 Administrative Assistant to a Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 5 Administrative Assistant to a Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 12 Secretary (Steno) to the Senior Vice President for ExporterCredits, Guarantees, and Insurance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 15 Administrative Assistant (Typing) to the President and Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 16 Administrative Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EXIM 24 Secretary (Steno) to the Executive Vice President.</ITAG>Section213.3343 Farm Credit Administration<ITAG tagnum="15">FCA 2 Private Secretary to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCA 4 Deputy Director for Public Affairs to the Director, Office ofCongressional and Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCA 5 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of Congressionaland Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCA 6 Executive Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FCA 8 Secretary to the Chairman.</ITAG>Section 213.3346 Selective ServiceSystem<ITAG tagnum="15">SSS 9 Assistant Director of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs</ITAG>Section213.3348 National Aeronautics and Space Administration<ITAG tagnum="15">NASA 1 Secretary (Steno) to the Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NASA 2 Secretary (Steno) to the Deputy Administrator.</ITAG>Section213.3351 Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission<ITAG tagnum="15">FM 1 Secretary (Steno) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FM 3 Confidential Secretary to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FM 4 Confidential Secretary to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FM 7 Attorney-Advisor (General) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FM 8 Attorney-Advisor (General) to a Commissioner.</ITAG>Section 213.3352Government Printing Office<ITAG tagnum="15">GPO 15 Special Assistant to the Public Printer.</ITAG>Section 213.3354Federal Home Loan Bank Board<ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB Secretary (Typing) to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 5 Staff Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 6 Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 7 Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 19 Congressional Liaison to the Executive Staff Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 33 Special Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 35 Deputy Director, Office of Congressional Liaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 36 Deputy Chief of Staff to the Executive Director and Chiefof Staff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 40 Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 43 Deputy to the Executive Director, Federal Savings and LoanInsurance Corporation, for the Southwest Plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 45 Congressional Lobbying Specialist to the Executive Directorfor Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FHLB 46 Assistant to the Deputy Executive Director for Asset Management.</ITAG>Section213.3356 Commission on Civil Rights<ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 1 Special Assistant to the Staff Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 12 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 13 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 14 Deputy General Counsel to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 15 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 23 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 27 Public Affairs Officer to the Staff Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 28 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 29 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 30 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CCR 32 Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG>Section 213.3357National Credit Union Administration<ITAG tagnum="15">NCUA 9 Staff Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NCUA 15 Secretary (Typing) to the President, Central Liquidity Facility.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NCUA 16 Confidential Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NCUA 18 Special Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NCUA 19 Writer-Editor to the Executive Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NCUA 21 Staff Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG>Section 213.3359 ACTION<ITAG tagnum="15">ACT 32 Confidential Assistant to the Associate Director for Domesticand Anti-Poverty Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACT 48 Special Assistant to the Deputy Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACT 56 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for Domestic andAnti-Poverty Operations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACT 58 Special Assistant to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACT 79 Assistant Director for VISTA/Student Community Service Programsto the Associate Director.</ITAG>Section 213.3360 Consumer Product SafetyCommission.<ITAG tagnum="15">CPSC 7 Special Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CPSC 16 Director, Office of Congressional Relations, to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CPSC 20 Special Assistant (Legal) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CPSC 23  Special Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CPSC 25 Staff Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CPSC 37 Supervisory Public Affairs Specialist to the Executive Director,Office of Public Affairs.</ITAG>Section 213.3364 U.S. Arms Control and DisarmamentAgency<ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 2 Secretary (Steno) to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 4 Private Secretary to the Assistant Director for Verificationand Intelligence.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 5 Secretary (Steno) to the Assistant Director for Nuclear andWeapons Control.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 15 Secretary to the Chairman, General Advisory Committee.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 17 Secretary (Steno) to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 20 Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 23 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Director for MultilateralAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 27 Special Assistant to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 29 Congressional Affairs Specialist to the Director of CongressionalAffairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 30 Secretary (Steno) to the Special Representative for Arms Controland Disarmament.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">ACDA 32 Secretary (Typing) to the Assistant Director for StrategicPrograms.</ITAG>Section 213.3367 Federal Maritime Commission<ITAG tagnum="15">FMC 2 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FMC 5 Confidential Assistant to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FMC 7 Secretary (Steno) to a Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FMC 8 Secretary (Steno) to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FMC 9 Secretary (Typing) to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FMC 10 Secretary (Steno) to a Commissioner. </ITAG>Section 213.3368Agency for International Development <ITAG tagnum="15">AID 38 Director, Office of Interbureau Affairs and Special Projects,to the Deputy Assistant Administrator for External Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 45 Deputy Assistant to the Administrator for Public Affairs tothe Assistant Administrator, External Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 48 Special Assistant to the Director of Policy Development andProgram Review. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 58 Special Assistant to the Coordinator, Office of Public Diplomacyfor Latin America and the Caribbean. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 64 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Administrator forManagement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 65 Supervisory Public Affairs Specialist to the Deputy AssistantAdministrator for Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 68 Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for PrivateEnterprise. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 76 Public Affairs Specialist to the Director, Public Liaison.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 80 Confidential Assistant to the Deputy Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AID 82 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Deputy Director, Officeof Legislative Affairs. </ITAG>Section 213.3372 Administrative Office ofthe United States Courts <ITAG tagnum="15">AOUSC 5 Secretary (Steno) to the Deputy Legislative Affairs Officer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AOUSC 8 Attorney-Advisor (Legislative) to the Legislative and PubicAffairs Officer. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AOUSC 9 Public Information Officer to the Legislative and Public AffairsOfficer. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">AOUSC 10 Secretary (Typing) to the Legislative and Public AffairsOfficer. </ITAG>Section 213.3376 Applachian Regional Commission <ITAG tagnum="15">ARC 8 Legislative and Policy Advisor to the Federal Co-Chairman. </ITAG>Section213.3377 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission <ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 2 Special Assistant to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 5 Confidential Assistant to a Member. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 9 Special Assistant to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 12 Media Contact Specialist to the Director, Communications Staff,Office of Communications and Legislative Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 15 Research Specialist to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 17 Special Assistant to a Member. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 22 Director, Legislative Affairs, to the Director, Office ofCommunications and Legislative Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 23 Special Assistant to a Member. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 25 Media Contact Specialist to the Director, Communications Staff,Office of Communications and Legislative Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 37 Social Science Research Specialist to the Director, Officeof Program Research. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 38 Legislative Affairs Specialist to the Director, Office ofCongressional Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 40 Legislative Affairs Specialist to the Director, Office ofCommunications and Legislative Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">EEOC 41 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of Communicationsand Legislative Affairs. </ITAG>Section 213.3379 Commodity Futures TradingCommission <ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 1 Administrative Assistant to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 3 Administrative Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 4 Administrative Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 5 Administrative Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 6 Administrative Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 7 Supervisory Public Affairs Specialist to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 12 Special Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 15 Special Assistant to a Commissioner. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">CFTC 21 Governmental Affairs Officer to the Chairman. </ITAG>Section213.3382 National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities <ITAG tagnum="84">National Endowment for the Arts </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NEA 9 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NEA 45 Special Assistant to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NEA 49 Associate Deputy Chairman for Programs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NEA 50 Special Projects Coordinator (Development) to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">National Endowment for the Humanities </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NEH 46 Special Assistant to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NEH 48 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NEH 54 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Director, Instituteof Museum Services. </ITAG>Section 213.3384 Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment <ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 35 Legislative Officer to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 60 Supervisory Public Affairs Specialist to the Assistant Secretaryfor Public Affairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 114 Special Assistant/Director, Executive Secretariat to the Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 135 Special Assistant to the General Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 151 Staff Assistant to the President, Government National MortgageAssociation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 163 Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for MultifamilyHousing. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 176 Special Assistant to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 182 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Housing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 184 Senior Assistant for Congressional Relations to the DeputyAssistant Secretary for Legislation and Congressional Relations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 200 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 203 Legislative Officer to the Deputy Assistant Secretary forLegislation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 206 Intergovernmental Relations Officer to the Deputy Under Secretaryfor Intergovernmental Relations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 212 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Research.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 213 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Program Developmentand Research. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 216 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 227 Executive Assistant to the Regional Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 238 Special Assistant to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 247 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Housing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 255 Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for ProgramDevelopment and Research. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 266 Special Assistant to the President, Government National MortgageAssociation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 281 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 289 Associate Deputy Assistant Secretary for Program Policy Developmentand Evaluation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 292 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for CommunityPlanning and Development. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 359 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 373 Special Assistant (Speech Issues to the Assistant Secretaryfor Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 374 Executive Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for FieldCoordination. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 376 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 386 Executive Assistant to the Under Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 396 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Small and DisadvantagedBusiness Utilization. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 400 Special Advisor to the Assistant Secretary for Legislationand Congressional Relations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 404 Special Assistant to the Regional Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 407 Executive Assistant to the Regional Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">HUD 408 Special Projects Coordinator to the Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Policy, Financial Management, and Administration. </ITAG>Section 213.3388President's Commission on White House Fellows <ITAG tagnum="15">PCWHF 2 Associate Director. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCWHF 3 Confidential Assistant to the Director. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">PCWHF 4 Special Assistant to the Director. </ITAG>Section 213.3389National Mediation Board <ITAG tagnum="15">NMB 53 Confidential Assistant to the Chairman. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NMB 54 Confidential Assistant to a Member. </ITAG>Section 213.3391Office of Personnel Management <ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 8 Confidential Assistant to the Director. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 10 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Director for PublicAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 11 Confidential Assistant to the Director, Office of ExecutiveAdministration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 17 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 18 Staff Assistant (Typing) to the Director, Office of ExecutiveAdministration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 19 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 21 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 25 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of CongressionalRelations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 26 Confidential Assistant (Typing) to the Director, Office ofGovernment Ethics. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 31 Staff Assistant to the Counselor to the Director. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 33 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Director for CongressionalRelations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 36 Staff Assistant to the Director, Office of Executive Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 37 Executive Assistant to the Director, Office of Government Ethics.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 39 Special Assistant to the Deputy Director. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 40 Special Assistant to the Associate Director for Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 41 Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">OPM 42 Confidential Assistant (Typing) to the Chief of Staff. </ITAG>Section213.3392 Federal Labor Relations Authority <ITAG tagnum="15">FLRA 13 Special Assistant to the General Counsel. </ITAG>Section 213.3394Department of Transportation <ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 1 Staff Assistant to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 14 Chauffeur to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 56 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Saint Lawrence SeawayDevelopment Corporation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 57 Confidential Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for GovernmentalAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 60 Congressional Liaison Officer to the Director, Office of CongressionalAffairs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 77 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 131 Staff Assistant to the Administrator, Federal Highway Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 147 Staff Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 157 Secretary (Steno) to the Associate Administrator for Policyand International Aviation, Federal Aviation Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 197 Staff Assistant to the Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 204 Executive Assistant to the Administrator, Federal RailroadAdministration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 209 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Urban Mass TransportationAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 218 Staff Assistant to the Director, Office of Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 233 Staff Assistant to the General Counsel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 239 Executive Assistant to the Administrator, Maritime Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 243 Special Assistant to the Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 244 Deputy Executive Secretary for Management to the Director,Executive Secretariat.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 249 Deputy Executive Secretary for Policy to the Director, ExecutiveSecretariat.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 251 Staff Assistant to the Administrator, Maritime Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 257 Staff Assistant to the Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 263 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Saint Lawrence SeawayDevelopment Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 270 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 274 Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 276 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Research and SpecialPrograms Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 278 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 281 Special Assistant for Intergovernmental Relations to the Administrator,Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 287 Staff Assistant to the Deputy Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 301 Legislative Research Officer to the Assistant Secretary forGovernmental Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 303 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 307 Director, Office of Intergovernmental and Consumer Affairs,to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Intergovernmental and Consumer Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 308 Deputy Director (Intergovernmental) to the Director, Officeof Intergovernmental and Consumer Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 309 Special Assistant to the Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">DOT 311 Staff Assistant to the Chief of Staff.</ITAG>Section 213.3395Federal Emergency Management Agency<ITAG tagnum="15">FEMA 3 Director of Congressional Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FEMA 33 Director, Office of Regional Operations, to the Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FEMA 34 Executive Assistant to the Deputy Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FEMA 36 Confidential Assistant to the Associate Director, EmergencyOperations Directorate.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">FEMA 38 Confidential Assistant to the Associate Director, EmergencyOperations Directorate.</ITAG>Section 213.3396 National Transportation SafetyBoard<ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 1 Special Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 30 Confidential Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 31 Confidential Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 32 Confidential Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 33 Confidential Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 34 Confidential Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 92 Government and Public Affairs Officer to the Managing Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 104 Special Assistant to a Board Member.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">NTSB 105 Special Assistant to the Chairman.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Office of Personnel Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Constance Berry Newman,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>Authority: </T3>5 U.S.C. 3301, 3302; E.O. 10577, 3 CFR 1954-1958 Comp.,p. 218.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-18743 Filed 8-9-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6325-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>