<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89330-0025 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-30-89.f2.A1024</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">National Highway Traffic Safety Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 571</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 89-04; Notice 01]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">RIN 2127-AC89</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Bus Fuel System Integrity</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),Department of Transportation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Advance notice of proposed rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> This advance notice announces that the National HighwayTraffic Safety Administration is considering amending Federal Motor VehicleSafety Standard No. 301, <T3>Fuel System Integrity,</T3> with respect to large (over 10,000 poundsgross vehicle weight rating) and small (10,000 pounds gross vehicle weightrating or less) buses, including school buses. More specifically, NHTSAis considering the issuance of a proposal to apply current or upgradedrequirements for the fuel systems of large school buses to other typesof buses rated over 10,000 pounds (such as inter-city and transit buses),and to upgrade the standard's current requirements for all buses (includingschool buses) to which the standard already applies. This notice requestscomments and information to assist the agency in determining whether toissue such a proposal. The purpose of such proposals would be to furtherreduce the risk of fire in bus crashes.This notice comprises one part of NHTSA's comprehensive effort to assessthe safety need to amend several of the motor vehicle safety standardsrelating to the crash worthiness and post-crash performance of buses ingeneral and school buses in particular. These issues have received substantialpublic attention following the tragic crash last year of a compact pickuptruck driven by a drunken motorist into a crowded church bus. Twenty-sevenof the 67 occupants of the bus died as a result of smoke inhalation, andnot from trauma or crash injuries resulting from the collision. Even thoughthe Kentucky crash was a unique catastrophe and the safety record of schooland other buses is extremely positive overall, the agency believes it shouldconsider whether there are improvements NHTSA could propose in its safetystandards that might provide an even higher level of safety.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments on this notice must be received by the agency nolater than May 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> Comments should refer to the docket number and noticenumber and be submitted in writing to: Docket Section, National HighwayTraffic Safety Administration, Room 5109, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington,DC, 20590. Telephone: (202) 366-5267. Docket hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:00p.m. Monday through Friday.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Dr. William J.J. Liu, NRM-12,Office of Vehicle Safety Standards, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,400 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 20590. Telephone: (202) 366-4923.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> On May 14 of last year, a church buscollided head-on with a compact pickup truck in Carrollton, Kentucky. Itwas an extremely severe crash; the combined velocity of the two vehiclesat the moment of impact was in excess of 100 miles per hour (mph). Duringor shortly after the crash, a fire apparently started near or at the frontbus entrance and was sustained by fuel from the wreckage. Twenty-sevenoccupants of the bus died as a result of smoke inhalation, and not fromtrauma or crash injuries resulting from the collision. The church bus,a used school bus designed to carry 66 passengers, was filled to capacitywith children, teenagers and adults.The bus was manufactured in 1977 shortly before the April 1, 1977, effectivedate of the school bus safety standards NHTSA issued pursuant to the Schoolbusand Motor Vehicle Safety Amendments of 1974. It was used first as a schoolbus and later sold to a church. Thus, the bus was typical of the pre-1977school bus body type which had been in use for many years, and presumablymet Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 302 for the flammabilityof interior materials (which took effect in 1972). The bus was not requiredto comply with the comprehensive school bus emergency exit requirementsof Standard No. 217 or the school bus fuel system integrity requirementsof Standard No. 301 which took effect on April 1, 1977, and apparentlydid not fully meet all aspects of those school bus standards.In the aftermath of the Kentucky crash, NHTSA has initiated a series ofefforts to assess the safety need to amend several of the motor vehiclessafety standards relating to the crashworthiness of buses in general andthat of school buses in particular. (Under NHTSA's regulations, a ``bus''is a motor vehicle designed for carrying 11 or more persons (driver included).A ``school bus'' is a ``bus'' that is sold for purposes that include carryingstudents to and from school or related events (common carriers in urbantransportation excluded). 49 CFR 571.3(b).)In taking these steps, NHTSA wishes to emphasize that the safety recordof these vehicles has been remarkably good. According to the agency's records,the fatalities in the Kentucky crash were the first ones caused by firein a school bus since NHTSA began careful tracking of all traffic fatalitiesin 1975. Further, over the past 10 years, school bus occupants have sustainedan average of 15 fatal injuries each year. While each of these fatalitiesis tragic, the number of school bus occupant fatalities is small comparedto occupant fatalities in all other types of motor vehicles. In 1987, forexample, there were 38,544 occupant deaths in motor vehicles other thanschool buses, which includes 5,663 deaths among children aged five to 18.These fatalities for 1987 are similar in number to those of other recentyears.School buses, which together travel 3.3 billion miles each year, are oneof the safest means of travel. On a vehicle-mile basis, there are 0.5 schoolbus fatalities per hundred million vehicle miles travelled, compared to1.9 occupant fatalities per hundred million vehicle miles in passengercars_i.e., school buses are about four times safer than passenger carson a per-vehicle mile basis. Moreover, since a school bus typically carriesmany more occupants than a passenger car, the comparison on a per-passenger-milebasis would be even more favorable for school buses.The safety record for other types of buses is also extremely good. Occupantfatalities in inter-city and transit buses have averaged 18 per year overthe past 10 years. During 1977-1987, there was one occupant fatality ina non-school bus in a crash in which fire was the most harmful event.As safe as today's buses are, it is incumbent upon NHTSA to inquire whetherthe bus fleet might be made safer still. NHTSA is issuing this notice toobtain factual information on available technologies, real-world environmentalconditions and other factors that might help the agency decide what furthersteps should be taken to improve school bus safety and the steps that canbe reasonably taken to reduce the risk of another Kentucky tragedy. Theagency believes it is important to find out more about the <T3>potential </T3>for fire-related injury and death on buses and schoolbuses, and whether reasonable measures can be taken to reduce that potential.The agency is in the process of determining whether to include buses over10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), such as inter-city andtransit buses, under coverage of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety StandardNo. 301, <T3>Fuel System Integrity.</T3> More specifically, the agency is consideringextending current or strengthened fuel system integrity requirements forlarge (over 10,000 pounds GVWR) school buses to large non-school buses.NHTSA is also considering the issuance of a proposal to upgrade the standard'scurrent requirements for all buses (including school buses) to which thestandard already applies. This advance notice requests comments to assistthe agency in developing, if possible, viable approaches toward increasingthe capability of the fuel systems of inter-city, transit, and school busesto withstand crash forces with limited fuel spillage. The agency does not,however, intend to imply by issuing this notice that it is possible orreasonable to expect to totally eliminate the risk of excessive fuel spillagein every type of crash. In some types of catastrophic crashes, crash forcesexerted on and damage to the fuel system are so great that fuel spillagebeyond that permitted by Standard No. 301 could occur (e.g., a collisionwith a train). In those rare crashes, the crash forces to which the fuelsystem is subjected far exceeds crash forces generated in impacts in whichbuses are usually involved_i.e., the forces against which the integrityof the fuel system is designed to withstand. For lesser crashes, however,it is possible that upgraded requirements for bus fuel systems could reducethe risk of excessive fuel spillage, and thus the risk of death or injuryto occupants due to fire.Among other issues, the agency is interested in obtaining information onthe safety need to amend the current requirements of Standard No. 301.To assess such a need, the agency will consider the magnitude and natureof the risk of fire-related death or injury to vehicle occupants. Thisrisk is related to a variety of factors, including the ability of an occupantto escape from a burning vehicle, the time needed to escape, and the presenceand suitability of exits and their ease of use.Some of these factors are, in turn, related to each other. For example,escape time and the suitability of emergency exits are related. The speedwith which a person is able to escape from a burning vehicle is affectedby the source and magnitude of the fire, the amount of smoke produced,the toxicity of the fumes, the flammability resistance of the vehicle interiormaterials and the speed and ease with which egress is possible from thevehicle. Factors relating to the latter include the number of passengerscarried in the vehicle, and the number and size of doors, windows and otherapertures and the ease of opening them.On November 4, 1988, NHTSA published concurrently two separate ANPRMs toaddress concerns and questions relating specifically to the adequacy ofFederal minimum school bus emergency exit requirements in Standard No.217 (53 FR 44623), and to examine possible revisions to the Federal MotorVehicle Safety Standard for flammability resistance of interior materials(Standard No. 302) of large buses, including school buses (53 FR 44627).For the same reason that every one of the Federal motor vehicle safetystandard must be premised on a safety need for it, any proposal by theagency to amend a standard must be justified by such a need. The agencywishes to explore whether such a need exists for amending the requriementsof Standard No. 301 as they apply to buses (including school buses), andis issuing this advance notice to request information pertaining to thesevehicles.This notice discusses a range of issues that NHTSA is considering in decidingwhether to develop and issue a proposal relating to the fuel system integrityof buses, including school buses. This notice makes a number of requestsfor opinions and data on four possible proposals, or ``options,'' thatthe agency might consider pursuing in the event that NHTSA tentativelydetermines that rulemaking on Standard No. 301 is warranted. Although theoptions are presented separately below, they are not meant to be mutuallyexclusive in the sense that commenters agreeing with one option are expectedto necessarily disagree with the other options. Instead, the agency willconsider possible combinations of the options in its assessment of whethera proposal to change Standard No. 301's requirements for buses is warranted.For easy reference, the agency has consecutively numbered its requestsfor comments on each of the four options. In commenting on a particularoption or in responding to a particular question, interested persons arerequested to provide any relevant factual information to support theirconclusions or opinions, including but not limited to statistical dataand estimated costs and benefits, and the source of such information. NHTSAis especially interested in the occurrence and risk of fire for the variousclasses of vehicles, and requests data and anecdotal information on busfuel leakage and tank failures, and any resulting fires and injuries.NHTSA emphasizes that this is an advance notice of proposed rulemaking.If the agency were ultimately to issue a final rule, it would do so onlyafter further notice of proposed rulemaking and opportunity to comment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Standard No. 301</ITAG>Standard No. 301 was issued as an ``Initial Federal Motor Vehicle SafetyStandard'' in 1967 and became effective for passenger cars on January 1,1968. The standard's requirements for buses (including school buses) witha GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less became effective on September 1, 1976.In 1974, Congress enacted the Motor Vehicle and Schoolbus Safety Amendmentsto the Vehicle Safety Act, which directed NHTSA to issue Federal motorvehicle safety standards on various aspects of school bus safety, includingfuel system integrity. The 1974 Amendments also ratified Standard No. 301'srequirements for buses 10,000 pounds GVWR and less, and thereby prohibitedNHSA from diminishing the level of motor vehicle safety that had been establishedfor thoses buses by a final rule published on March 21, 1974 (39 FR 10588),and which became affective in 1976 (with additional requirements becomingeffective in 1977). The potential proposals discussed in this notice regardingthose buses conform to these statutory requirements.In response to the 1974 Amendments, the agency established requirementsfor the fuel system integrity of large (over 10,000 pounds GVWR) schoolbuses in conjunction with other Federal motor vehicle safety standardsfor school buses_e.g., those for passenger crash protection (FMVSS No.222), emergency exits (No. 217), rollover protection (No. 220), and schoolbus body joint strength (Standard No. 221). These comprehenisve schoolbus safety standards, including Standard No. 301's requirements for thefuel systems of <T3>large </T3>school buses, becamse effective on April 1, 1977. Currently,Standard No. 301 does not apply to non-school buses (e.g., transit andinter-city buses) over 10,000 pounds GVWR. (Geneally speaking, a bus witha GVWR of 10,000 pounds or more would be designed to carry a minimum ofabout 25 passengers.)In enacting the 1974 Amendment, Congress included a directive to issuemotor vehicle safety requirements for school bus fuel system integrityeven though data then available indicated that school bus fires had occurredvery infrequently. In proposing Standard No. 301's requirements for largeschool buses, NHTSA stated that, notwithstanding the very infrequent occurrenceof school bus fires, the potential for such fires exists. It is know thatfuel allowed to escape during a crash can ignite if contacted by sparks.The danger to which children would be exposed in the event of a crash-causedschoolbus fire is great and poses a threat to large groups of individualswho normally travel in such vehicles. For these reasons Congress has directedthe promulgation of a safety standard that will protect children by enforcinga safe level of schoolbus fuel system performance. 40 FR 17036; April 16,1975.Standard No. 301 limits the amount of fuel spillage that can occur fromfuel systems of vehciles subject to the standard during and after specifiedfront, rear, and lateral barrier impact tests. Fuel spillage is measuredfrom a test vehicle for a period of 30 minutes following the time the vehicleceases movement after a fixed or moving barrier crash. Basically, limitsare set on fuel spillage at three points in time: (1) from impact untilthe vehicle has ceased motion, spillage must not exceed one ounce; (2)for a five minute period following cessation of motion, fuel spillage mustnot exceed five ounces; (3) for the following 25-minute period, fuel spillageduring any one-minute interval must not exceed one ounce.After enactment of the 1974 Schoolbus Safety Amendments, NHTSA carefullyconsidered the safety level at which the fuel system integrity requirementsfor large school buses should be established. NHTSA determined that thespillage rate that was in effect in the standard at that time for othervehicles constituted a reasonable maximum level of fuel escape during acrash. (That spillage rate is virtually identical to the current rate inthe standard.) However, the agency adopted a crash test to evaluate complianceof the fuel systems of large school buses that is different from the testfor buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less.Buses (including school buses) with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less mustnot exceed fuel spillage rates set by Standard No. 301 after being subjectedto a 20 mph lateral moving non-contoured barrier crash or a 30 mph frontalfixed barrier or rear moving non-contoured barrier crash, followed by astatic rollover test. School buses over 10,000 pounds must not exceed theabove spillage rates after being sujected to a 30 mph crash of a 4,000-poundmoving contoured barrier into any point, and at any angle, on the schoolbus.NHTSA established the 30 mph, 4,000-pound moving contoured barrier crashtest for large school buses as a realistic and repeatable means of testingthe performance of these vehicles in vehicle-to-vehicle impacts. The impactsurface of the barrier was set at a height that was representative of atypical engine height of vehicles that might impact a school bus; the weightof the barrier was representative of vehicles likely to be encounteredby a school bus, given the occurrence of a crash. Also, the agency believedthe moving contoured barrier crash test was appropriate in terms of theseverity of the crash, and the corresponding level of vehicle crashworthinessthat had to be exhibited by a school bus when subjected to the barriercrash. Since the contoured barrier concentrates the crash energy into arelatively small area, when the barrier impacts the school bus at the locationwhere the fuel tank is mounted, the fuel tank is subject to crash forcesmore severe than those generated by a frontal impact into a fixed barrier.Large school buses must withstand the moving barrier crash at any pointon the school bus body; thus the integrity of the ``most vulnerable'' pointsof the fuel system configuration must be sound enough to meet StandardNo. 301.<ITAG tagnum="84">Issues</ITAG>Option 1: Extend reuqirements to large buses other than school busesThe agency believes that the potential for fire in crashes of large busesnot covered under the Schoolbus Safety Amendments, i.e., transit and inter-citybuses, is at least as great as that for school buses. Accordingly, theagency wishes to explore whether it should propose that Standard No. 301be amended to establish fuel system integrity requirements for buses suchas transit and inter-city buses. To aid the agency in analyzing areas relatedto developing a proposal extending Standard No. 301 to large buses notpresently subject to the standard, the agency request responses to thefollowing questions:1. Should the agency extend Standard No. 301 to large buses that are currentlyexcluded from the standard? If yes, what would be the benefits of suchan extension? If no, why not?2. What are the costs of fuel system guards currently used on school busesover 10,000 pounds GVWR? Would those same types of guards be effectiveon non-school buses for Standard No. 301 compliance? Would costs be thesame?3. Do any large transit or inter-city buses currently meet any of StandardNo. 301's requirements (i.e., those for either large school buses or forsmall buses)? Where are the fuel tanks on large transit or inter-city buseslocated? What steps have been taken by manufacturers to protect fuel systemson these vehicles? What makes and models of buses have their fuel tankslocated inside the chassis frame rails?Option 2: Extend the large school bus requirements to small school buses(10,000 pounds GVWR or less)The agency is of the view_one supported by the excellent safety recordfo school buses_that the standard's requirements for large school busesachieve a high level of safety, and that consideration should be givenas to whether these requirements might be achievable by and appropriatefor other types of buses. Accordingly, the agency is setting forth an optionfor extending the current fuel system integrity requirements for schoolbuses over 10,000 pounds GVWR (hereinafter ``large school bus requirements'')_<T3>viz., </T3>the contoured moving barrier crash test_to small schoolbuses, which are already subject to other Standard No. 301 crash tests(i.e., frontal fixed, or rear or lateral moving barrier, followed by astatic rollover).To aid the agency in analyzing issues related to upgraded fuel system integrityfor small school buses, the agency requests information or comments onthe following questions:4. Are there any small school buses that are currently manufactured tomeet Standard No. 301's requirements for large school buses. What typesof fuel guards would be needed for 301 compliance?5. How would the design of a small school bus that meets the current StandardNo. 301 for small school buses be affected if the bus were made subjectto the 30-mph contoured moving barrier impact test for large school buses?6. How long a leadtime would be needed if the standard were amended asdescribed in option 2? What are the estimated costs of such an amendment?7. Currently small school buses are subject to a static rollover test followinga barrier crash test, during which fuel spillage must not exceed limitsset forth in the standard. Should the static rollover test be retainedin the event the moving contoured barrier crash test requirement is adoptedfor small school buses?Option 3: Extend the large school bus requirements to small non-schoolbusesThe agency also wishes to explore whether NHTSA should propose extendingthe large school bus requirements to small non-school buses, which arealready subject to the same requirements in Standard No. 301 that applyto small school buses.To aid the agency in analyzing issues related to upgraded fuel system integrityfor small buses, the agency requests information or comments in responseto the following questions:8. Are there any small non-school buses that are currently manufacturedto meet Standard No. 301's requirements for large school buses?9. How would the design of a small non-school bus that meets the currentapplicable requirements of Standard No. 301 be affected if the bus weremade subject to the 30-mph contoured moving barrier impact test for largeschool buses? What would be the costs of such a requirement?10. Do the current requirements in Standard No. 301 for small non-schoolbuses (i.e., the fixed frontal, or moving rear or lateral barrier impact,followed by a static rollover) achieve reasonable and appropriate fuelsystem performance?11. Should all buses be subject to the same fuel system integrity requirements?12. How long a leadtime would be needed if the standard were amended asdescribed in option 3? What are the estimated costs of such an amendment?Option 4: Upgrade performance requirements and test procedures for largeschool busesAs with every other Federal motor vehicle safety standard, Standard No.301 is a performance standard. Manufacturers are free to select their ownfuel system design as long as they ensure that their vehicles will meetthe fuel spillage limitations of Standard No. 301 when tested by the agencyin accordance with the test procedures set forth in the standard. Manufacturersof large school buses typically conform to the fuel spillage limitationsby installing an open steel frame, or cage, which encircles the fuel tankand which guards against excessive deformation and rupture during the movingcontoured barrier compliance test. While each bus chassis manufacturerhas a different fuel tank cage design, it is possible that small objectsmight be able to pass between the rails of some cages and strike the fueltank. Available information indicates that these manufacturers have compliedwith Standard No. 301 without changing the location or size of the fueltank on their large school buses.To aid the agency in analyzing issues related to developing possible newtest procedures for improved fuel system integrity, the agency requestsinformation or comments on the following questions:13. The agency wishes to explore whether Standard No. 301's crash testrequirements adequately address potential safety problems that may arisein a bus crash situation. For example, the agency is concerned that thereis a real possibility that the front wheels of a bus can be displaced rearwardin a frontal crash, due to breakage of the axle and/or suspension mountingsor bending of the vehicle frame, which could result in a rupturing of thefuel tank or fuel delivery/crossover lines and an ensuing fuel spillage.How frequently do the front axles dislodge on buses, especially schoolbuses, in crashes and how does a dislodged axle exacerbate damage to thevehicle? Is there a need to test the structural integrity of the frontaxle and suspension of large school buses, and if so, what would be anappropriate test? Which buses should be subject to such a test? Shouldthe test be in addition to the moving contoured barrier test? What wouldbe the costs of such a requirement?14. Should NHTSA establish requirements for the location of the fuel tankon large school buses? Does the frequency or magnitude of fuel spillagein large school bus crashes vary according to fuel tank location? Whereare the fuel tanks on large school buses located? How many large schoolbuses have their fuel tanks located between the chassis frame rails? Howmany large buses have their fuel tanks located outside the chassis framerails? How many large school buses have their fuel tanks located on theleft (or right) side of the bus? What factors (e.g., probable area of impact,probability of impact, location of rear emergency exit(s)) affect a manufacturer'sdecision about where to place the fuel tank and how would a possible requirementfor tank location affect these factors? Should the agency prohibit tanksto be placed adjacent to a door? Should tanks be required to be placedinside the frame rails? Is this feasible for all school bus models? Howwould any of the above possible requirements affect the cost of schoolbuses?15. Currently compliance with Standard No. 301, a ``vehicle'' standard,is determined in a crash test of the entire vehicle. Should the standardincorporate additional tests of component parts of the fuel system, suchas a ``drop test'' established by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)for side-mounted liquid fuel tanks? (<T3>See</T3>, 49 CFR andSection; 393.67(e)(1).) Briefly, under the FHWA ``droptest,'' a fuel tank may not leak more than a total of one ounce by weightof water per minute after being dropped 30 feet on its corner onto an unyieldingsurface.16. Are Standard No. 301's requirements adequate for buses that have multiplefuel tanks? Should different requirements apply to buses with multiplefuel tanks, and if so, what should those requirements be?17. The agency believes that diesel fuel may be less flammable than gasolinein certain types of crash situations. Should the agency consider differenttest procedures for fire protection for gasoline-versus diesel-fueled busesbased on the differences in the flammability of these fuels? Should schooland/or other buses be required to operate on diesel fuel? What would bethe consequences of such a requirement?18. Are the impact speed and size/weight of the moving contoured barriersufficient and appropriate for ensuring adequate protection of school busoccupants? Should either the impact speed or barrier size/weight be changed,in particular, should either be increased to cover higher speed crashesand impacts by larger vehicles, respectively? Why or why not? Can any aspectsof the current test procedure be changed to better represent typical crashconditions? What would be the effects of a different test procedure, suchas a change in barrier test speeds and/or sizes/weights, on the designand costs of school buses?19. Should there be additional performance requirements concerning thepenetration resistance of the fuel tank? What would be an objective andreasonable test procedure for penetration resistance? Do non-metallic fueltanks have better penetration resistance than metallic tanks? What arethe costs and benefits of non-metallic fuel tanks for buses? Do any busescurrently have non-metallic fuel tanks? What is the future of non-metallicfuel tanks for buses? What performance criteria are appropriate for non-metallictanks?20. The agency solicits comments on any other reasonable approaches commentersbelieve would increase fuel system integrity of large school buses. Commentersshould estimate the burdens and benefits associated with each of theirsuggestions.21. The agency requests comments on the desirability of a proposal extendingthese upgraded large school bus requirements (or a variation thereof) to:(a) Large non-school buses;(b) Small school buses; and,(c) Small non-school buses.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">What should those strengthened requirements be? What would be thecosts of such an extension?<ITAG tagnum="84">Potential Regulatory Impacts</ITAG>NHTSA has considered the potential burdens and benefits associated withrequirements addressing the areas discussed above. This advance noticeof proposed rulemaking is not subject to Executive Order 12291, since thatorder applies to notices of proposed rulemaking and final rules only. However,NHTSA believes that this advance notice is a ``significant'' rulemakingaction under the Department of Transportation regulatory policies and procedures.The advance notice concerns a matter in which there is substantial publicinterest. The agency has prepared a Preliminary Regulatory Evaluation (PRE)which addresses preliminary estimates of the costs and benefits of potentialcountermeasures that the agency is considering in this action. The evaluationis available in the docket.This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteriacontained in Executive Order 12612, and it has been determined that itdoes not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparationof a Federalism Assessment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Comments</ITAG>NHTSA solicits public comments on this notice. It is requested but notrequired that 10 copies be submitted.All comments must not exceed 15 pages in length. (49 CFR 553.21.) Necessaryattachments may be appended to these submissions without regard to the15-page limit. This limitation is intended to encourage commenters to detailtheir primary arguments in a concise fashion.If a commenter wishes to submit certain information under a claim of confidentiality,three copies of the complete submission, including purportedly confidentialbusiness information, should be submitted to the Chief Counsel, NHTSA,at the street address given above, and seven copies from which the purportedlyconfidential information has been deleted should be submitted to the DocketSection. A request for confidentiality should be accompanied by a coverletter setting forth the information specified in the agency's confidentialbusiness information regulation. (49 CFR Part 512.)All comments received before the close of business on the comment closingdate indicated above for the advance proposal will be considered, and willbe available for examination in the docket at the above address both beforeand after that date. To the extent possible, comments filed after the closingdate will also be considered. Comments on the advance proposal will beavailable for inspection in the docket. The NHTSA will continue to filerelevant information as it becomes available in the docket after the closingdate, and it is recommended that interested persons continue to examinethe docket for new material.Those persons desiring to be notified upon receipt of their comments inthe docket should enclose a self-addressed, stamped postcard in the envelopewith their comments. Upon receiving the comments, the docket supervisorwill return the postcard by mail.A regulatory information number (RIN) is assigned to each regulatory actionlisted in the Unified Agenda of Federal Regulations. The Regulatory InformationService Center publishes the Unified Agenda in April and October of eachyear. The RIN contained in the heading of this document can be used tocross reference this action with the Unified Agenda.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 49 CFR Part 571</ITAG>Imports, Motor vehicle safety, Motor vehicles.<ITAG tagnum="21">(15 U.S.C. 1392, 1401, 1407; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued: March 27, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Barry Felrite,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Administrator for Rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7559 Filed 3-27-89; 4:37 pm]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>