<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89818-0080 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-18-89.f2.A1079</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority</ITAG>Part F. of the Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations ofAuthority for the Department of Health and Human Services, Health CareFinancing Administration (HCFA), (<T4>Federal Register</T4>, Vol. 51, No. 201, dated Friday, October 17,1986, <T4>Federal Register</T4>, Vol. 50, No. 198, dated Friday, October 11,1985, <T4>Federal Register</T4>, Vol. 49, No. 133, dated Tuesday, July 10, 1984,<T4>Federal Register</T4>, Vol. 48, No. 196, dated Wednesday, October 12,1983, and <T4>Federal Register</T4>, No. 223, dated Thursday, November 19, 1981)is amended to update organizational titles and functional statements withinthe Bureau of Policy Development (BPD), Office of the Associate Administratorfor Program Development. The amendments replace the word ``reimbursement''with the word ``payment'' in the organization titles and in the functionalstatements within BPD. These changes will more accurately reflect the responsibilitiesof the Bureau. The specific changes to Part F. are described below: andbullet; Section FQ.10 The Office of the Associate Administrator for ProgramDevelopment (FQ) (Organization) is deleted in its entirety and replacedby the following: <ITAG tagnum="81">FQ. Office of the Associate Administrator for Program Development(FQ) </ITAG>A. Bureau of Policy Development (FQA) B. Office of Research and Demonstrations (FQB) andbullet; Section FQ.10.A.4. The Office of Reimbursement Policy (FQA5) (Organization)is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Office of Payment Policy (FQA5) </ITAG>a. Division of Medical Services Payment (FQA54) b. Division of Alternative Payment Systems (FQA55) c. Division of Hospital Payment Policy (FQA56) d. Division of Payment and Reporting Policy (FQA58) e. Division of Dialysis and Transplant Payment Policy (FQA59) andbullet; Section FQ.20.A.4., The Office of Reimbursement Policy (FQA5)is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following section. SectionFQ.20.A.4. now reads: <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Office of Payment Policy (FQA5) </ITAG>Establishes national program policy on all issues of Medicare or Medicaidpayment including provider payment policy, provider accounting and auditpolicy, and physician and medical services payment policy. Develops, evaluates,and maintains regulations, policies, and standards for payments to hospitalsfor inpatient services under the prospective payment system. Coordinateswith and reviews recommendations from the Prospective Payment AssessmentCommission. Develops payment policy for alternative forms of health caredelivery such as health maintenance organizations, rural health clinics,hospices, prepaid health plans, comprehensive health centers, ambulatorysurgery centers, and kidney dialysis centers. Establishes payment policiesas they apply to the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment(EPSDT) and the End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) Programs. Develops costanalysis systems policies for the ESRD Program, conducts ongoing analysisof cost payment data, and provides input of a payment nature to the AnnualReport to Congress on the ESRD Program. Reviews requests for exceptionsto payment limitations and recommends approval or disapproval. Establishespolicy for implementing payment controls and cost containment programs.Establishes policy pertaining to the Federal Financial Participation inState Medicaid administrative costs and third-party liability collectionprocedures. Maintains liaison with interested professional groups, States,intermediaries, and Departmental components on issues related to payment.Participants in the development and evaluation of proposed legislationin the area of health care payment. Develops policies related to the maximumallowable cost program for multiple source drugs and the development ofreasonable charges for physician and medical services payment. andbullet; Section FQ.20.A.4.a., Division of Medical Services Reimbursement(FQA54), is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: <ITAG tagnum="81">a. Division of Medical Services Payment (FQA54) </ITAG>Formulates and evaluates national policies and standards for Medicare andMedicaid payment and fiscal standards for physician services, practitionerservices, pharmaceuticals, supplies and equipment such as hearing aids,eyeglasses, durable medical equipment, and other medical services. Developspolicies related to the maximum allowable cost program for multiple sourcedrugs and the development of reasonable charges for physician and medicalservices payment. Drafts program regulations, manuals, guidelines, andother general instructions related to medical services payment. Coordinateswith other HCFA bureaus, divisions, and offices, the Social Security Administration,and other Department components in the development of payment policiesfor medical services. Participates in the development and evaluation ofproposed legislation in the area of medical services payment and recommendsalternatives to current methods of payment. Provides interpretations ofestablished policies and technical assistance to Departmental and HCFAcomponents, regional offices, State agencies, and carriers. andbullet; Section FQ.20.A.4.b., Division of Alternative Reimbursement Systems(FQA55), is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: <ITAG tagnum="81">a. Division of Alternative Payment Systems (FQA55) </ITAG>Assumes the primary responsibility within HCFA in formulating and evaluatingpolicies for the payment of alternative methods of health service deliveryrequiring special methods of cost finding and apportionment. Establishespolicies and principles for reimbursing services furnished in ambulatorycare settings such as health care prepayment plans, health maintenanceorganizations, prepaid health plans, nonprovider-based comprehensive healthcenters, hospices, and rural health clinics. Analyzes and approves paymentsto be made to hospitals for inpatient hospital services under State paymentcontrol systems rather than systems provided for by Medicare. Formulatesand evaluates policies and procedures related to hospitals and long-termcare activities including approval and verification of methodologies usedby the States to determine payment to hospitals, skilled nursing facilities,and intermediate care facilities under medical assistance plans. Servesas the focal point in the Bureau for the coordination of alternative paymentand long-term care issues. Develops policies and procedures on FederalFinancial Participation in State administrative costs relating to alternativepayment or comprehensive health planning activities. Prepares regulations,manuals, program guidelines, and other general instructions related tothese policies. Reviews policies developed by other components for theirimpact on alternative delivery systems and alternative payment for hospitalsand long-term care. Conducts studies on the impact of alternative modesof health care delivery on health care payment. Provides interpretationsof established policies to regional offices, State agencies, fiscal intermediaries,suppliers of services, congressional staffs, and other Departmental offices.Provides technical assistance to regional offices, States, and intermediaries.Participates in the development and evaluation of proposed legislationpertaining to alternative delivery of payment systems and long-term careservices. Reviews Medicaid State plan waivers requested under Section 1915of the Social Security Act. andbullet; Section FQ.20.A.4.c., Division of Hospital Payment Policy (FQA56),is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following:  <ITAG tagnum="81">c. Division of Hospital Payment Policy (FQA56)  </ITAG>Develops, evaluates, and maintains regulations, policies and standardsfor payments to hospitals for inpatient services under the prospectivepayment system (PPS). Develops, evaluates, and maintains policies pertainingto the determination of appropriate amounts of prospective payments tohospitals for services furnished to inpatients. Works with the ProspectivePayment Assessment Commission on PPS and reviews the commission's recommendationson and basis for rates of payments. Develops, evaluates, and maintainspolicies pertaining to the appropriate methods for determining the amountof payments for cost items associated with inpatient hospital servicesbut not yet within the prospecitve payment rates and develops policiesfor bringing such excepted cost items under PPS. Develops, evaluates, andmaintains policies for determining and applying rates of increase and limitationsto the costs of hospitals for services furnished to inpatients. Develops,evaluates, and maintains methods for classifying hospitals and hospitalservices to inpatients, including sole community hospitals, for the purposeof applying rates of increase and limitations on hospitals' costs and fordetermining prospective payments to hospitals. Develops, evaluates, andmaintains criteria for exceptions to the established rates of increaseand limitations of hospitals' costs for inpatient services and reviewsfiscal intermediaries' recommendations on hospitals' requests for exceptions.Prepares regulations, program guidelines, and instructions related to PPSand those excepted items or adjustments to the system that are paid ona cost-payment basis to hospitals for inpatient services. Works with otheroffices in the Bureau, HCFA, the Department, and the Prospective PaymentAssessment Commission to improve hospital efficiency and reduce Medicareexpenditures. Reviews policies and operational guidelines and instructionsdeveloped by other components for their impact on the policies governingPPS and limitations on payment for hospital services to inpatients. Participatesin the development and evaluation of proposed legislation pertaining toPPS and cost containment for hospital services to inpatients. Providesinterpretations of established policies and other policy and technicalassistance to regional offices, State agencies, Medicare contractors, hospitals,hospital associations, congressional staff, Departmental offices, and otherson policy issues relating to PPS and cost containment policies for hospitalinpatient services. Assists in the Administration's professional relationsand public information activities to foster understanding and acceptanceof the PPS.  andbullet; Section FQ.20.A.4.e., Division of Payment and Reporting Policy(FQA58), is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following functionalstatement. Sections e. and f. are being renumbered as sections d. and e.Section d. had been previously deleted.      <ITAG tagnum="81">d. Division of Payment and Reporting Policy (FQA58)</ITAG>Develops and evaluates national policies, regulations, and standards forpayment of the costs incurred by providers of services including hospitalsnot under the Prospective Payment System (PPS) and other classes of providersunder both the health insurance and medical assistance programs. Collaboratesin and coordinates the development of overall payment policies involvingprospective payment and cost payment. Ensures that interrelated policiesare consistent. Directs the planning and analysis of Medicare payment initiativesincluding studies and recommendations for solutions to program relatedproblems. Evaluates the effectiveness of general payment policies in meetingthe goals and objectives of HCFA. Evaluates and interprets policy issuesand initiatives that cross Division lines, such as PPS under Medicare andState cost control systems. Provides technical and advisory services toHCFA, the Department, officials at the policymaking level, and to officalswith similar authority within the executive branch, congressional committees,individual congressmen, and private organizations interested in HCFA'spayment policies. Initiates and collaborates in the development and reviewof legislative proposals on general Medicare and Medicaid payment policies,interprets law (considering intent), and develops policy directives andbasic payment policy decision statements which derive from such applicablelaw and which are reflective of the minimum requirements of such law (i.e.,the broad parameters). Develops detailed payment specifications which constitutethe basis for regulations promulgating payment policies and pertinent publicnotices. Reviews and evaluates written regulations to be certain they aretechnically complete and accurately reflect specifications as developed.Develops and issues implementing instructions consistent with overall paymentpolicy, directives and specifications applicable to Medicare. Reviews alternativepayment and rate-setting systems for potential adaptation to the healthinsurance and medical assistance programs. Compiles materials, reports,and decision memoranda and makes recommendations for action by principaladministrative policymakers and congressional staff on Federal health careprograms. Establishes policies, principles and guidelines related to circumstancesrequiring atypical payment practices. Plans, develops, and maintains acontinuing program of surveillance and evaluation of HCFA auditing, accountingpractices, general payment policy, and billing procedures at Central Office,regional intermediary, and carrier levels which impact on Office functionsin order to identify emerging problems and to develop and promulgate correctivepolicies and procedures. Collaborates with other components in maintainingconsistency among the various payment activities conducted with the Office.Formulates and evaluates national policies for all Medicare and Medicaidprogram provider financial filing and reporting requirements. Developspolicies pertaining to the use of all reporting forms, schedules, and relatedinstructions necessary for reimbursing health care institutions. Receivesand analyzes all reported expense data from providers and health care facilitiesand serves as a source of information on payment data for HCFA and theDepartment. Develops policies, pertaining to the validity of accountingand audit policies and procedures. Develops and maintains a system of internalcontrols for the validation of policy decisions. Provides interpretationsof overall cost and charge payment policies to regional offices, Stateagencies, Medicare contractors, providers of services, other health carefacilities, congressional staffs, other Departmental offices, and others.Identifies problem areas and develops solutions to such problems, as appropriate.Maintains continuing liaison with Medicare contractors' advisory groups,provider associations, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants,and others. Chairs the Technical Advisory Group. Develops policies relatedto accounting and auditing of provider costs and policies for assistingStates in implementing programs for auditing institutions participatingin Medicare assistance programs. Provides technical assistance to regionaloffices, Medicare contractors, and State agencies on the application ofcost-based data reporting requirements and policies and procedures forcost accounting and audit. Formulates and evaluates national policies governingpayment of skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), home health agencies (HHAs),hospital outpatient departments, outpatient physical therapy facilities,and comprehensive outpatient rehabilitiation facilities under the healthinsurance program and the medical assistance plans. Develops policies pertainingto determining the reasonable costs and charges, where appropriate, forthe services of these providers and facilities. Prepares and evaluatesregulations, program guidelines, and instructions for providers, Medicarecontractors, and State agencies related to payment for the services ofthese providers and facilities. Formulates the basic principles and policiesfor developing and applying limitations to the costs of health care. Developsmethods for classifying SNFs and HHAs and their service for the purposeof developing effective limitations. Develops and evaluates the criteriafor exceptions to the limitations and reviews and makes decisions on theintermediary recommendations on providers' requests for exceptions. Analyzescost data, develops actual limitations which will be applied to healthcare costs, promulgates required notices of limitations and issues companioninstructions and policies needed to implement the limitations. Works withother offices of the Department in developing changes in the cost paymentsystem which are designed to improve provider efficiency through the useof financial incentives or penalties. Reviews policies and operationalguidelines and instructions developed by other components for their impacton payment and cost containment policies for these providers and facilities.Provides interpretations of established policies and technical assistanceon the application of payment and cost limit policies to regional offices,State agencies, Medicare contractors, providers of services and healthcare facilities, congressional staff, and other Departmental offices. Maintainscontinuing liaison with provider associations and others. Participatesin the development and evaluation of proposed legislation pertaining topayment and cost containment for these providers and facilities. Providescentralized data extraction, maintenance, and analysis services for theOffice. Provides data and/or analysis to other HCFA components on request.andbullet; Section FQ.20.A.<T3>4</T3>.f., Division of Dialysis and Transplant Payment Policy (FQA59),is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following functional statementat Section FQ.20.A.<T3>4</T3>.e.:<ITAG tagnum="81">e. Division of Dialysis and Transplant Payment Policy (FQA59)</ITAG>Formulates and evaluates policies for reimbursing services under the End-StageRenal Disease (ESRD) program. Establishes policies and procedures for reimbursingESRD services, transplantation, physician payment, kidney acquisition includingpayments, organ procurement, histocompatibility services, home and self-dialysistraining, and other medical items and services related to the ESRD program.Serves as the focal point in HCFA for coordinating ESRD policies that frequentlycross Bureau lines. Prepares regulations, manuals, program guidelines,and other general instructions in these policy areas. Formulates and evaluatesaccounting policy for payments through ESRD delivery systems. Establishedpolicies, procedures, and criteria for reimbursing payment exceptions forESRD facilities. Processes such requests and determines which ESRD facilitiesshould be granted exceptions to national payment rates. Analyzes paymentdata, develops payment rates for ESRD services, and updates rates. Developsand performs professional evaluation of payment data for rate setting,exceptions processing, and program evaluation. Provides technical assistancein the development of cost reporting and audit programs for ESRD facilities.Provides liaison with the Veterans' Administration and other insurers ofdialysis and transplant services. Conducts special studies and reviewsof ESRD payment as necessary for rate setting and program evaluation purposes.Maintains continuing liaison with ESRD provider groups, industry asociations,patient organizations, medical associations, and related parties. Reviewspolicies developed by other components for their impact on the ESRD program.Provides interpretations of established policies to regional offices, Stateagencies, fiscal intermediaries, suppliers of services, congressional staff,and other Departmental offices. Provides technical assistance to regionaloffices, States, and intermediaries. Participates in the development andevaluation of proposed legislation pertaining to the ESRD program and organtransplant issues. Formulates and evaluates national policies governingpayment of ambulatory surgical centers under the health insurance programand the medical assistance plans. Develops policies pertaining to determiningthe reasonable costs and charges, where appropriate, for the services ofthese facilities. Prepares and evaluates regulations, program guidelines,and instructions for providers, Medicare contractors, and State agenciesrelated to payment for the services of these facilities. Formulates thebasic principles and policies for developing and applying limitations tothe costs of health care. Reviews policies and operational guidelines andinstructions developed by other components for their impact on paymentand cost containment policies for these facilities. Provides interpretationsof established policies and technical assistance on the application ofpayment and cost limits policies to regional offices, State agencies, Medicarecontractors, providers of services and health care facilities, congressionalstaff, and other Departmental offices. Maintains continuing liaison withprovider associations and others. Participates in the development and evaluationof proposed legislation pertaining to payment and cost containment forthese facilities. <ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: August 7, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis B. Hays, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-19412 Filed 8-17-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>