<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891003-0129 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-03-89.f2.A1128</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 190 / Tuesday, October 3, 1989/ Notices <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Issuance of Program Announcement, ``Nonparticipating State Initiative''</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice of issuance of program announcement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> Notice is hereby given that the Office of Juvenile Justiceand Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP), pursuant to the provisions of section223(d) of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974,as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5601 <T3>et seq., </T3>as amended by the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency PreventionAmendments of 1988, subtitle F of title VII of Pub. L. 100-690, November18, 1988 (hereinafter ``Act'') is issuing a program announcement and asolicitation for applications from states not participating in the FormulaGrants Program established by Part B of the Act. Eligible applicants arelimited to local public and private nonprofit agencies in nonparticipatingStates. Agencies in South Dakota and Wisconsin are currently eligible toreceive funds. The amount available in South Dakota is up to $225,000,in Wisconsin, up to $838,000. If additional funds become available forother states, a notice will be placed in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> naming the state, the amount of funds available,and the deadline for submission of applications by agencies in that state.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Introduction and Background </ITAG>A. Legislation Pursuant to section 223(d) of the Act, the OJJDP Administrator must endeavor,under section 222(a) of the Act, to make the Formula Grants fund allotmentof a State which chooses not to participate or loses its eligibility toparticipate in the Formula Grants Program available to local public andprivate nonprofit agencies within the nonparticipating State. Should aState choose not to participate or lose its eligibility to participatein OJJDP's Formula Grants Program, the OJJDP Administrator, pursuant tosection 223(d) of the Act, must endeavor to make that nonparticipatingState's formula grants fund allotment available to local public and privatenonprofit agencies within the State pursuant to section 222(a) of the Act.The funds may be used only for the purpose(s) of achieving compliance with:1. Section 223(a)(12)(A), which provides that juveniles shall not be placedin secure detention or correctional facilities if (1) they are chargedwith or have committed offenses that would not be criminal if committedby an adult, (2) they are charged with or have committed offenses whichdo not constitute violations of valid court orders, or (3) they are non-offenderssuch as dependent or neglected children; 2. Section 223(a)(13), which provides that juveniles alleged or found tobe delinquent, status offenders, and non-offenders shall not be detainedor confined in any institution in which they have regular contact withincarcerated adults convicted of crimes or awaiting trial on criminal charges;and 3. Section 223(a)(14), which provides that no juvenile shall be detainedor confined in any jail or lockup for adults except criminal-type juvenileoffenders awaiting an initial court appearance pursuant to an enforceableState law requiring such appearance within 24 hours after being taken intocustody (excluding weekends and holidays) provided that such exceptionsare limited to areas which: a. Are outside a Metropolitan Statistical Area, b. Have no existing acceptable alternative placements available, and c. Provide for the sight and sound separation of juveniles and incarceratedadults. B. Definition of Terms 1. <T3>Adult jail. </T3>A locked facility administered, by State, county,or local law enforcement and public or private correctional agencies. Thepurpose of such facility is to detain adults charged with violating criminallaw pending trial. Facilities used to hold convicted adult criminal offenders,usually sentenced for less than one year, are also considered adult jails.2. <T3>Adult lockup. </T3>Similar to an adult jail except that an adult lockupis generally a municipal or police facility of a temporary nature whichdoes not hold persons after they have been formally charged. 3. <T3>Criminal-type offender. </T3>A juvenile offender who has been adjudicatedfor conduct which would, under the law of the jurisdiction in which theoffense was committed, be a crime if committed by an adult. 4. <T3>Accused juvenile offender. </T3>A juvenile on whom a petition has beenfiled in the juvenile court or other action has occurred alleging thatsuch juvenile is a juvenile offender, (i.e., a criminal-type offender ora status offender), but no final adjudication has been made by the juvenilecourt. 5. <T3>Adjudicated juvenile offender. </T3>A juvenile who the juvenile courthas determined through an adjudicative procedure is a juvenile offender,(i.e., a criminal-type offender or a status offender). 6. <T3>Facility. </T3>A place, an institution, a building or part thereof,a set of buildings or an area, whether or not enclosing a building or setof buildings, that is used for the lawful custody and treatment of juvenilesand that may be owned and/or operated by public and private agencies. 7. <T3>Juvenile offender. </T3>An individual within a juvenile court's jurisdictionfor purposes of adjudication and treatment based on age and offense limitationsas defined by State law (i.e., a criminal-type offender or a status offender).8. <T3>Lawful custody. </T3>The exercise of care, supervision and controlover a juvenile offender or non-offender pursuant to the provisions ofthe law, a judicial order or decree. 9. <T3>Local private nonprofit agency. </T3>A private nonprofit agency ororganization that provides services within an identifiable unit or a combinationof units of general local government, but which is not under public supervisionor control. No part of the net earnings of such a private nonprofit agencyor organization inures or may lawfully inure to the benefit of any privateshareholder or individual. In addition such an agency or organization hasbeen held by the IRS to be tax-exempt under the provisions of section 501(c)(3)of the 1954 Internal Revenue Code. 10. <T3>Local public agency. </T3>Any unit of local government, combinationof such units, or any department, agency, or instrumentality of any suchunit or combination of such units. 11. <T3>Non-offender. </T3>A juvenile who is subject to the jurisdiction ofthe juvenile court_usually under abuse, dependency, or neglect statutes_forreasons other than legally prohibited conduct of the juvenile. 12. <T3>Nonparticipating State. </T3>A State which chooses not to submit aplan, fails to submit a plan, or submits a plan which does not meet therequirements of section 223 of the Act and thus is not participating inthe Formula Grants Program authorized by part B of the Act for a particularfiscal year; or a State found ineligible to receive funds because of failureto achieve or maintain substantial or full compliance with a mandate ofthe Act.13. <T3>Secure. </T3>As used to define a detention or correction facility thisterm describes residential facilities which include construction fixturesdesigned to physically restrict the movements and activities of personsin custody such as locked rooms and buildings, fences, or other physicalstructures. It does not include facilities where physical restriction ofmovement or activity is provided solely through facility staff. 14. <T3>Status offender. </T3>A juvenile offender who has been charged withor adjudicated for conduct which would not, under the law of the jurisdictionin which the offense was committed, be a crime if committed by an adult.15. <T3>Valid Court Order. </T3>The term means a court order given by a juvenilecourt judge to a juvenile who has been brought before the court and madesubject to a court order. The use of the word ``valid'' permits the incarcerationof juveniles for violation of a valid court order only if they receivedtheir full due process rights as guaranteed by the Constitution of theUnited States. The requirements for taking this exception can be foundin the Formula Grants Regulation, 28 CFR 31.303(f), published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of June 20, 1985. 16. <T3>State Program Coordinator. </T3>The agency/organization selected byOJJDP to implement Stage 1 and 2 of this Initiative.C. <T3>Problem Addressed </T3>Many communities within the boundaries of the nonparticipating States havenot been able to implement the mandates of the Act because the State haselected not to participate in the Formula Grants Program, has become ineligibleto continue participation in the program, or has elected to withdraw fromparticipation. State or local policies, failure to coordinate, concentrateand redirect existing resources, and/or the limited number of alternativeresources available to communities have resulted in an overreliance onthe use of jails, lockups and other secure facilities for criminal-typeoffenders, status offenders and non-offenders. This over-reliance on secure facilities may be due to a number of problemssuch as:1. A lack of coordination and cooperation among juvenile justice systemagencies including schools, law enforcement, prosecution, the judiciary,corrections, public and private service providers, and local public interestgroups, which contributes to the inappropriate placement of juveniles injails and lockups. 2. A lack of public awareness and policies regarding the issues of juvenilesin jails and lockups and the secure confinement of status offenders andnon-offenders. 3. The lack of a flexible network of services and programs that is responsiveto the local jurisdiction's needs and capabilities and focused upon jurisdictionswith the most difficult barriers to overcome. 4. The lack of alternative services which can be sustained over time withlocal resources, inclusive but not limited to: a. Supervision of juveniles in secure facilities that conforms to the requirementsset forth in the Formula Grants Regulation, 28 CFR part 31, published inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4> of August 8, 1989. b. Intensive supervision in a child's home as a placement alternative.c. Emergency foster care, shelter care, group care and independent livingarrangements. d. Crisis intervention services and shortterm residential crisis interventionprograms that can be used for conflict mediation, emergency holding, andprovision of emergency attention for youth with physical or emotional problems.e. Objective intake criteria that are based upon a presumption of release,utilization of least restrictive alternatives, protection of the rightto due process, and maintenance of a child's ties to the family and community.f. Twenty-four (24) hour intake screening services.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Program Goals and Objectives </ITAG>Pursuant to section 223(d) of the Act, the goal of this program is to assistnonparticipating states in developing a range of alternatives to secureconfinement and revising associated policies and procedures and bring theminto compliance with section 223(a)(12)(A), the deinstitutionalizationof status offenders, section 223(a)(13), the separation of juveniles fromadults in adult jails and lockups, and section 223(a)(14), the removalof juveniles from adult jails and lockups. To achieve this goal applicantsmust address the following objectives: A. The removal of juveniles from adult jails and lockups through systemwidecoordination, cooperation and concentration of existing and new resourcesto develop community juvenile service systems that provide viable alternativesto the use of adult jails and lockups. B. The development of a statewide, flexible network of services and placementoptions for juvenile offenders and non-offenders that will provide suchjuveniles with supervision and control, give them protection from victimizationand exploitation and hold them accountable for their offenses. C. The development and implementation of objective intake criteria andoperational policies and procedures that are consistent with nationallyrecognized standards and applicable to alleged juvenile offenders and non-offenderswho are awaiting court appearance. D. An enhanced capacity for parents, schools, police and other privateand public youth serving agencies to resolve juveniles' problems withoutthe use of jail and lockups. This includes, where appropriate, the coordinationand interaction between public and private juvenile services. E. An increased public awareness of the problems of juveniles in jailsand lockups as well as the difficulties of status offenders and non-offendersin secure confinement, resulting in the development of public policiesto address such problems. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Program Strategy </ITAG>This program consists of two stages: (1) Assessment and Planning; and (2)Strategy Implementation. A single State Program Coordinator (SPC) willbe selected through this program announcement to implement the programin each nonparticipating state. The SPC will develop a statewide strategyand provide funds and assistance to selected communities in developingand implementing comprehensive youth service systems focused on complyingwith the mandates of the JJDP Act. An advisory committee that meets, to the degree appropriate, the provisionsof section 223(a)(3) will be established for this program to provide commentsand recommendations to the SPC regarding the program strategy and activities.At a minimum, a meeting of the advisory committee should be held at thebeginning of stages 1 and 2 to brief them on the purpose and activitiesand determine their role in the program. Where appropriate, considerationshould be given to appointing some of the persons who served effectivelyon the advisory board to each State's prior nonparticipating grantee, ifany. A. Stage 1, Assessment and Planning The first stage of the program consists of an assessment of detention andincarceration legislation, policy, procedures and practices, and the developmentof a detailed, statewide, strategy to change these laws, policies, procedures,and/or practices to move the State toward compliance with subsections 223(a)(12)(A),223(a)(13) and 223(a)(14). The strategy should provide for improving thesupervision and protection of status offenders and non-offenders in a non-securesetting as well as removing juveniles from adult jails and lockups. A majorpurpose of this stage is to establish a solid foundation of informationand use it as the basis for developing a statewide strategy for implementingcomprehensive community juvenile services systems. 1. The major activities of stage 1 consist of: a. Establishing the advisory committee; b. Developing the assessment plan;c. Collecting information and data on laws, policies, procedures, practicesand programs; d. Preparing an assessment report; and e. Developing an action plan. 2. The major products of stage 1 are: a. An assessment plan that specifies each step of the first stage. b. An assessment report that includes: (1) Problem statement; (2) Review of current legislation, policies, practices and programs pertainingto the detention and jailing of juveniles including alternative services;(3) Data on the number and types of jails, lockups, juvenile detentionfacilities, and correctional facilities in which juveniles are placed;(4) Data on the number and types of juveniles in juvenile detention facilities,correctional facilities and adult jails and lockups; (5) An assessment of the needs of the juveniles involved in the State'sjuvenile justice system; (6) Status of the State laws, policies, procedures and practices with regardto the deinstitutionalization of status offenders and non-offenders, theseparation of juveniles from adults in adult jails and lockups and theremoval of juveniles from jails and lock-ups; (7) Identification of the needs that must be addressed to develop a statewidestrategy for improving detention and incarceration practices and for bringingthe State into compliance with the JJDP Act; and (8) Specification of the State and local public and private resources availableto support the implementation of the strategy. c. A statewide strategy that specifies: (1) Who will be involved in implementing the strategy; (2) What the major activities will be and how they are related to the problemsand needs identified during the assessment process; (3) Where in the State the activities will be targeted; (4) A schedule of strategy implementation; (5) How the strategy will be implemented; and (6) The project budget, including the detailed budget narrative. B. Stage 2, Strategy Implementation During stage 2 the strategy developed during stage 1 will be implemented.The SPC will contract with local public agencies and private nonprofitorganizations within the State to support specific projects in local jurisdictions.These projects should emphasize the development and implementation of systemwidestrategies for coordinating, concentrating and redirecting existing resourcesto improve services for the care and custody of juveniles and meet themandates of the JJDP Act. Activities should promote a coordinated statewideeffort. If projects were initiated under a previous non-participating Stateaward, the SPC will need to review the projects funded under that awardto determine what projects, if any, should be continued. The SPC will providetraining and technical assistance to the projects to ensure their performanceis consistent with, and enhances, the overall strategy.1. The major activities of stage 2 consist of: a. Preparing an RFP for local projects; b. Reviewing applications, selecting finalists and making awards; c. Convening project staff and advisory committee members to review strategy;d. Providing training and technical assistance to projects supported underthe initiative; e. Developing and implementing a statewide public education program; andf. Developing and implementing an assessment of the effectiveness of theoverall program. 2. The major products of stage 2 are: a. A Request for Proposals to implement the program strategy developedunder Stage 1; b. A plan for providing training and technical assistance to local projectsand State agencies; and c. An assessment report on the effectiveness of the program in meetingits goals and objectives. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Dollar Amount and Duration </ITAG>A. The project period for this program is three years from the date ofaward. The recipient in each of the nonparticipating States will be eligiblefor awards of up to the amount of that State's FY 1988 Formula Grant allocationfor the initial one-year budget period unless the State has already receivedits FY 1988 Formula Grant allocation. Any State which has already receivedits FY 1988 Formula Grant Award will be eligible for an award of up tothe amount of that State's FY 1989 Formula Grant allocation for the initialone-year budget period. The second and third year awards, if made, willeach be for an amount not to exceed that State's Formula Grant allocationsfor the succeeding two fiscal years, respectively. Both the second andthird 12-month assistance awards will be subject to the availability ofFederal funds; a demonstration of satisfactory completion of identifiedobjectives; satisfactory progress toward compliance with the provisionsof sections 223(a)(12)(A), 223(a)(13), and 223(a)(14); and whether theState has or has not announced an intention of becoming a participatingState. Funds will be made available through a cooperative agreement. Financialsupport for the SPC (planning and administration costs) may not exceed20% of the total award for the project period. The SPC will contract theremainder of the first-year award to local public and private nonprofitagencies to enable them to implement Stage 2 of the initiative. SPC financialsupport for the second and third-year awards, if any, will be negotiatedwith each recipient but should not exceed 20% of the award. Financial assistanceprovided under this program requires no matching contribution with theexception of construction funds as provided in this announcement. B. One application will be selected for each of the nonparticipating Statespursuant to the selection criteria established in this announcement, andconsistent with the OJJDP Competition and Peer Review Policy, 28 CFR part34, subpart B, published August 2, 1985, at 50 FR 31366-31367. The agencyor organization selected as the SPC will not be eligible to receive, beyondthe three-year project period, funds allocated pursuant to section 222(a)for purposes related to section 223(d). C. No more than one-fourth of the funds received by a public or privateorganization for Stage 2 may be used for construction or renovation purposes.Use of funds for construction is limited to innovative, community-basedfacilities for less than 20 persons and must be approved in advance byOJJDP. All construction funds must be matched dollar-for-dollar, in cash,by the local jurisdiction. The SPC and the local jurisdiction and/or theprivate organization will be held accountable for adherence to section294 of the Act and the requirements for construction programs as containedin the effective edition of the OJP Financial and Administrative Guidefor Grants, M7100.1. The erection of new buildings or the renovation ofsecure facilities is not permitted with funds acquired through this program.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Eligibility Criteria </ITAG>Applications to serve as the SPC are invited from local public and privatenonprofit agencies within the nonparticipating States that have knowledgeand experience in developing and/or implementing programs and projectson a statewide basis at the local level. To be eligible for consideration, the applicant must demonstrate in theapplication that it has experience in the following areas: A. An understanding of the intent of the statutory mandates of the JJDPAct and the general approaches for implementing the mandates on the locallevel. B. Knowledge of and experience with juvenile justice systems; local jails,lockups, and secure juvenile detention facilities; the specific problems,strategies, and program alternatives necessary to achieve the objectivesof this program; and strategy development and implementation. C. Capability to develop management and fiscal systems necessary for theproper administration of Federal funds. D. Capability to fulfill the activities and responsibilities identifiedin the Program Strategy Section of this announcement. E. Capability to work effectively with local and State elected public officials,key decision makers in the juvenile justice system and the boards of publicand private youth service providers which exist within the State for thepurposes of achieving the objectives of this program. <ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Program Application Requirements </ITAG>All applicants must submit a completed Application for Federal Assistance(Standard Form 424), including a program narrative, a detailed budget anda budget narrative. All applications must include the information outlinedin this section of the solicitation (subsection VI). In accordance with Executive Order 12549, 28 CFR 67.510, applicants mustprovide a certification that they have not been debarred (voluntarily orinvoluntarily) from the receipt of Federal funds. Form 4662/2, which willbe supplied with the application information package, must be submittedwith the application. Applicants for this program must submit a copy of their application tothe State Single Point of Contact (SPOC), if one has been established andif the State has selected this program to be covered in its review process.Applications must be submitted to the SPOC for review and comment at thesame time they are submitted to OJP. Under the regulations, the State processhas at least (30) days to comment on noncompeting continuation applicationsand at least sixty (60) days to comment on all other applications. Applicants must provide a <T3>Certification Regarding Drug-Free Workplace Requirements</T3> whichmeets the requirements of the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988 (Public Law100-690, title V, subtitle D). Form 4061/3, which will be supplied withthe application information package, must be submitted with the application.When submitting applications that contain more than one organization, therelationships among the parties must be set forth in the application. Asa general rule, organizations that describe their working relationshipas primarily cooperative or collaborative when developing products anddelivering services will be considered co-applicants. In the event of aco-applicant submission, one co-applicant must be designated the payeeand, as such, will receive and disburse project funds and be responsiblefor the supervision and coordination of the activities of the other co-applicant.Under this arrangement, each organization would agree to be jointly andseverally responsible for all project funds and services. Each co-applicantmust sign the SF-424 and indicate their acceptance of the conditions ofjoint and several responsibility with the other co-applicant. Applications that include non-competitive contracts for the provision ofspecific services must include a sole source justification for any procurementin excess of $25,000. In addition to the requirements specified in the instructions for preparationof Standard Form 424, the following information must be included in theapplication:A. Organizational Capability  Applicants must demonstrate that they are eligible to compete for thiscooperative agreement on the basis of eligibility criteria establishedin this solicitation.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Organizational Experience </ITAG>Applicants must concisely describe their organizational experience withrespect to the eligibility criteria specified above. Applicants must demonstratehow their organizational experience and capabilities will enable them toachieve the goals and objectives of this initiative.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Capability of Working with Other Organizations in the State </ITAG>Applicants must demonstrate that they have discussed this program withlocal and State elected public officials or their staffs, key decisionmakers in the juvenile justice system such as juvenile court judges, associationsof those involved in juvenile justice, the boards of public and privateyouth service providers, and other groups whose cooperation or participationis necessary to the success of the program. The applicant must certifythat it is able to obtain the necessary cooperation or participation. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Financial Capability </ITAG>In addition to the assurances provided in Part V, Assurances (SF-424),applicants must also demonstrate that their organization has or can establishfiscal controls and accounting procedures which assure that Federal fundsavailable under this announcement are disbursed and accounted for properly.Applicants who have not previously received federal funds will be askedto submit a copy of the Office of Justice Programs (OJP) Accounting Systemand Financial Capability Questionnaire (OJP Form 7120/1). Copies of the form will be provided in the application kit and must beprepared and submitted along with the application. Other applicants maybe requested to submit this form.All questions are to be answered regardless of instructions (section C.I.B.note). The CPA certification is required only of those applicants who havenot previously received Federal funding. B. Program Goals A succinct statement of your understanding of the goals and objectivesof the program should be included. The application should also includea problem statement to include the following: 1. Discuss your understanding of: (a) The State's placement of juvenilesin adult jails and lockups as well as status offenders and non-offendersin secure detention or correctional facilities and the issues surroundingthe removal of such juveniles from the facilities, (b) State legislative,judicial and executive branch activities related to supervision and protectionof status offenders and non-offenders and jail removal, and (c) programs,community services, organizations and planning approaches which can beused in an effort to develop comprehensive community services and achievethe Act's mandates. 2. Discuss the anticipated major difficulties and problem areas in themanagement and implementation of Stage 1 activities, selection of jurisdictionsfor implementing Stage 2, management of Stage 2 activities, and coordinationwith OJJDP. This discussion of anticipated problems should also addresspotential or recommended approaches for their solution. C. Program Strategy Applicants should describe the proposed approach for achieving the goalsand objectives of the program. A discussion of how each of the activitiesof both stages of the program will be accomplished and a description ofthe products to be prepared should be included. D. Program Implementation Plan Applicants should prepare a plan that outlines the major activities involvedin implementing the program and describes how they will allocate availableresources to implement the program and how the program will be managed.The plan must include an annotated organization chart that depicts theroles and responsibilities of the SPC and the public and private organizationsthat receive funds during Stage 2. The process for identifying, selecting,and awarding funds to these organizations must be described. The policiesand procedures for managing the contracts and for monitoring and assessingthe effectiveness of the overall program must be described. E. Time-Task Plan Applicants must develop a time-task plan for the 12-month project period,clearly identifying major milestones and products. This must include designationof organizational responsibility and a schedule for the completion of theactivities and products identified in Section III, Program Strategy. <ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Procedures and Criteria for Selection </ITAG>All applications will be evaluated and rated based on the extent to whichthey meet the following weighted criteria. In general, all applicationsreceived will be reviewed in terms of their responsiveness to the programapplication requirements, organizational capability, the goals, objectivesand program strategy described in this announcement, and thoroughness andinnovation in responding to strategic issues in project implementation.Applications will be evaluated by a peer review panel according to theOJJDP Competition and Peer Review Policy, 28 CFR part 34, subpart B, publishedAugust 2, 1985, at 50 FR 31366-31367. The selection criteria and theirpoint values (weights) are as follows: A. The statement of the problem to be addressed by the project is clear,concise and well justified. (5 Points) B. The objectives of the proposed project are clearly defined. (10 Points)C. The project design is sound and contains program elements directly linkedto the achievement of project objectives. (15 Points) D. Project Management (35 Points): 1. The project management structure is adequate to the successful conductof the project. This criterion includes the adequacy and appropriatenessof the activities and the project management structure, and the feasibilityof the time task plan. (15 Points) 2. Highly qualified staff are identified to manage and implement the programincluding staff to be hired through contracts. This criterion includesthe clarity and appropriateness of position descriptions, required qualificationsand selection criteria relative to the specific functions set out in theImplementation Plan and the qualifications of existing staff demonstratedby their resumes. (20 Points) E. Organizational capability is demonstrated at a level sufficient to successfullysupport the project. Applicants must evidence the following qualificationsand experience: (35 Points) 1. The applicant demonstrates capability and diversified experiences inworking with local jurisdictions to develop and implement plans and programsfor youth and establishing services and policy changes at the local, regionaland statewide level. (15 Points)2. The applicant demonstrates an ability to establish effective relationshipswith the juvenile justice system and alternative service providers. (5Points) 3. The applicant's key staff are experienced in providing diverse populationswith technical expertise in substantive topics related to the developmentand implementation of plans. (5 Points) 4. The applicant demonstrates capability and expertise in maintaining andmanaging contracts where local agencies or jurisdictions will be implementingvarious projects, new policies, and different techniques. (10 Points) F. The budget is complete, appropriate and cost-effective in relationshipto the proposed strategy and tasks to be accomplished. (5 Points) Applications will be evaluated by a peer review panel. The results of peerreview will be a relative aggregate ranking of applications in the formof ``Summary of Ratings.'' These will be based on numerical values assignedby individual peer reviewers. Peer review recommendations, in conjunctionwith the results of internal review and any necessary supplementary reviews,will assist the Administrator in considering competing applications andin selection of the application for funding. The final award decision willbe made by the OJJDP Administrator. <ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Submission Requirements </ITAG>This program announcement is a request for proposals from local publicand private nonprofit agencies in those States currently not participatingin the JJDP program. Applicants must submit the original signed application and three copiesto OJJDP. The necessary forms for applications will be provided upon request.Applications must be received by mail or hand delivered to the OJJDP by5:00 p.m. EST on October 15, 1989. (Or six (6) weeks after the date ofpublication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>) Those applications sent by mail should be addressedto: SRAD/OJJDP, United States Department of Justice, 633 Indiana Avenue,NW., Washington, DC 20531. Hand delivered applications must be taken tothe SRAD, Room 768, 633 Indiana Avenue, NW., Washington, DC between thehours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays or Federal holidays.The OJJDP will notify applicants in writing of the receipt of their application.Subsequently, applicants will be notified by letter as to the decisionmade regarding whether or not their submission will be recommended forfunding. <ITAG tagnum="84">IX. Civil Rights Compliance </ITAG>A. All recipients of OJJDP assistance, including any contractors, mustcomply with the nondiscrimination requirements of the Juvenile Justiceand Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974, as amended; title VI of the CivilRights Act of 1964; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended;title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972; the Age Discrimination Actof 1975; and the Department of Justice Nondiscrimination Regulations (28CFR part 42, subparts C, D, E, and G). B. In the event a Federal or State court or Federal or State administrativeagency makes a finding of discrimination, after a due process hearing,on the grounds of race, color, religion, national origin or sex againsta recipient of funds, the recipient will forward a copy of the findingto the Office of Civil Rights Compliance (OCRC) of the Office of JusticePrograms. C. Applicants shall maintain and submit to OJJDP upon request timely, completeand accurate data establishing the fact that no person or persons willbe or have been denied or prohibited from participation in, benefits of,or denied or prohibited from obtaining employment in connection with anyprogram activity funded in whole or in part with funds made available underthis program because of their race, national origin, sex, religion, handicapor age. In the case of any program under which a primary recipient of Federalfunds extends financial assistance to any other recipient or contractswith any other person(s) or group(s), such other recipient, person(s) orgroup(s) shall also submit such compliance reports to the primary recipientas may be necessary to enable the primary recipient to assure its civilrights compliance obligations under a grant award. <ITAG tagnum="84">X. Contact </ITAG>For further information contact: Eric Peterson, Juvenile Justice Specialist,State Relations and Assistance Division, Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, 633 Indiana Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20531,(202) 724-5924.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: September 19, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Terrence S. Donahue, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-23228 Filed 10-2-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-19-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>