<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89614-0091 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-14-89.f2.A1090</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-710 et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; General American Life Insurance Co., et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Notice of Proposed Exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary:</T2> This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>addresses:</T2> All written comments and requests for a hearing (atleast three copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671,U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC20210. Attention: Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. Theapplications for exemption and the comments received will be availablefor public inspection in the Public Documents Room of Pension and WelfareBenefit Programs, U.S. Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 ConstitutionAvenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information:</T2> The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">General American Life Insurance Company (General American) Locatedin St. Louis, MO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Application No. D-7107)</ITAG>Proposed exemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408 (a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and 406(b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to: (1) The proposedamendment (the Amendment) to an annuity contract (the Contract) and SeparateAccount agreement entered into by General American and the Carpenters'Pension Trust Fund of St. Louis (the Plan) which will provide that GeneralAmerican will insure that, in the event of a foreclosure upon a mortgageloan note (Note) held by General American's Separate Account No. 3 (theAccount), the Account will receive the unpaid principal balance, any dueand unpaid interest at the face rate of the Note, and any advances andforeclosure costs with respect to that Note; and (2) the proposed purchaseof residential real property (the Property) or delinquent Notes by GeneralAmerican from the Account in accordance with the Amendment, provided thatthe terms and conditions of the transactions are at least as favorableto the Plan as those between unrelated parties would be.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a multi-employer pension plan with approximately 10,601participants as of May 30, 1986 and assets of approximately $214,000,000as of June 3, 1986.2. General American is a mutual insurance company organized and operatedunder the laws of the state of Missouri, with its principal offices inSt. Louis, Missouri. It is licensed to do business in Missouri and 48 otherstates and the District of Columbia. General American is among the fortylargest life insurance companies in the United States and, as of December31, 1985, had over three billion dollars in assets and one billion dollarsin pension fund assets under management.3. The Account was established in February, 1971 specifically to fund theContract issued to the Plan. The Account has been utilized solely for thatpurpose. The Account is a ``separate account'' within the meaning of section3(17) of the Act. That is, the Account is an account established by GeneralAmerican under which income, gains and losses from the investments allocatedto the Account are directly and fully credited to or charged against theAccount (and thus the Plan's interest under the Contract) without regardto any other business General American may conduct. The Account is notregistered under the Investment Company Act of 1940.The value of the assets allocated to the Account as of June 3, 1986 was$102,751,253.03. This constituted approximately 48% of the total assetsof the Plan as of that date.The investment policy for the Account is investment in first mortgagessecured by Missouri residential property in and around metropolitan St.Louis. Account funds may also be invested on a temporary basis in moneymarket securities.Mortgages in which the Account invests generally are originated by GeneralAmerican's field investment office in St. Louis and approved by the homeoffice mortgage staff. All loans made by the Account are made in conformancewith prevailing market practice. Any commitment fees paid by the borrowerare at prevailing market rates and are paid to the Account. In addition,all such loans bear a market interest rate. The amount of each such loandoes not exceed 75% of the value of the property securing the loan. Asof December 31, 1985, the Account held 1,489 residential mortgage loanswith a total face amount of approximately $85,000,000.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The applicant represents that General American makes onlycommercial mortagage loans on behalf of its general account and that residentialmortgage loans are made only on behalf of its qualified plan separate accounts.4. The applicant represents that the Account has experienced a negligbledelinquency rate on its mortgage loans. For example, in each month betweenJanuary 1, 1985 and December 31, 1985, an average of only 2.9 loans, andnever more than 6 loans (out of more than 1,400), were 45 days or morein arrears. Only one loan became more than 75 days delinquent in 1985,and it was paid in full in January 1986. Loans for which foreclosure proceedingshave commenced have, in all cases to date, been satisfied in full priorto a foreclosure sale; in the fifteen years since the Account was established,no mortgage loan held by the Account has been actually foreclosed.5. The applicant represents that due to concerns that were raised by theDepartment that the percentage of the Plan's assets invested in St. Louisarea residential real estate might increase the investment risk to thePlan, the Plan's trustees (the Trustees) approached General American toinsure the repayment of the mortgage investments held by the Account. TheTrustees and General American negotiated the terms and conditions of theAmendment, which the Trustees believe to be reasonable and protective ofthe Plan's interests. In addition, the Trustees have not made any furtherinvestment of Plan assets in the Account since March 15, 1985. 6. Under the Amendment, General American will effectuate this insuranceby entering a bid at any formal foreclosure sale of the property securinga delinquent Account Note in the amount of the lesser of: (a) The sum ofthe oustanding principal, accrued interest, advances and costs with respectto the Note; or (b) General American's estimate of the value of the Propertybeing sold. If the foreclosure proceeds are less than the outstanding principal,accrued interest at the specified rate, advances and costs, General Americanwill make a separate payment to the Account in the amount of such deficit.If a foreclosure sale does not occur within the first 180 days of loandelinquency, General American will purchase the Note from the Account forthe total of the outstanding principal, accrued interest at the specifiedrate, advances and costs and then proceed with any foreclosure proceedingsfor General American's own account. The Trustees will have the right andauthority to enforce all the terms of the Contract and the Amendment. Furthermore,the Trustees may terminate the arrangement upon 30 days written notice.Other than its actions pursuant to the Amendment, General American's procedureswith respect to the delinquency and foreclosure of loans made by the Accounthave been and will remain the same as those used for mortgages made byGeneral American's other separate accounts. The applicant represents thatthese procedures are the result of General American's experience with mortgageinvestments for over fifty years. Delinquent loans are typically processedin accordance with these established procedures, although there may besome variation from these procedures where warranted by the circumstances.7. If the Trustees determine it to be advantageous to the Plan, the Planwill also have the unilateral right either: (1) To bid for the Propertyfor its own account at the foreclosure sale; or (2) to request that theNote be assigned to the Plan as an in-kind withdrawal from the Account(which will be permitted by the Amendment), in order to proceed with foreclosureor other resolution of the delinquency itself without the insurance protectionprovided by the Amendment. 8. The applicant represents that if General American acquires either theProperty at a foreclosure sale or the Note from the Account, General Americanmay or may not be able to recoup the payments made under the Amendmentthrough subsequent satisfaction of the Note or sale of the Property. Inany event, however, the Account, and thus the Plan, will receive the fullamount of the outstanding principal balance, accrued interest at the specifiedrate, and advances and costs with respect to the delinquent loan. Accordingly,the Amendment will shift the risk of loss on mortgage loans by reason ofthe borrower's default from the Plan to General American and thereby willassure that the Plan, and in turn Plan participants, realize no loss anda full return on investments allocated to the Account. 9. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionssatisfy the criteria of section 408(a) because: (a) The risk of loss associatedwith the investments in the Account will be shifted from the Plan to GeneralAmerican; (b) the Plan will receive no less than the sum of the outstandingprincipal, accrued interest, advances and costs with respect to any Notewhich is foreclosed upon; (c) General American will utilize the same proceduresin processing delinquent loans in the Account as it does with respect tothose in its general and other separate accounts; and (d) the Trusteeshave the right, responsibility and authority to enforce all the terms andconditions of the Contract and Amendment.For Further Information Contact: David Lurie of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8671. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="85">National Rural Utilities Cooperative Finance Corporation (CFC) Locatedin Washington, DC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7364]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through(D) of the Code, shall not apply to certain transactions, described inthe summary of facts and representations herein, between CPC and certainemployee benefit plans (the Plans). CFC may be deemed to be a party ininterest with respect to the Plans as a result of providing services toa trust in situations where the assets of the trust are considered to be``plan assets'' as a result of the Plans acquiring significant equity interestsin the trust in the form of pass-through certificates (the Certificates).The exemption will be effective provided that:A. The decision by a Plan to engage in the transactions is made by a fiduciaryof the Plan which is independent of CFC and the trustee of the trust; andB. The terms of each such transaction are no less favorable to the Planthan the terms available in a similar transaction involving unrelated parties.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE:</T2> If the proposed exemption is granted, the exemptionwill be effective July 22, 1987.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The transactions for which exemptive relief is requested primarily involvethe acquisition of the Certificates by the Plans from CFC or the acquisitionand/or holding of CFC debt instruments (CFC Debt) by the Plans in situationswhere CFC would be considered a party in interest with respect to the Plans.CFC may become a party in interest under the Act as a result of providingservices to a trust, established at the direction of CFC, where the assetsof the trust are considered to be ``plan assets'' as a result of the Plansand other benefit plan investors, in the aggregate, acquiring significantequity interests (i.e., 25 percent or more) in the trust in the form ofthe Certificates.\2\<NOTE/> The Certificates represent undivided fractional interestsin a private note (the Private Note) which is held by the trust.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ See 29 CFR 2510.3-101.2. CFC is a tax-exempt, not-for-profit cooperative association organizedin 1969 under the laws of the District of Columbia. CFC was establishedby certain non-profit cooperative electric utilities and service organizations(the Cooperatives) to provide the Cooperatives with a source of financingto supplement the loan programs of the Rural Electrification Agency (REA).CFC is a finance company that makes loans to the Cooperatives to enablethem to acquire, construct and operate electric distribution, generation,transmission and related facilities. CFC obtains funding for its activitiesthrough a variety of means, including the issuance of CFC Debt in Underwrittenpublic offerings. Most CFC long-term loans to the Cooperatives are madein conjunction with concurrent loans from REA and are secured equally andratably with REA's loans by a single mortgage on the particular Cooperative'sproperty. CFC also provides guarantees for tax-exempt financings of pollutioncontrol facilities and other properties constructed or acquired by theCooperatives. In addition, CFC provides guarantees or other debt in connectionwith certain leases and other transactions of the Cooperatives. CFC presentlyhas loans outstanding to the Cooperatives in the aggregate principal amountof approximately $3.3 billion, and has guaranteed on behalf of Cooperativesan additional $2.9 billion in obligations.3. Since enactment of the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 (the RE Act),REA has financed the construction and operation of electric generatingplants, transmission facilities and distribution systems in order to provideelectricity to persons in rural areas who are without central station service.REA obtains a mortgage on all its borrowers' assets (the REA Mortgage),and generally exercises a high degree of financial and technical supervisionover their operations.During the 1970s, the expanding power requirements of rural consumers inmany areas throughout the country resulted in the construction by the Cooperativesof many new generating plants and transmission facilities. To satisfy themajor capital requirements for these projects, Congress passed legislationrequiring the Federal Financing Bank of the United States Treasury (theFFB) to make long-term loans (the FFB Loans), at interest rates 1/8 of1% above FFB's own borrowing costs, to the Cooperatives with repaymentguaranteed by REA.Most FFB Loans were made in the late 1970's and early 1980's at rates rangingup to approximately 15%. The applicant states that under current marketconditions the FFB Loans could be made at considerably lower rates whichwould result in significant savings for the Cooperatives.4. In June 1986, Congress passed legislation permitting rural electricutilities to take advantage of the reductions in interest rates by prepayingtheir high-interest FFB Loans, without any prepayment penalty or fees,through the issuance of REA-guaranteed debt to private lenders. REA hasadopted regulations (the Regulations) implementing the legislation, andhas accepted prepayment applications submitted by a number of the Cooperatives.5. CFC represents that it has formulated a program (the Program) to permitthe Cooperatives to refinance their FFB Loans in accordance with the Regulationsat competitive rates. REA has approved the Program as complying with theRegulations.Under the Program, one or more trusts (the Trusts) are established foreach Cooperative intending to prepay its FFB Loans. The trustee of eachTrust (the Trustee) is a commercial bank having capital and surplus ofat least $50,000,000. CFC makes a private loan (the Private Loan) to theCooperative, the proceeds of which are used to prepay the FFB Loans beingrefinanced. CFC directs the Cooperative to issue a Private Note evidencingthe Private Loan to the separate Trust. The Trust issues to CFC the Certificates,which represent the entire beneficial interest in the Trust. While CFCholds the Certificates, the Private Note bears interest at a variable ratereflecting CFC's cost of funding the Private Loan. CFC resells the Certificatesin private placements or to the public in firm commitment underwritings,at which time the rate on the associated Private Note is reset to equalthe fixed rate on the Certificates, increased by an amount equal to CFC'sservicing fee and expense reimbursement. The Certificate rate is fixedat the lowest rate acceptable to the marketplace that permits the Certificatesto be resold by CFC at par. CFC resells the Certificates promptly, unlessthey cannot be sold bearing rates within the prescribed interest rate ceiling.Scheduled payments on the Private Notes must be sufficient to satisfy thescheduled payments on the Certificates, plus any amounts of servicing feesor other expenses payable by the Trust.The applicant states that in order to insure that the Cooperatives derivesignificant benefit from the refinancing of the FFB Loans, the Regulationsrequire that the interest rate on the Private Notes must be at least 50basis points lower than the weighted average interest rate borne by theFFB Loans being repaid. CFC assumes all risks associated with interestrate fluctuations.Each Trust's sole investment activity consists of receiving the PrivateNote, issuing the Certificates on the day of its formation, and collectingpayments on the Private Note. The assets of each Trust consists of a singleREA-guaranteed Private Note evidencing one Private Loan. The applicantstates that in order to obtain the best rates by matching maturities toparticular market segments, separate Certificates having sequential maturitiesare offered through separate Trust (i.e., one Trust receives a PrivateNote payable by the Cooperative in installments in years 6-10, a secondreceives a Private Note payable by that Cooperative in years 11-16, etc.).The Trustee is not authorized to modify the right to receive payments onthe Certificates or to take any action that would reduce the principalamount or interest rate on the Private Note without the consent of theCertificateholders. No Trust can issue any security other than a singleclass of Certificates or hold more than a single Private Note.The applicant states that any default with respect to one Private Notedoes not permit acceleration by the holder of any other Private Note. TheTrust cannot acquire any assets in substitution for the Private Note orsell the Private Note, except in connection with the repayment of the Certificatesin full and the termination of the Trust.6. REA endorses on each Private Note a guarantee (the REA Guarantee) ofthe timely payment of principal and interest on the Private Note. The REAct provides that the REA Guarantee is a full faith and credit obligationof the United States. REA is required to pay the Trust the amount of anyprincipal and interest not paid when due on a Private Note within fivebusiness days of notice from CFC of such default. Although the REA Mortgagesecures the Private Note, all rights under the REA Mortgages with respectto the Private Note are held by REA and will not inure to the benefit ofCFC, the Trust, or any holder of Certificates.7. CFC contracts with REA and each Trust to service the Private Loan therebyestablishing an agency relationship with respect to the Trustee, as describedin the terms of the Trust Agreement.Under the Trust Agreement, the Trustee appoints CFC as its attorney-in-factto prosecute any claims to enforce or collect on each Private Note andREA Guarantee. However, CFC as such attorney-in-fact may not rescind, cancel,release, waive or reschedule the right to collect the unpaid balance onany Private Note from the Cooperative or REA.In administering, servicing and enforcing a Private Note or REA Guarantee,CFC is obligated to exercise the rights and powers vested in it by theTrust Agreement. Prior to a default in payment on a Private Note, CFC isobligated to perform only those duties that are specifically set forthin the Trust Agreement. CFC has no liability for any error of judgmentmade in good faith, unless it is proved that CFC was negligent in ascertainingthe pertinent facts, or with respect to any action it takes or omits totake in good faith in accordance with a direction received by CFC fromthe Trustee or the Certificateholders.In addition to enforcing the Trustee's rights under the Private Note andthe REA Guarantee held by a Trust, CFC is obligated to fulfill a numberof administrative and notice functions under the Trust Agreement. For example,CFC is obligated to deliver a notice to each Cooperative and the Trusteefor the Trust specifying the date any payment is due on the Private Noteheld by the Trust and the amount of such payment. In addition, CFC is responsiblefor notifying REA of any default in the payment of interest and principalon the Private Note held by the Trust.CFC must notify REA of any conditions which might lead to a default orviolation by the Cooperative under the Loan Agreement, the Loan GuaranteeAgreement or a Private Note. CFC is also obligated to notify REA of anyoptional redemption of the Private Note held by a Trust and to calculatethe amount payable on such Private Note, and the related Certificates,pursuant to any redemption or purchase of the Private Note.CFC handles the billing or Private Loan payments from the Cooperative,but payments on the Private Note are made directly to the Trustee. CFCprepares for distribution by the Trustee to Certificateholders all regularsemiannual reports concerning distributions on the Certificates and itsfees, as well as tax information required by the Certificateholders. Theapplicant states that at least once a year, an independent public accountantaudits the books and records of each Trust. Upon completion, copies ofthe auditor's reports are provided to the Trustee.8. CFC is compensated out of payments on the Private Note in excess ofthe scheduled payments distributed to the Certificateholders. CFC estimatesthat its regular servicing fee will total not more than approximately \1/10\of 1% per annum of the principal amount of the Private Note. If REA consents,CFC receives from the Trust reimbursement for costs incurred by it in connectionwith the reoffering of the Certificates. However, the applicant statesthat such reimbursement does not reduce distributions to the Certificateholders.CFC may not resign, but may be discharged by action of 51% of the Certificateholdersor the Trustee following certain defaults or events of bankruptcy relatingto CFC. The insolvency of either the Trustee of CFC will not affect theCertificateholders rights, because CFC will not hold any Trust assets andthe assets held in a fiduciary capacity by the Trustee are not subjectto claims of the Trustee's general creditors.9. CFC states that it may resell the Certificates, either in private placementspursuant to section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 (the SecuritiesAct), or in underwritten public offerings registered under the SecuritiesAct, or possibly in distributions exempt from registration because theywill come to rest outside the United States. CFC expects that the Certificateswill be marketed principally to financial institutions, such as the Plans.CFC states further that the Certificates issued by each Trust will receivethe highest investment grade rating (``AAA'' or ``Aaa'') from at leasttwo nationally recognized statistical rating organizations not affiliatedwith CFC or the Trusts.10. Each Certificate represents an undivided fractional interest in a Trust.The Certificates are issued in denominations of $1,000 or multiples thereof,and will not be divisible into Certificates with original principal amountsbelow that figure. The Certificates are transferable and are listed ona national securities exchange. Payments on the Certificates representthe pass-through of payments received by the Trustee on the Private Noteheld by the Trust. Interest on both the Private Note and the Certificatesare payable semiannually and principal payments on both the Private Noteand the Certificates are payable annually for the period during which thePrivate Note and the Certificates amortize.The Certificates can be prepaid at any time the Private Note is prepaid.The Private Notes are prepayable at the Cooperative's option, generallyafter a no-call period, at premiums declining each year until such premiumsequal zero. The applicant states that the payment of principal, interestand premium in the event a Cooperative elects to prepay the Private Noteare not covered by the REA Guarantee. However, the Cooperative is requiredto accompany its notice of prepayment with a cash deposit equal to theamounts that are due on the Private Note at the time of prepayment, thusassuring that funds are available at that time.The applicant states that with the exception of the prepayment referredto above, all payments on the Certificates have back-to-back Private Noteobligations which are supported by the full faith and credit of the UnitedStates. If the Cooperative defaults in making its payments or in its otherobligations to REA, REA has the option either to pay under the REA Guaranteeprincipal and interest as they fall due on the Private Note or to proceedagainst the Cooperative and to assume the Cooperative's obligations underthe Private Note. In addition, if the Cooperative could at that time makean optional prepayment of the Private Note, REA may prepay or purchasethe Private Note at the same premium as would then be applicable to a prepaymentby the Cooperative. The Trustee or CFC, as its agent, will enforce paymentsdue on the Private Note and the REA Guarantee. However, a specified percentageof Certificateholders may direct the time, method and place of conductingany remedy available to the Trustee or CFC. The Trustee may not resignuntil the Trust is liquidated and the proceeds distributed to Certificateholdersunless a successor Trustee has been designated and has accepted the trusteeship.11. Scheduled distributions on the Certificates are made approximately11 days following the corresponding payment on the Private Note. The applicationstates that this period of time allows CFC to notify REA if there is adefault by the Cooperative in making a payment on the Private Note andallows five business days for REA to make a payment under the guarantee.As a consquence, if the Cooperative defaults, the full faith and creditguarantee payment will fall due before the scheduled payment on the Certificates.The applicant states that if a Cooperative elects to prepay the PrivateLoan, distributions on the Certificates will be made only after advancereceipt of the amounts to be prepaid, thus permitting notice of the resultingdistribution to be given to the Certificateholders.The applicant states further that during these periods pending distribution,payments on the Private Note received by the Trust will be invested, atthe direction of CFC, in (i) obligations issued by the United States (andsupported by its full faith and credit), or (ii) repurchase agreementswith respect to such obligations, over-collateralized on a basis that willnot result in a reduction in the ratings of the Certificates. All suchinvestments must mature before the next scheduled distribution date onthe Certificates. The obligations collateralizing the repurchase agreementsin question would be marked-to-market on a daily basis and kept in thepossession of the Trustee. Assuming all amounts then due on the PrivateNotes have been paid in full, any yield on these investments will be returnedto the Cooperative, or to REA to the extent of any unreimbursed paymentson the REA Guarantee.12. <T3>Prohibited Transactions.</T3> The Department's regulations defining``plan assets'' (29 CFR 2510.3-101) provide that if a plan acquires anequity interest in an entity that is not an operating company, such asthe Certificates in a Trust, the plan will be required to treat the underlyingassets of the entity as assets of the plan, if the class of equity interestsin question are not (i) held by 100 or more investors independent of theissuer and of each other, (ii) freely transferable and (iii) sold as apart of an offering pursuant to an effective registration statement underthe Securities Act, and then timely registered under section 12(b) or 12(g)of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The application represents thatalthough there are no restrictions imposed on the transfer of the Certificatesand CFC will satisfy the registration requirements, CFC anticipates thatone or more series of the Certificates will be held by fewer than 100 independentinvestors at the conclusion of the initial offering.The applicant states that a Plan's assets will be deemed to include assetsof a Trust if employee benefit plan investors in the aggregate acquireCertificates representing a greater than 25% interest in a Trust.\3\<NOTE/> CFC represents that it is possible that more than 25% ofthe interests in one series of Certificates may be held by the Plans.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\See DOL Reg. andSection;2510.3-101(f).If the assets of a Trust are deemed to be ``plan assets'', the activitiesof CFC with respect to a Trust may be regarded as services being performedfor the participating Plans, which would cause CFC to be a ``service provider''and party in interest to the Plans investing in the Trust. Thus, CFC statesthat it is the possible existence of such ``service provider'' status whichgives rise to the potential prohibited transactions for which an exemptionis requested. However, CFC acts solely as an agent of the Trustee and doesnot have any authority or control, outside those duties specifically delineatedin the Trust Agreement, which would make it a fiduciary of the assets ofa Trust.First, the applicant states that a Plan may acquire interests in more thanone Trust. Since separate Trusts will be established with respect bothto borrowings by different Cooperatives and with respect to borrowingsof different maturities by the same Cooperative, it is possible that aPlan interested in the Certificates will acquire interests in multipleTrusts. In such event, the party in interest status assumed by CFC withrespect to an investing Plan as a result of the Plan's first investmentin an interest in a Trust might cause the acquisition by the Plan of aninterest in a second Trust to violate the provisions of the Act. Such atransaction could occur if the Plan were to acquire a Certificate directlyfrom CFC. However, the applicant states that some of the Certificates willbe placed through a firm commitment underwriting.\4\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The applicant represents where the Certificates are acquiredby the Plans through an underwriting, the acquisition of the Certificatesby the Plans may be covered by Part III of Prohibited Transaction Exemption(PTE) 75-1, 40 FR 50845, (October 31, 1975). However, this proposed exemptionwould provide exemptive relief for those additional prohibited transactionsinvolving CFC not covered by PTE 75-1 that may arise as a result of theplan asset ``look-though'' rule and CFC's status as a service-providerto a Trust.Second, in addition to the acquisition of Certificates, a Plan may acquireor already hold the CFC Debt (see Paragraph 1 above) which CFC issues toprovide funding for its operations. CFC Debt consists of collateral trustbonds (CFC Bonds), commercial paper (CFC Paper), and medium term notes(CFC Notes). These debt securities are all high grade investments, accordingto two nationally recognized rating organizations, which are sold primarilyto institutional investors. CFC Bonds are fixed rate unconvertible seniordebt securities which have maturities ranging from five to thirty-fiveyears. CFC Bonds are listed on the New York Stock Exchange and sold infirm commitment underwritten public offerings, registered under the SecuritiesAct, to traditional buyers of corporate debt securities such as banks andinsurance companies. CFC Paper is issued as senior promissory notes havingmaturities of up to nine months. CFC Paper is exempt from registrationunder the Securities Act and is sold through securities dealers mostlyto banks and money-market funds. CFC Notes are unsecured senior unconvertiblenotes having maturities ranging from nine months to fifteen years. CFCNotes are registered under the Securities Act and are placed by securitiesdealers on a best-efforts basis with the usual buyers of this type of security,which are mostly banks and insurance companies. The applicant representsthat all these debt securities are offered on the same terms and conditionsto all investors, including the Plans. The applicant states that if a Planwere to acquire Certificates from CFC at any time during which the Planheld CFC Debt, and such acquisition of the Certificates resulted in CFCbecoming a party in interest with respect to the Plan as a service providerto the Trust which issued the Certificates, then the holding by the Planof such CFC Debt would become a prohibited extension of credit in violationof the Act. Likewise, if CFC were to become a party in interest with respectto a Plan as a service provider and if the Plan subsequently acquired CFCDebt, then such acquisition by the Plan of CFC Debt would become a prohibitedextension of credit in violation of the Act.CFC states that it will have no relationship to, or influence over theinvestment decisions made by, a Plan either to acquire CFC Debt or to acquirea Certificate under a Trust. The decisions of the Plans to participatein the Trusts, through the purchase of the Certificates, will be made byPlan fiduciaries independent of CFC and the Trustee.Finally, CFC states that it is obligated to defend and indemnify the Trustand its Certificateholders against any and all costs, expenses, losses,damages, claims and liabilities, including reasonable fees and expensesof counsel and expenses of litigation, arising with respect to any actiontaken by CFC, except to the extent such charges may be attributable tothe Trustee's negligence or bad faith. The applicant states that if CFCis considered to be a party in interest with respect to Plan Certificateholders,CFC's indemnification of the Certificateholders against certain potentialtaxes and expenses may be deemed to be a guarantee which results in a prohibitedextension of credit between CFC and the Plan under the act.13. Soyland Power Cooperative, Inc. (Soyland), has refinanced its FFB Loansunder the Program by borrowing from CFC and issuing five Private Notesevidencing these borrowings to separate Trusts. CFC has acquired the Certificatesrepresenting the ownership interest in these Trusts (the Soyland Transaction)and has sold the Certificates to various institutional investors, includingthe Plans. The applicant requests that the proposed exemption be effectiveas of July 22, 1987, the date of the delivery of the Certificates to thePlans with respect to the Soyland Transaction. The applicant states thatfour other Cooperatives, Cajun Electric Power Cooperative, Inc., DeseretGeneration andamp; Transmission Co-Operative, Tex-La Electric Cooperativeof Texas Inc., and Kansas Electric Power Cooperative, Inc., have plannedto refinance their FFB Loans under the Program. However, CFC states thatbecause the determination of eligibility under the Regulations rests solelywith REA, CFC cannot determine which other borrowers will have prepaymentapplications approved. CFC anticipates that a substantial number of theCooperatives may participate in the Program.14. In summary, the applicant represents that the transactions satisfythe statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because, among otherthings: (a) The decision of the Plans to purchase the Certificates wasand will be made in all cases by a Plan fiduciary which is independentof CFC and the Trusteee; (b) the Certificates are priced at market ratesand will in all cases receive the highest investment grade rating fromtwo nationally recognized statisitcal rating organizations; (c) the paymentsof principal and interest on the Private Notes held by the Trusts issuingthe Certificates are guaranteed by REA; and (d) the Certificates are soldto the Plans with full disclosure to the independent fiduciaries for thePlans of the fees and expenses to be recovered by CFC and the Trustee fromthe Trust, which in all cases come only out of payments made on the PrivateNotes by the Cooperatives.For Further Information Contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Dalton Foundries, Inc. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (the Plan) Locatedin Fort Wayne, Indiana</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7757]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), and 406(b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting fromthe application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (D) of the Code shall not apply to the sale by the Plan ofcertain units in a limited investment partnership (the Partnership Units)to the Dalton Foundries, Inc. Pension Plan (the Pension Plan), a partyin interest with respect to the Plan by reason of the Plan's ownershipof more than 50 percent of Dalton Foundries, Inc. (Dalton), sponsor ofthe Pension Plan, provided that the price paid is the fair market valueof the Partnership Units on the date of sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is an employee stock ownership plan sponsored by Dalton Foundries,Inc., manufacturers of foundry equipment doing business in Warsaw, Indiana.As of September 8, 1988, the Plan had 122 participants and $3,460,000 inassets.2. In 1982 the Dalton Foundries, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan (the Profit SharingPlan) purchased the Partnership Units, 63.441 units of Balcor Pension InvestorsII (Balcor II) at an aggregate cost of $60,000. Balcor II is a limitedreal estate investment partnership marketed by The Balcor Company (Balcor),a subsidiary of Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc. At the time of the purchaseof the Partnership Units the Profit Sharing Plan covered Dalton's salariedemployees and the assets of the Profit Sharing Plan were allocated betweenan equity fund (the Equity Fund) and a money market fund, between whichparticipants were given the right to exercise investment discretion. ThePartnership Units then represented approximately 4.3% of the $1.4 millionin the Equity Fund. After formation of the Plan in 1985, Profit SharingPlan participants were given the opportunity to direct that their accountsbe invested in whole or in part in employer stock, and the Profit SharingPlan was merged into the Plan. All Profit Sharing Accounts, however, weresegregated within the Plan trust. As of December 31, 1987, the Profit SharingEquity Fund accounts totalled approximately $161,000. The Partnership Units,valued as of September 1, 1988 at $876.04 per unit, thus represent approximately34.5% of the Equity Fund value.3. The Partnership Units now represent more than a third of the value ofassets in the Plan's Equity Fund. However, no satisfactory secondary marketcurrently exists for the Partnership Units. Although Balcor maintains arepurchase plan for Balcor II investment units, the waiting period forrepurchase is currently approximately four years, a waiting period whichfluctuates on the basis of cash received each quarter.Early in 1988 the waiting period was nine years. As a result, a severeliquidity problem exists with respect to the Profit Sharing Equity Fundaccounts which limits the right of Plan participants to exercise theirinvestment discretion between the Profit Sharing Equity Fund and moneymarket accounts and the ability of the Plan to make distributions fromthe Profit Sharing Equity Fund to retiring or otherwise terminating Planparticipants.4. Accordingly, the Plan proposes to sell the Partnership Units to thePension Plan for an amount in cash equal to the unit value of the PartnershipUnits as determined by Balcor. Balcor discounts the value of the Unitsby 10% due to lack of marketability and this amount represents the priceat which Balcor will repurchase the Units from unitholders. On September1, 1988, Sean O'Malley, of the Investor Services Department of Balcor,stated that the fair market value of the Partnership Units was $876.04per interest.5. On April 4, 1989, Radd L. Riebe, (Mr. Riebe) Vice President of AmeritrustCompany N.A. of Cleveland, Ohio, acting as independent fiduciary for thePlan, stated that the proposed transaction was in the best interest ofthe Plan and its participants and beneficiaries. In reaching this conclusion,Mr. Riebe took into consideration the Plan's overall investment portfolio,especially its liquidity requirements and the need of the Plan to diversifyits assets.6. On April 6, 1989, Barry F. Ebert (Mr. Ebert), President of HeartlandCapital Management, Inc., a registered investment advisor, acting as independentfiduciary for the Pension Plan, stated that the proposed transaction wasin the best interest of the Pension Plan and its participants and beneficiaries.In reaching this conclusion, Mr. Ebert took into consideration the PensionPlan's average annual rate of investment return, the diversification ofits assets, and its liquidity needs. The Partnership Units will representapproximately 3.5% of the assets of the Pension Plan.7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a)The sale represents a one-time transaction for cash, which can be easilyverified; (b) the transaction will result in greater liquidity of the Plan'sassets, enabling the Plan to make timely distributions; (c) the Plan willreceive and the Pension Plan will pay the fair market value for the PartnershipUnits as determined by Balcor; and (d) Ameritrust Company, N.A., servingas independent fiduciary for the Plan, and Heartland Capital Management,Inc., serving as independent fiduciary for the Pension Plan, have determinedthat the transaction is in the interest of the Plan and its participantsand beneficiaries and of the Pension Plan and its participants and beneficiaries.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact:</T2> Joseph L. Roberts III of theDepartment, telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Pension Plan for Employees of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., Inc. and Affiliates(the Plan) Located in New York, New York </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Application No. D-7859) </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to: (1) The proposedcash sale by the Plan of certain parcels of improved real property (theProperties) and the transfer of all existing leases on the Properties,to Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., Inc. (the Employer), the sponsor of the Plan,provided that the price paid for each of the Properties is the greaterof either (i) the price originally paid for the particular Property bythe Plan, plus the cost of all capital improvements made to the Propertysince the time of its acquisition by the Plan (the Book Value), or (ii)the fair market value of the Property as of the date of sale; and (2) theproposed cash sale by the Plan of a second mortgage note (the Note), whichis secured by another parcel of improved real property unrelated to theProperties, to the Employer, provided that the price paid for the Noteis the greater of either (i) the outstanding principal balance on the Note,plus any accrued but unpaid interest (the Note's Book Value), or (ii) thefair market value of the Note on the date of sale. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a defined benefit plan which, as of December 31, 1988, hadtotal assets of approximately $1 billion. The Plan covers approximately32,542 active participants. In addition, the Plan covers 5,317 former participants,retirees and beneficiaries who are now receiving or who are entitled toreceive benefits in the future. The trustees of the Plan are Courtney F.Jones (Mr. Jones), D. Bruce Brunson (Mr. Brunson), Robert J. Farrell (Mr.Farrell), Jack W. Lowery (Mr. Lowery), Arthur Zeikel (Mr. Zeikel), andMary A. Wrenn (together, the Trustees). The Trustees are all officers ofthe Employer or its subsidiaries. 2. The Employer is a holding company incorporated in Delaware with itsprincipal offices located at North Tower, World Financial Center, New York,New York. The Employer provides, through its subsidiaries, various investment,financial, real estate, insurance and related services. The Employer'sprincipal subsidiary, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner andamp; Smith, Inc.,is one of the largest securities firms in the world. 3. The Plan provides for the appointment by the Board of Directors of theEmployer of an investment committee for the Plan (the Committee) consistingof not less than three nor more than nine members. Members of the Committeemay, but need not, be employees of the Employer or its subsidaries. Atthe present time, there are five employees of the Employer or its subsidiariesthat are serving as members of the Committee. These five Committee membersare Mr. Jones, Mr. Brunson, Mr. Farrell, Mr. Lowery, and Mr. Zeikel. The Committee has the exclusive power to establish and monitor the policiesand guidelines for the investment of the Plan's assets. The Committee isalso authorized to direct the purchase or sale of specific investmentsof the Plan, except to the extent that an investment manager has been appointedfor any of the Plan's assets. 4. The Employer has decided to terminate the Plan effective December 31,1988. In connection with the Plan's termination, the Committee intendsto liquidate all of the Plan's assets, including the Properties and theNote. The assets of the Plan, including the proceeds from the sale of theProperties and the Note, will be used to provide the participants and beneficiariesof the Plan with annuities in an amount equal to their Plan benefits asof December 31, 1988. The Employer anticipates that, following the satisfactionof Plan liabilities, there will be residual assets held by the Plan whichwill be transferred to an employee stock ownership plan sponsored by theEmployer (the ESOP). The applicant states that the amount transferred tothe ESOP will consist solely of cash or cash equivalents and will be usedto purchase stock of the Employer. 5. The Properties are described as follows: (1) A single six-story office building with approximately 82,800 squarefeet located at 523 North Belt, Houston, Texas (the Houston Property);(2) a single one-story warehouse containing 47,791 square feet locatedat 1383 Vapor Trail Road, Colorado Springs, Colorado (the Colorado SpringsProperty); (3) a business park consisting of four office and warehousebuildings containing approximately 86,544 square feet located at 1977 O'TooleAvenue, San Jose, California (the San Jose Properties); and (4) three single-storyindustrial warehouse buildings, known as Centreport 7, Valwood Park 1,and Valwood Park 4, containing a total of approximately 215,598 squarefeet, which are located, respectively, at 4501 Cambridge Road in Fort Worth,Texas, 13800 Hutton Drive in Dallas, Texas, and 13755 Benchmark Drive inDallas, Texas (together, the Dallas/Ft. Worth Properties). The Note is a nonrecourse second mortgage interest in a five-story, 104,000square foot office building, located at 500 Sylvan Avenue, Bridgeport,Connecticut (the Bridgeport Property). The Bridgeport Property is ownedby the Sylvan Executive Limited Partnership (Sylvan), an unrelated party.6. The Plan purchased the Houston Property in December, 1980, from Messrs.Frank E. Allison and R.E. Walker, Jr., both of whom are unrelated parties,for $4,875,000. The Plan has incurred capital expenditures of $385,874with respect to the Houston Property, making the current Book Value ofthe Property $5,260,874. The Houston Property was appraised by Thomas R. Kirby, M.A.I. (Mr. Kirby),of Murphy, Kirby andamp; Associates, an independent, qualified real estateappraiser in Houston, Texas. Mr. Kirby states that the fair market valueof the Houston Property, expressed in terms of the ``leased fee estate''created by existing and projected multiple tenant leases, was $1,200,000,as of September 15, 1988. Mr. Kirby notes that a major tenant of the HoustonProperty vacated the premises in 1986 and that the property was approximately85% vacant, as of the date of the appraisal. Mr. Kirby also notes thatthe Houston area real estate market is over-developed and extremely competitive.The applicant represents that the value of the ``leased fee estate'' inthe Houston Property was used to determine fair market value because theHouston Property is being sold subject to existing leases to parties unrelatedto the Plan or the Employer. By letter dated February 3, 1989, Mr. Kirbystates that in the real estate appraisal profession it is common practice,when a property is encumbered by either a single tenant lease or multipletenant leases, to value the ``leased fee estate'' rather than the ``feesimple estate.'' Mr. Kirby states further that the term ``leased fee estate''is synonymous with the use of the term ``fee simple encumbered by existingleases.'' Mr. Kirby notes that a ``leased fee estate'' valuation takesinto consideration the future rental income from the current tenants, aswell as the reversion of the property (unencumbered by those leases) atthe expiration of the leases. 7. The Plan purchased the Colorado Springs Property on June 26, 1981, fromMr. James Barry Craddock, an unrelated party, for $1,614,143. The Planhas incurred capital expenditures of $61,562 with respect to the ColoradoSprings Property, making the current Book Value of the property $1,675,705.The Colorado Springs Property was appraised by John D. Freeman, M.A.I.(Mr. Freeman), an independent, qualified real estate appraiser in ColoradoSprings, Colorado, as having a fair market value of $1,410,000, as of September16, 1988. Mr. Freeman states that the only tenant in the Colorado SpringsProperty is the Schlage Lock Company, which will be vacating the premisesin June 1989. Mr. Freeman states further that his valuation of the ColoradoSprings Property has emphasized the income approach and has taken intoconsideration the present value of a future rental income stream, basedon market rents for comparable properties in the area. Mr. Freeman notesthat the current market for industrial warehouse space in Colorado Springsis over-developed and highly competitive. 8. The Plan purchased the San Jose Properties on September 16, 1983, fromPublic Storage, Inc., an unrelated party, for $5,790,902. The Plan hasincurred capital expenditures of $258,659 with respect to the San JoseProperties, making the current Book Value of such properties $6,049,561.The San Jose Properties were appraised by William A. Niethammer, M.A.I.(Mr. Niethammer), of the Real Estate Research Corporation, an independent,qualified real estate appraiser in San Francisco, California, as havinga fair market value of $5,000,000, as of September 23, 1988. Mr. Niethammernotes that the commercial real estate market in San Jose is over-developedand suffers from a high vacancy rate, although vacancy rates for similarproperties have declined some in the past year. Mr. Niethammer states thathis valuation of the San Jose Properties has correlated the market approachand the income capitalization approach in arriving at the current marketvalue for such properties. 9. The Plan purchased the Dallas/Ft. Worth Properties on August 15, 1985,from Centre Development Company, an unrelated party, for a total of $11,190,185(i.e. $5,727,825 for Centreport 7, $2,567,825 for Valwood Park 1, and $2,894,535for Valwood Park 4). The Plan has incurred total capital expenditures of$138,609 with respect to the Dallas/Ft. Worth Properties (i.e. $108,441for Centreport 7, $15,084 for Valwood Park 1, and $15,084 for Valwood Park4), making the current aggregate Book Value of such properties $11,328,794.The Dallas/Ft. Worth Properties were appraised by Ronald W. Potts, M.A.I.(Mr. Potts), of Cushman andamp; Wakefield Appraisal Division, an independent,qualified real estate appraiser in Dallas, Texas. Mr. Potts states thatthe aggregate fair market value of the Dallas/Ft. Worth Properties, expressedin terms of the ``lease fee interest'' in the subject properties, was $8,770,000,as of November 1, 1988 (i.e. $4,900,000 for Centreport 7, $1,770,000 forValwood Park 1, and $2,100,000 for Valwood Park 4). Mr. Potts notes thatseveral major tenants in the Dallas/Ft. Worth Properties have leases whichare due to expire soon and that other tenants are seeking to sublet theirspace. Mr. Potts also notes that the Dallas/Ft. Worth industrial real estatemarket is over-developed and very competitive. The applicant represents that the value of the ``leased fee interest''in the Dallas/Ft. Worth Properties was used to determine fair market valuebecause, as with the Houston Property, those Properties are being soldsubject to the existing leases, all of which are with unrelated parties.By letter dated January 31, 1989, Mr. Potts states that a valuation ofthe ``leased fee interest'' or ``leased fee estate'' for the Dallas/Ft.Worth Properties is the relevant valuation for such Properties. Mr. Pottsstates further that a ``leased fee interest'' valuation takes into considerationthe market value of existing leases on the subject property, the probabilitiesof such leases being renewed or cancelled at their termination, and anyresidual fee simple interest value in the property when arriving at fairmarket value. 10. The Plan originated the Note in July 1982. The Note is a 30-year note,with a face value of $3,200,000, which matures in 2012. The annual intereston the Note is 10% for the initial fifteen years and 12% for the remainderof the term. Amortization of the principal amount of the Note begins inthe sixteenth year. Prepayment of the Note by Sylvan, the borrower, isprohibited until the sixteenth year. The Note allows the Plan an optionto convert its debt interest in the Bridgeport Property, the underlyingproperty which secures the Note, into an equity interest on six monthsprior written notice between the tenth and fifteenth year of the Note.The Bridgeport Property has a first mortgage interest held by the AetnaLife Insurance Company, an unrelated party, in the amount of $5,500,000.The Note was appraised by Mark B. Victor, M.A.I. (Mr. Victor), of Cushmanandamp; Wakefield of Connecticut, Inc. (the Appraiser), an independent, qualifiedappraiser in Stamford, Connecticut, as having a fair market value of $3,200,000,as of September 20, 1988. Mr. Victor states that his valuation of the Notewas based on the terms and conditions of the Note, the Note's lien positonwith respect to the other encumbrances, and the security for the Note.Mr. Victor notes that the Bridgeport Property was appraised by the Appraiseras having a fair market value of $8,700,000, as of September 20, 1988.11. The applicant represents that extensive efforts have been made to sellthe Properties and the Note to unrelated parties. However, these effortshave been unsuccessful. The applicant states that it may be difficult tosell the Properties without incurring a significant economic loss becauseof the depressed state of the commercial and industrial real estate marketsin the areas where the Properties are located. The Committee and the Employerwould like to avoid the potential adverse economic impact upon the Planof selling the Properties on the open market. Therefore, the Employer proposesto purchase the Properties from the Plan for cash at the greater of either(i) the Book Value for the particular Property, or (ii) the fair marketvalue of the particular property as determined by qualified, independentappraisers. The Employer is also willing to purchase the Note from thePlan for cash at the greater of either (i) the Note's Book Value, or (ii)the fair market value of the Note, as determined by a qualifed, independentappraiser. The applicant states that the appraisals for each of the Propertiesand for the Note will be updated as of the date of sale.12. The applicant represents that the proposed sale of the Properties andthe Note to the Employer would be in the best interests of the Plan andits participants and beneficiaries. The applicant states that the proposedtransactions would facilitate the timely liquidation of the Plan's assetsand will ensure that the Plan at least recoups its investment in the Propertiesand the Note. The Plan will not pay any commissions or other expenses inconnection with the proposed transactions.The applicant states that the Properties are not now and have not beeneither leased to or used by the Employer, its subsidiaries, or any otherparty in interest with respect to the Plan. In addition, neither the Employernor its subsidiaries own any property which is adjacent to the properties.13. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionwill satisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the act because:(a) The sale of the Properties and the Note will be one-time transactionsfor cash; (b) the plan will receive a price for the Properties which willbe the greater of either the Book Value for the particular Property orthe fair market value for the particular Property, as established by independent,qualified appraisers; (c) the Plan will receive a price for the Note whichwill be the greater of either the Note's Book Value or the fair marketvalue of the Note, as established by an independent, qualified appraiser;(d) the Plan will not pay any commissions or other expenses with respectto the proposed sale of the Properties and the Note; and (e) the transactionswill facilitate a prompt termination of the Plan and will allow the Plan'sassets to be distributed to the participants and beneficiaries.Tax Consequences of TransactionThe Department of the Treasury has determined that if a transaction betweena qualified employee benefit plan and its sponsoring employer (or affiliatethereof) results in the plan either paying less than or receiving morethan fair market value, such excess may be considered to be a contributionby the sponsoring employer to the plan, and therefore must be examinedunder the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, includingsections 401(a)(4), 404 and 415.Fpr Further Information Contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Complete General Construction Company Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan)Located in Columbus, Ohio</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7868]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the applicjation of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedsale for cash by the Plan of certain real property (the Real Property)to Complete General Construction Company (the Employer), a party in interestwith respect to the Plan, provided that the price paid be no less thanthe fair market value of the Real Property as of the date of sale, as determinedby an independent and qualified appraiser.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan sponsored by the Employer, a constructioncompany doing business in Columbus, Ohio. Lino A. Guzzo, President of theEmployer, serves as trustee of the Plan. As of December 7, 1988, the Planhad 53 participants. As of March 31, 1988, the aggregate value of Planassets was $1,777,097.12.2. On June 30, 1961, the Employer purchased 101.33 acres of unimprovedland (the Employer Property) in Franklin and Delaware Counties, Ohio. OnAugust 12, 1968, the Plan purchased the Real property, approximately 40acres of undeveloped land in Liberty Township, Delaware County, Ohio, froman unrelated third party for $52,000 in cash as an investment in anticipationof future appreciation. The Real Property, which includes approximately20 acres of lake area, is contiguous to the Employer Property, and hasno access to any road.3. On January 17, 1989, James L. Murr, MAI (Mr. Murr), an independent andqualified real estate appraiser associated with James Petropoulos and Company,a real estate and appraisal firm in Columbus, Ohio, stated that the fairmarket value of the Real Property was $192,000, based on the highest andbest use of the Real Property as to be developed in conjunction with theEmployer Property.4. The value of the Real Property is approximately 11% of Plan assets.The applicant represents that the Real Property, as undeveloped land, producesno income and has not been used by any party in interest with respect tothe Plan.5. Accordingly, the Plan proposes to sell the Real Property to the Employerfor cash for the fair market value of the Real Property as of the dateof sale as determined by an independent and qualified appraiser. The Plandesires to sell the Real Property in order to improve the liquidity ofits assets and to realize a higher investment return. The applicant representsthat the Employer will pay any and all costs relating to the sale of theReal Property.6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because, among otherthings: (a) The sale represents a one-time transaction for cash, whichcan be easily verified; (b) the Plan will receive the fair market valueof the Real Property as of the date of sale as determined by an independentand qualified appraiser; (c) the Plan will be able to divest itself ofan illiquid asset which is producing no income, and will be able to diversifyits assets in order to realize a higher return for the assets representedby the Real Property; (d) the Plan will not pay any commissions, taxes,or fees in connection with the sale of the Real Property; and (e) the trusteeof the Plan has determined that the proposed transaction would be in thebest interest and protective of the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact:</T2> Joseph L. Roberts III of theDepartment, telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Advest Group, Inc. Incentive Savings Plan (the Plan) Located in Hartford,CT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7947]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply to the proposed purchase or sale of zero-couponobligations based on Treasury securities (STRIPS) \5\<NOTE/> between individually-directed accounts in the Plan and Advest,Inc. (AI), the trustee, Plan administrator and sponsor of the Plan, providedthe following conditions are met: (a) The purchase or sale of the STRIPSwill be on terms at least as favorable as those offered in the ordinarycourse of business to unrelated customers of AI; (b) purchases or saleswill be made only upon the written direction of a Plan participant; and(c) purchases or sales directed by a participant will be only for the participant'sindividual account.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ The STRIPS program was announced by the Department ofthe Treasury on February 15, 1985, to facilitate Separate Trading of RegisteredInterest and Principal Securities.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan covering employees of the AdvestGroup, Inc. (AGI), a holding company located in Hartford, Connecticut,and its seven subsidiaries. As of December 31, 1987, the Plan had net assetsof $16,791,251. As of February 16, 1989, the Plan had approximately 1,800participants. AI, a wholly-owned subsidiary of AGI, is a broker-dealerwhich is also located in Hartford, Connecticut. AI is the Plan trustee,sponsor and administrator.2. The Plan currently allows each participant to direct the investmentand reinvestment of assets credited to such participant's individual accountin one or a combination of nine different mutual funds, none of which arerelated to AI. Plan participants are also permitted to invest the assetsin their individual accounts in money market accounts maintained for theparticipants at Advest Bank (Advest Bank), a Connecticut-chartered capitalstock savings bank and a subsidiary of AGI.\6\<NOTE/> A participant may direct investment in funds currently inhis or her account up to four times in any plan year by giving writtennotice to AI. Assets for which there is no effective participant directionare invested in Advest Bank money market accounts.\7\<NOTE/> Once given, an investment direction is deemed to be continuinguntil it is explicitly changed in writing by the participant.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ The application represents that such investments are inaccordance with the statutory criteria for exemptive relief under section408(b)(4) of the Act which pertains to the investment of all or part ofa plan's assets in deposits of a bank fiduciary. The Department expressesno opinion herein on whether participant investments in money market accountsof Advest Bank satisfy the terms and conditions of section 408(b)(4) ofthe Act.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ In this proposed exemption, the Department is not providingrelief for the receipt of fees with respect to the money market accounts.In this regard, see section 408(b)(2) of the Act.3. AI proposes to amend the Plan to allow all participants the additionaloption of investing in STRIPS. STRIPS represent direct ownership of futureprincipal and interest payments on United States Treasury Bonds or Notes.STRIPS pay no semiannual interest, sell at a substantial discount and paythe full face value upon maturity. The total return, if held to maturity,is fixed at the time of purchase and equals the difference between theprice an investor pays and the face value at maturity. The applicant representsthat investment in STRIPS is particularly attractive to participants whowish to lock in a fixed rate of interest for a given period of time.4. The applicant represents the STRIPS are marketed in the following manner.A primary government bond dealer purchases securities from the United StatesGovernment, and then, breaks the Treasury securities into the principaland interest component obligations of the underlying securities, whichare traded separately.\8\<NOTE/> Broker-dealers, such as AI, purchase components by a transferin book-entry form to the bank of the purchaser. At all times, regardlessof who owns the STRIP, such investment is maintained as a book-entry accountat a bank which participates in the book-entry system operated by the FederalReserve Banks. Each particular Government security, representing an obligationto pay the owner of the STRIPS, will be identified by a Committee on UniformSecurities Identification Procedures (CUSIP) number assigned to the obligation.The payment is fully-backed by and is a direct obligation of the UnitedStates Government. Whether the payment is an interest payment or a principalpayment is determinable from the CUSIP number assigned to that issue.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ For example, if an investor wishes to purchase STRIPSwhich will pay $25,000 on February 15, 1996, the underlying Treasury obligationsmay be in twenty-five $1,000 interest payments due on that date or five$5,000 principal payments due on that date or a $25,000 principal paymentdue on that date, or any combination of interest and principal paymentsdue on that date totaling $25,000.5. In marketing STRIPS, AI acts as a principal rather than as an agent.STRIPS are offered to the public in face amounts of $1,000 and integralmultiples thereof at discounts from their face amount. AI sells STRIPSto its regular customers in the ordinary course of its business at a sellingprice which is $3 to $22 per $1,000 of face value above the price establishedand posted by AI for each particular STRIP on the trade date. This mark-upwill not be charged to Plan participants for the subject transactions.6. AI represents that it establishes the selling price for STRIPS by examiningthe bid and asked prices for maturity dates of STRIPS established by primarydealers, secondary dealers, brokers and electronic screens such as Telerateand Bloomberg. During the course of a business day, AI receives quotationsfrom three or more different dealers and brokers in these categories regardingtheir bid and asked prices for given maturity dates. AI, in turn, pricesthe STRIPS to its customers based on the round lot market (i.e., salesfor a given maturity date of STRIPS in the face amount of $1 million andmultiple thereof) rather than the odd lot market, resulting in a higheryield-to-maturity for the customers. AI represents that it is not the onlybroker-dealer selling STRIPS and, therefore, the prices it establishesmust be competitive with the marketplace. AI establishes its price at leastonce daily, at 4 p.m. on the business day preceding the actual trade. Ona day when the market is particularly volatile, AI may change its pricemore frequently. The posted price applies to all sales to all customers. 7. The applicant seeks an exemption to allow any Plan participant to directAI to invest all or a portion of the balance in such participant's individually-directedaccount in STRIPS currently available to AI's regular customers in thenormal course of business. The only commitment of Plan funds will be byan individual participant for his or her individual account. Neither AGI,nor AI nor any subsidiary will recommend the purchase of STRIPS nor willany employee of AI, AGI or any other subsidiary, do anything which willserve as a primary basis for investment decisions with respect to any Planassets by an individual participant. If a participant selects a particularSTRIP that is not in AI's inventory, AI will obtain such STRIP, if available,for resale to the participant.  8. AI will sell STRIPS to participants at the base price established byAI at 4 p.m. on the business day before the STRIPS are purchased by theparticipant or the cost price of a subsequent purchase.9<NOTE/> The use of cost prices will occur only in rare instanceswhen the volume of orders greatly exceeds the amount of inventory. If thecost price is lower than the base price, that lower price will apply toall purchases. In addition, AI will not charge Plan participants any ofthe normal mark-ups or commissions that it would charge to regular customersin the ordinary course of business.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>9 The cost price is defined as the actual purchase price atwhich AI acquires a STRIP.  9. AI will provide written notice to each Plan participant explaining thatsuch participant will be able to direct the purchase of STRIPS at any timeand up to the level of AI's then present inventory of STRIPS. A participant'sinvestment direction must be in writing in a form acceptable to AI. Suchdirection must specify the particular STRIP (including maturity date(s)),to be acquired, the quantity of each STRIP to be acquired and the securityof securities to be sold from the participant's other investments to fundthe purchase of the STRIP, if applicable. A participant may place a conditionalorder directing the purchase of STRIPS only if it could be obtained atbelow a maximum price or above a minimum yield. A participant will be ableto rescind any order prior to the trade date by notifying AI. A participantmay modify an order should there be insufficient funds to pay for the STRIPSas of the trade date. The minimum investment in STRIPS shall be $1,000. 10. AI will execute the orders on a first come, first serve basis, in thesame manner as AI processes its orders for its regular customers in thenormal course of business. The actual purchase will be made as soon aspracticable after receipt of a participant's investment direction.  11. The applicant represents that the proposed exemptions is in the Plan'sbest interest because: (a) The proposal merely makes available an additionalinvestment option to Plan participants; (b) the participant may directpurchases only for his or her individual account; (c) the purchase pricesof STRIPS will be set by external market conditions which are not withinthe control of AI; and (d) the amount paid by the participant for a particularSTRIP will be below the price available to a regular customer of AI becausethere will be no mark-up or commission charged, whereas the normal marketprice available to a regular customer of AI is $3 to $22 per $1,000 offace value above the price established and posted by AI for each particularSTRIP on the trade date.  12. The applicant also requests an exemption to permit Plan participantsto have the opportunity to sell any or all of the STRIPS in their accountto AI at any time. If the STRIPS are sold through AI in a principal transaction,the sale prices for the STRIPS will be the sale prices that would be availablefor the same STRIPS sold by AI in the ordinary course of business to itsregular customers on the date of sale. Plan participants will not be chargedany mark-up from the base sale price or commission. The trade will otherwisebe executed in the same manner as a sale in the ordinary course of businessby a regular customer of AI. Any decision to sell STRIPS prior to distributionfrom the Plan will be voluntarily made by a participant. In making thesale option available, neither AGI, nor AI nor any subsidiary will recommendthat any participant sell any STRIPS.  13. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionsmeet the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) The purchaseand sale of the STRIPS will be on terms at least as favorable as thoseoffered in the ordinary course of business to unrelated customers of AI;(b) no commissions or mark-ups will be charged to Plan participants oneither the purchase or the sale of the STRIPS; (c) purchases and salesmay be made by Plan participants at any time and only on the written directionof such Plan participant; and (d) the purchases and sales of the STRIPSdirected by a participant will only be for that participant's individualaccount. For Further Information Contact: Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)  <ITAG tagnum="84">General Information  </ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:  (1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;  (2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and  (3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.  (4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption. <ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 9th day of June, 1989.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14144 Filed 6-13-89; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M   </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>