<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89518-0036 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-18-89.f2.A1035</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 95 / Thursday, May 18, 1989 /Proposed Rules  <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Aviation Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Parts 61, 67 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 25905; Notice No. 89-12] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2120-AC51 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Pilots Convicted of Alcohol- or Drug-Related Motor Vehicle Offensesor Subject to State Motor Vehicle Administrative Procedures </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed rulemaking. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This notice proposes rules under which two or more alcohol-or drug-related motor vehicle convictions or related state administrativeactions would be grounds for certificate action against a pilot. This noticealso proposes rules under which a pilot's medical certificate would expire,requiring that the pilot apply for a new medical certificate, after analcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle action. The notice proposes to requirepilots to report alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle actions to theFAA and proposes to add an express consent provision to facilitate FAAaccess to information reported to the National Driver Register. The proposedrules are needed to prohibit a pilot from operating an aircraft after multiplealcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle actions. The proposed rules areintended to enhance aviation safety by identifying persons who do not meetthe medical standards of the regulations and by removing from navigableairspace pilots who have demonstrated an unwillingness or inability tocomply with safety regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments must be received on or before July 17, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments on this notice may be delivered or mailed induplicate to: Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Chief Counsel,Attn: Rules Docket (AGC-204), Docket No. 25905, 800 Independence Avenue,SW., Room 915G, Washington, DC 20591. Comments must be marked: Docket No.25905. Comments may be inspected in Room 915G between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00p.m. on weekdays, except Federal holidays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Ms. Judie Craine, Office of Rulemaking(ARM-1), Federal Aviation Administration, 800 Independence Avenue, SW.,Washington, DC 20591; telephone (202) 267-968l.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Comments Invited </ITAG>Interested persons are invited to participate in the proposed rulemakingby submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire.Communications should identify the regulatory docket or notice number andbe submitted in duplicate to the address above. All communications receivedon or before the closing date for comments will be considered by the Administratorbefore taking further rulemaking action. Persons wishing the Federal AviationAdministration (FAA) to acknowledge receipt of their comments submittedin response to this notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) must submit withthose comments a preaddressed, stamped postcard on which the followingstatement is made: ``Comments to Docket No. 25905. The postcard will bedate stamped and returned to the commenters. All comments submitted willbe available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in theRules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report summarizingeach substantive public contact with FAA personnel concerned with thisrulemaking will be filed in the docket.'' <ITAG tagnum="84">Availability of NPRM </ITAG>Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to theFAA, Office of Public Affairs, Attn: Public Inquiry Center (APA-230), 800Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20591, or by calling (202) 267-3484.Communications must identify the notice number of this NPRM. Persons interestedin being placed on the mailing list for future rulemaking actions shouldalso request a copy of Advisory Circular No. 11-2A, Notice of ProposedRulemaking Distribution System, that describes the application procedures.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>On February 17, 1987, the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) for theU.S. Department of Transportation released the results of an audit of theFAA's airman medical certification program. The OIG evaluated the proceduresused by the FAA to ensure that an individual with a history of alcohol-or drug-related problems is not issued an airman certificate and the proceduresused to determine if an individual reports this information to the FAAin an accurate and timely manner. The OIG used three automated files to conduct its audit: (1) An extractfrom a state driving file on alcohol- and drug-related motor vehicle offenses;(2) an extract from the National Driver Register (NDR); and (3) the FAA'sactive medical files. The OIG used these files to perform two comparisonsfor the audit. First, the OIG compared the FAA's medical file and the staterecords of alcohol- and drug-related traffic offenses. This comparisonshowed that 1,584 of the active pilots (3.4%) who held a driver's licenseissued by that state had at least one driving-while-intoxicated (DWI) ordriving-under-the-influence (DUI) conviction. Of these pilots, 1,124 pilots(71%) did not report this information to the FAA. The OIG also compared the FAA's medical file with the NDR records for individualswhose driver's licenses had been suspended or revoked based on alcohol-or drug-related traffic offenses. This comparison disclosed that the driver'slicenses of approximately 10,300 of the 711,648 active airmen (1.45%) hadbeen suspended or revoked for DWI or DUI offenses within the past 7 years.Of these pilots, 7,850 pilots (76%) failed to report these motor vehicleconvictions to the FAA on their medical applications. The NDR Act containsstatutory restrictions regarding access and use of NDR information. Thus,the OIG collected only statistical data from the NDR and did not obtainthe names of specific airmen during the audit.After the audit report was released, the OIG announced its intention toconduct two computer matches as part of an investigative effort to gatherspecific, detailed information (52 FR 5374; February 20, 1987) (52 FR 8545;March 18, 1987). For the first match, the OIG matched the Automated MedicalCertification Data Base (the FAA's medical files) with certain IdentificationRecords of criminal history information of the Federal Bureau of Investigation(FBI). For the second match, the OIG matched FAA's Automated Medical CertificationData Base with the State of Florida Department of Highway Safety and MotorVehicles driver's license records involving alcohol- or drug-related trafficoffenses. These one-time computer matches resulted in the identificationof specific airmen who allegedly falsified applications for medical certificatesby failing to report alcohol- or drug-related convictions. The OIG has referred over 6,400 of these computer matches to the FAA forpossible administrative action. The OIG also is referring some resultsof these matches to the Department of Justice for possible criminal actionbased on a violation of 18 U.S.C. 1001 for intentional falsification ofan application for a medical certificate. On September 30, 1988, 27 airmenwere indicted by a Federal grand jury in Tampa, Florida for falsificationof their medical certificate applications. The airmen were charged withmaking one or more false statements to the FAA by failing to disclose alcohol-or drug-related convictions on the airmen's application for a medical certificate.The OIG currently has investigations underway throughout the country andmore indictments are expected. Based on the information discovered during the audit, the OIG recommendedthat the FAA develop an objective, regulatory standard that would providefor FAA certificate action against pilots convicted of alcohol- or drug-relatedmotor vehicle offenses. The OIG also recommended that the FAA seek legislativechanges to the NDR statute that would give the FAA access to NDR information.The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and the U.S. General AccountingOffice (GAO) supported these recommendations. Statistics do not now indicate a significant positive correlation betweenconvictions for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and flyingfatalities or accidents. However, information collected by the FAA showsthat 6.0 percent of general aviation pilots killed in aircraft accidents,during the period from 1978 to 1987, had a blood alcohol level above 0.04percent. Based on this information, the FAA has reason to believe thatsome intoxicated or impaired pilots may operate aircraft in the UnitedStates. The FAA believes that it is reasonable to conclude that a pilot with multiplealcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle convictions has shown an inabilityor unwillingness to comply with regulations or laws. In addition, pilotsconvicted of alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle offenses may not meetthe medical standards contained in Part 67 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.The FAA has determined that information related to any conviction is necessaryto conduct effective investigations to ensure that a pilot is capable ofsafely exercising the privileges of a flight crewmember. On June 22, 1987, the Secretary of Transportation submitted a draft billto Congress proposing amendments to the NDR Act to assist the FAA in identifyingoperators of aircraft who have motor vehicle driving problems by permittingaccess to the NDR. An amended version of the proposed bill was passed bythe Senate on December 17, 1987 and passed by the House on December 18,1987. The legislation amending the National Driver Register Act of 1982(Pub. L. No. 100-223 adding section 206(b)(3) to the NDR Act of 1982) wassigned by the President on December 30, 1987.The amendment to the NDR Act states that<ITAG tagnum="21">(a)ny individual who has applied for or received an airman's certificatemay request the chief driver licensing official of a State to transmitinformation regarding the individual * * * to the Administrator of theFederal Aviation Administration. The Administrator of the Federal AviationAdministration may receive such information and shall make such informationavailable to the individual for review and written comment. The Administratorshall not otherwise divulge or use such information, except to verify informationrequired to be reported to the Administrator by an airman applying foran airman medical certificate and to evaluate whether the airman meetsthe minimum standards as prescribed by the Administrator to be issued anairman medical certificate. There shall be no access to information inthe Register under this paragraph if such information was entered in theRegister more than 3 years before the date of such request, unless suchinformation relates to revocations or suspensions which are still in effecton the date of the request. (23 U.S.C. 401 note)</ITAG>On October 29, 1987, the FAA published a notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (52 FR 41557) of a special enforcement policyregarding applicants for a medical certificate who have provided incorrectinformation about traffic convictions on a medical application form. Inorder to encourage compliance with the reporting requirement on the medicalcertificate application form, and to ensure that the FAA's records areaccurate and complete, the FAA afforded airmen an opportunity to avoidFAA enforcement action based on falsification of their medical certificateapplications if they volunteered the corrected information to the FAA beforeJanuary 1, 1988. As of January 1, 1988, the FAA may take enforcement action,based on falsification of the medical certificate application, againstthose persons identified, and referred, by the OIG and those persons discoveredthrough the FAA's investigative process before the airman disclosed thetrue and accurate information to the FAA. On November 1, 1988, the FAApublished a notice announcing termination of this so-called ``amnesty''policy, effective December 1, 1988 (53 FR 44166). The FAA currently isevaluating information received from the OIG, information received fromairmen supplying corrected information regarding traffic convictions tothe FAA, and information obtained as a result of FAA investigations. Evaluationof this information will enable the FAA to determine appropriate action,including enforcement action where warranted, to be taken in light of thatinformation. <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of the Proposed Rules </ITAG>The FAA has had regulations addressing the issues of alcohol and drug useby an aircraft crewmember for many years. Section 91.11 of the FAR providesfor certificate action against a person who acted, or attempted to act,as a crewmember of a civil aircraft within 8 hours after consumption ofan alcoholic beverage; while under the influence of alcohol; while usingany drug that affects the persons faculties in any way contrary to safety;or while having 0.04 percent by weight or more alcohol in the blood. Moreover,the FAA's strong interest in ensuring that individuals are not troubledby alcoholism or drug dependency is demonstrated by the long history ofmedical standards contained in Part 67. The proposals in this notice areintended to supplement, not replace, the current regulations. The proposedrules would implement measures to further ensure aviation safety by identifyingthose persons who may commit unsafe acts in an aircraft because they maydisregard general safety regulations and those persons who have failedto report violations of general safety regulations to the FAA as required.<ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Amendments to Part 61 </ITAG>For the purposes of the proposed amendments to Part 61, the FAA has includeda definition in andSection; 61.15 that defines the term ``motor vehicle action.''The proposed definition describes events related to operation of a motorvehicle while intoxicated, while impaired, or while under the influenceof alcohol or drugs. The list of events is intended to encompass the varioustypes of alcohol- and drug-related motor vehicle offenses and administrativeactions contained in state statutes. As used in the NPRM, the term ``conviction'' is intended to mean that acourt has entered a judgment of conviction for an alcohol- or drug-relatedmotor vehicle offense. The FAA believes that this use of the term shouldapply notwithstanding the fact that an individual may appeal a conviction.If a pilot is acquitted of the charges or a pilot's conviction is reversedon appeal, the FAA would take appropriate action consistent with the reversalof the conviction. However, this construction of the term ``conviction'' would not capturethe situation where a court asserts or retains continuing jurisdictionover a person for an alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle offense butthe court does not enter a judgment of conviction and a state has not takenadministrative action for cause. In many states, a court has discretionto use a procedure known as ``probation before judgment'' or ``deferredadjudication'' in certain circumstances. Under this procedure, a personmay be required to participate in a court-ordered rehabilitation or communityservice program under the supervision of the court as a condition of probationand in lieu of conviction for the substantive offense. This procedure enablesan individual to avoid a permanent record of conviction; however, thisprocedure is not a formal acquittal of the substantive offense and restsupon a finding that the individual has operated a motor vehicle while intoxicated,while impaired, or while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. The FAAspecifically requests comment on whether this situation should be treatedin the same manner as a conviction for purposes of a final rule. The FAA intended to include all types of action taken by a state, fromadministrative action to criminal conviction, within the proposed definitionof a motor vehicle action. For example, many states have statutory impliedconsent provisions that result in automatic or mandatory cancellation,suspension or revocation of a driver's license regardless of whether anindividual is convicted of an alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle offense.A state's motor vehicle code also could provide for denial of an applicationfor a driver's license for actions not supported by a conviction. Under most state statutes, an individual's refusal to submit to a testto determine blood alcohol content, when requested by a law enforcementofficer, automatically results in an ``administrative'' suspension or revocationof a driver's license by operation of state law. It is possible that anindividual may ``surrender'' his or her driver's license, pursuant to astate's administrative suspension or revocation mechanism, to avoid a criminalconviction for an alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle offense. The proposedamendment to andSection; 61.15 is intended to address this situation by providingfor certificate action in cases where there is no underlying criminal convictionfor alcohol- or drug-related operation of a motor vehicle but a state hasimposed an administrative sanction against a pilot's license to operatea motor vehicle on the basis of similar conduct or a related violation.Pursuant to proposed andSection; 61.15, the FAA's denial of an applicationand suspension or revocation of an existing certificate would be basedon two or more alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle convictions, twoor more administrative actions by a state for cause, or at least one convictionand at least one administrative action, occurring within a 3-year period.Under the proposed rule, at least one of the convictions or administrativeactions would have to occur after the effective date of the rule.The proposed amendment also would require that a pilot report each alcohol-or drug-related motor vehicle conviction or administrative action in thepilot's recent past to the Airmen Certification Branch in Oklahoma City,Oklahoma. Any conviction or administrative action that occurred withinthe 3-year period before the effective date of the rule would have to bereported to the FAA not later than 60 days after the effective date. Anyconviction or administrative action that occurs after the effective dateof the rule would have to be reported not later than 60 days after thedate of the conviction or the administrative action. Failure to reporteven one of these convictions or administrative actions to the FAA wouldbe grounds for denial of an application and grounds for suspension or revocationof a pilot certificate issued under Part 61. The proposed rule would require that the pilot report certain identifyinginformation to the FAA. For example, the pilot would be required to includethe following information: name; address; date of birth; pilot certificatenumber; the type of violation that resulted in the conviction or the administrativeaction; and the state which holds the record of conviction or administrativeaction. Thus, the FAA would have adequate information to locate and toobtain a copy of a conviction or record of administrative action and sufficientinformation with which to exercise its discretion to initiate appropriatecertificate action. A pilot would be required to report an alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicleconviction to the FAA within the proposed timeframes unless the pilot isacquitted of the charges or a conviction is reversed on appeal before thosetime periods elapse. A pilot would be required to report any continuingstate administrative sanction affecting the pilot's license to operatea motor vehicle within the proposed timeframes if the administrative sanctionis effective despite the fact that the pilot has been acquitted of a substantiveoffense, a conviction has been reversed on appeal, or a court has not entereda judgment of conviction based on deferred adjudication or probation beforejudgment. The reporting requirement proposed in this notice is unrelated to the existingrequirement that a pilot describe any past or current record of trafficconvictions or record of other convictions on an application for a medicalcertificate. The reporting requirement proposed in this NPRM is not intendedto affect or to change in any manner the requirement to fully and completelyanswer all questions relating to traffic and other convictions on an applicationfor a medical certificate. Under the provisions of section 602(b)(1) ofthe Federal Aviation Act of 1958, the Administrator issues an airman certificateif, after investigation, the Administrator finds that the applicant   ``** * possesses proper qualifications for, and is physically able to performduties pertaining to, the position for which the airman certificate issought * * *.'' Pursuant to the Act, the FAA requires airmen to undergophysical examinations periodically. An airman is examined by an FAA-designatedAviation Medical Examiner (AME) who initially determines if the airmanmeets the medical qualifications contained in Part 67 of the Federal AviationRegulations for a medical certificate. An airman is required to reportexcessive drinking habits, drug or narcotic habits, as well as trafficand other convictions on the application for the medical certificate. Thisinformation is considered by the AME along with other information regardingthe airman's medical history. The AME uses this information, combined witha physical examination, to determine if the airman meets the medical standardsof Part 67 and is qualified to hold a medical certificate. The FAA is concerned that even a single alcohol- or drug-related motorvehicle conviction or administrative action may reflect adversely on apilot's fitness to operate an aircraft. Any impairment of a pilot's medicalfitness to operate an aircraft raises important safety concerns withinthe jurisdiction of the FAA. In light of the FAA's statutory mandate andthe adverse effects of alcohol and drug use on aircraft operators, theFAA believes that a single alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle convictionor related administrative action is of sufficient relevance to a pilot'scontinued medical fitness to trigger a medical examination of the pilot.In the FAA's opinion, it is in the public interest to medically examinea pilot within a reasonable period of time after the motor vehicle incident.Accordingly, the FAA proposes to revise andSection; 61.23 of the FederalAviation Regulations to amend the duration of a medical certificate heldby pilots. The proposed amendment to andSection; 61.23 provides that a medicalcertificate automatically expires on the 61st day after the pilot is convictedof, or a state has taken administrative action based on, a motor vehicleaction, unless the medical certificate would otherwise expire before the61st day, so that the pilot would be medically examined in accordance withthe standards contained in Part 67. Although the FAA believes that examination of a pilot following a singlealcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle incident is appropriate, the FAAis not proposing that a pilot automatically be prohibited from operatingan aircraft and immediately be examined by an AME. If the pilot otherwisemeets the medical standards contained in Part 67, the pilot may continueto exercise the privileges of his or her pilot certificate before the automaticexpiration of the pilot's medical certificate. The FAA believes that theproposed examination within a 60-day period is a reasonable amount of timein which to schedule and complete a medical examination without an adverseimpact on aviation safety and with minimum disruption to the pilot. Consistent with the FAA's current procedures, an applicant for a medicalcertificate is required to list any traffic convictions and any other convictions,including alcohol- or drug-related traffic convictions, on the applicationfor a medical certificate. At the time of application for a new medicalcertificate, each applicant who has been the subject of a motor vehicleaction also would be required to present documents that substantiate anyalcohol or substance abuse treatment plan in which the pilot participatedand documents that show evidence of compliance with any court-ordered programrelated to the conviction or the administrative action. A pilot would receivea new medical certificate if, in light of the information on the applicationfor a medical certificate and any new information submitted by the pilot,the pilot continues to meet the medical qualifications of Part 67 and otherwiseis eligible to hold a medical certificate. Not every state court or state administrative agency requires participationin an alcohol or substance abuse treatment program or a court-ordered programafter conviction or administrative action based on alcohol- or drug-relatedmotor vehicle offenses. Thus, the proposed rule provides that a pilot wouldbe required only to submit this information, if applicable, to the AMEat the medical examination. If the pilot was not required to participatein a treatment program or a court-ordered program as a result of the motorvehicle action, the pilot would still be required to report a motor vehicleconviction on an application for a new medical certificate and to reporta motor vehicle action to the FAA pursuant to the proposed amendment toandSection; 61.15.<ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Amendment to Part 67 </ITAG>The legislation enacted by Congress gives the FAA the authority to receiveinformation about an individual reported by states and contained in theNDR. The legislation provides that the FAA can receive NDR informationif an individual who has applied for, or received, an airman certificaterequests the chief driver licensing official of a state to transmit thisinformation to the FAA. To implement this authority, the FAA proposes toadd an express consent provision to the medical certification regulationsof Part 67. The proposed consent provision would enable the FAA to obtaininformation that independently verifies the traffic conviction informationprovided on a medical certificate application and to determine if an applicantfor a medical certificate, or a person who currently holds a medical certificate,meets the medical standards contained in Part 67. The proposed consent provision would require that an applicant for a medicalcertificate execute a consent form at the time of application that authorizesthe FAA to receive NDR information. The FAA considers the express consentrequirement to be integral to the application for a medical certificate.Therefore, an applicant's failure to comply with this requirement, at thetime of application, would mean that the application for a medical certificateis incomplete. The FAA would be unable to process the incomplete applicationand to issue a medical certificate to the applicant. The FAA is prohibited by the legislation from releasing NDR informationto any person except the individual who is the subject of the NDR report.In addition, if the FAA receives information from the NDR about a particularindividual, the FAA is required to make this information available to theindividual for review and written comment. The FAA intends to place anyinformation received from the NDR in the airman's medical file. Therefore,NDR information would be accorded comprehensive privacy protection andwould be released only to the airman. The legislation denies the FAA access to information in the NDR that wasentered more than 3 years before the date that the FAA requests the information.However, the FAA can receive NDR data that is more than 3 years old ifthat information relates to the current suspension or revocation of anairman's license to operate a motor vehicle. State participation in the NDR system is voluntary. Currently, all statesparticipate in the NDR in some manner. Participating states report a widevariety of driver's license information to the NDR. This information includesthe denial of an application for a driver's license by a state for cause;the cancellation, suspension or revocation of a driver's license by a statefor cause; and a state conviction for certain motor vehicle related offenses,including the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of,or impaired by, alcohol or a controlled substance. A report from the NDRcontains basic descriptive data about an individual, the current statusof an individual's license to operate a motor vehicle, and an indicationof a state that may hold records regarding criminal, civil, or administrativeaction taken against an airman's license to operate a motor vehicle. Asa result of amendments to the NDR Act in 1982, an NDR report will not describethe substantive offense that forms the basis for the state's license action.The amendment to the NDR Act states that the FAA may use NDR information``to verify information required to be reported to the Administrator byan airman applying for an airman medical certificate and to evaluate whether[an] airman meets the minimum standards as prescribed by the Administratorto be issued an airman medical certificate.'' Due to the limited informationcontained in an NDR report, the FAA would use information reported by theNDR as an investigative tool. The FAA intends to seek information from any state, identified in an NDRreport, that may hold a record of traffic convictions, or a record of administrativeactions by a state driver licensing agency, related to an airman's licenseto operate a motor vehicle. The FAA also intends to obtain a copy of anyrecord that contains substantive information about traffic convictionsand state motor vehicle administrative actions. An examination of the staterecords would enable the FAA to determine the nature of the underlyingoffense, if it is not described in the NDR report, and to confirm thatthe report accurately describes any action taken by a state against anairman's license to operate a motor vehicle. In addition, the state recordswould enable the FAA to verify that the NDR report correctly identifiesa particular airman whose name may appear in the NDR database. The language of the legislation does not prohibit the FAA's intended useof the NDR as an investigative tool. In general, information containedin state records and reported to the NDR is a matter of public record atthe state level. Therefore, in addition to the express statutory authorityto receive and use NDR data, the FAA's investigative use of NDR data anduse of state traffic or criminal records complies with the restrictionscontained in the legislative amendments and with the requirements of theFederal Privacy Act. The FAA believes that the proposed rules would improve the level of aviationsafety by providing a mechanism to identify and take enforcement actionagainst those individuals who exhibit a lack of compliance disposition.Also, the proposed rules would enable the FAA to investigate false statements,which may be intended to conceal a pilot's failure to meet the medicalstandards (including alcoholism or drug dependency), made by an individualon a medical certificate application. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Evaluation </ITAG>This is a summary of the preliminary cost impact and benefit evaluationfor the regulatory changes proposed in this notice. The proposed changeswould establish a basis for revocation or suspension of pilot certificationfor pilots convicted of alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle offensesor pilots subject to state administrative action for cause. The proposalswould require that a pilot report any conviction or administrative actionthat occurred within the 3-year period before the effective date of therule, and each conviction or administrative action that occurs after theeffective date of the rule, to the FAA Airmen Certification Branch in OklahomaCity. Under the proposed amendment, a pilot's failure to report even oneconviction or administrative action to the FAA would be grounds for denialof an application and grounds for suspension or revocation of a certificateissued under Part 61. The proposed reporting requirement is in additionto the existing obligation on a pilot to describe any past record of trafficconvictions and any past record of other convictions on an applicationfor a medical certificate.The proposed changes also would provide that a pilot's medical certificatewould expire on the 61st day after conviction of an alcohol- or drug-relatedmotor vehicle offense or after imposition of a state administrative sanctionunless the medical certificate would otherwise expire before the 61st day.The proposals would require that a pilot submit certain information regardinga pilot's participation in an alcohol or substance abuse treatment planor court-ordered program to an AME at the time of an examination associatedwith an application for a medical certificate that follows a motor vehicleaction. The proposal to amend andSection; 61.15 of the Federal Aviation Regulations(FAR) would affect an estimated 752,000 individuals currently holding pilotcertificates and ratings issued by the FAA. Implementation of these proposalsis likely to result in the revocation or suspension of the privilege tooperate an aircraft for a substantial number of pilots convicted of alcohol-or drug-related motor vehicle offenses or pilots subject to state administrativeaction for cause. This number could range from 1,000 to 12,000 pilots peryear. The costs of suspension or revocation of a certificate issued underPart 61 would be the negative economic impact associated with the temporaryor permanent loss of employment for pilots engaged in commercial aviationand the deprivation of leisure and business flying for general aviationpilots. These costs are considered to be the result of alcohol or druguse rather than regulatory costs and, therefore, should not be attributedto FAA's efforts to improve aviation safety by removing from an increasinglycongested airspace individuals who have demonstrated an unwillingness orinability to comply with safety regulations. The costs associated with the administration and enforcement of the proposedrules are considered nominal and unquantifiable. The FAA anticipates thatthese activities could be incorporated into the agency's existing workload;however, additional agency resources may be required to process the datafrom the NDR and material submitted by pilots at a medical examinationby an AME in accordance with the proposals. The proposal to amend andSection; 61.23 would provide for termination ofa pilot's medical certificate following a motor vehicle action. Pilotswhose medical certificates expire as a result of the proposed amendmentwould be required to apply for a new medical certificate. Pilots whosemedical certificates have expired and pilots who are examined before theirmedical certificates expire would be required to submit documents, if any,substantiating the pilot's participation in any alcohol or substance abusetreatment program and to show evidence of compliance with any court-orderedprogram. For the purposes of the regulatory evaluation, the FAA assumedthat, statistically, the average duration of an airman medical certificatethat expires pursuant to the proposed amendment would be reduced by 50percent. The expirations would range from recently-issued medical certificatesto those nearing expiration under the current sections in andSection; 61.23.The FAA estimates that the incremental cost to affected pilots to obtaina new medical certificate in compliance with the proposed rule would beapproximately $294,800 per year or approximately $1.8 million discountedover a 10-year period. The FAA expects that the proposed rules would reduce the number of aviationaccidents caused by pilots who may be impaired by alcohol or drugs duringaircraft operations. However, the FAA has been unable to quantify the expectedbenefits of the proposed rules. Some observations can be made, however,regarding potential benefits of the proposed rules. As previously stated,during the period from 1978 to 1987, 6.0 percent of general aviation pilotskilled in aviation accidents had a blood alcohol level of at least 0.04percent. During the 10-year period from 1978 to 1987, 11,329 people diedin general aviation accidents. If 6.0 percent of these people died in accidentswhere the pilot was under the influence or impaired by alcohol, an averageof 68 people died annually where alcohol may have been a contributing factorin the accident. The FAA believes that potential drug involvement in aviationaccidents would increase the average number of people killed in aviationaccidents where impairment may have been a contributing factor. Consequently,if the proposed changes to the Federal Aviation Regulations are only 1percent effective, the benefits expected as a result of reduced aviationaccidents would more than equal the $1.8 million discounted, 10-year costof the proposals, based on the generally-accepted, statistical value of$1 million per human life. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Determination </ITAG>The FAA has determined, pursuant to the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980,that the proposed rules would not have a significant economic impact, positiveor negative, on a substantial number of small entities. This determinationis based on the FAA's opinion that the adverse economic consequences associatedwith the loss of the privilege to operate an aircraft for both commercialand general aviation pilots convicted of alcohol- or drug-related motorvehicle offenses or pilots affected by state administrative action forcause are the direct consequence of alcohol or drug use. <ITAG tagnum="84">Trade Impact Statement </ITAG>These proposals, if adopted, would affect only those individuals who holdan FAA-issued certificate and, therefore, would have no impact on tradeopportunities for U.S. firms doing business overseas or foreign firms doingbusiness in the United States. <ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act Approval </ITAG>Proposed andSection; 61.15(e) would require a pilot to report to the FAAeach alcohol- or drug-related motor vehicle conviction and each alcohol-or drug-related administrative action. Proposed andSection; 61.23(d) wouldrequire a pilot to submit certain documents to an AME at the time of examinationfor application for a medical certificate following a motor vehicle action.In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511),the recordkeeping and reporting provisions contained in this NPRM havebeen submitted for approval to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).Comments on these requirements should be submitted to the Office of Informationand Regulatory Affairs (OMB), New Executive Office Building, Room 3001,Washington, DC 20503; Attention: FAA Desk Officer; telephone (202) 395-7340.A copy also should be submitted to the FAA docket.<ITAG tagnum="84">Federalism Implications </ITAG>The regulations proposed herein would not have substantial direct effectson the states, on the relationship between the national government andthe states, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities amongthe various levels of government. Therefore, in accordance with ExecutiveOrder 12612, it is determined that these proposals would not have sufficientFederalism implications to warrant preparation of a Federalism Assessment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion </ITAG>The costs associated with the proposed rules are the cost of reportingconvictions and administrative actions to the FAA and a small cost resultingfrom expiration of a medical certificate requiring a medical examinationof a pilot. Based on estimates of these costs, the FAA has determined thatthe proposed amendments would impose only a nominal cost on the aviationcommunity and that the estimated benefits are expected to exceed the estimatedcosts of implementation. For these reasons, it is certified that, underthe criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the proposed amendments,if adopted, would not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative,on a substantial number of small entities. For the same reasons, the proposalsdo not involve a major rule under the criteria of Executive Order 12291.Because the proposals involve issues of substantial interest to the public,the proposals are considered to be significant under the Regulatory Policiesand Procedures of the Department of Transportation (44 FR 11034; February26, 1979). An initial regulatory evaluation for this rulemaking actionis contained in the regulatory docket. A copy may be obtained by contactingthe person identified under the caption entitled ``<T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT</T2>.'' <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects </ITAG>14 CFR Part 61 Aircraft pilots, Airmen, Air safety, Alcohol and alcoholic beverages, Aviationsafety, Drugs, Pilots, Safety, Transportation. 14 CFR Part 67 Airmen, Aviation safety, Medical records. <ITAG tagnum="84">The Proposed Amendments </ITAG>In consideration of the foregoing, the FAA proposes to amend Part 61 andPart 67 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR Parts 61 and 67) asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 61_CERTIFICATION: PILOTS AND FLIGHT lNSTRUCTORS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 61 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1355, 1421, 1422, and 1427; 49 U.S.C.106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983).</ITAG>2. By amending andSection; 61.15 by adding new paragraphs (c), (d), and (e)to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 61.15</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Offenses involving alcohol or drugs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) For the purposes of paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, a motorvehicle action means_(1) A conviction for the violation of any Federal or state statute relatingto the operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated by alcohol or a drug,while impaired by alcohol or a drug, or while under the influence of alcoholor a drug; (2) The cancellation, suspension, or revocation of a license to operatea motor vehicle by a state for a cause related to the operation of a motorvehicle while intoxicated by alcohol or a drug, while impaired by alcoholor a drug, or while under the influence of alcohol or a drug; or (3) The denial of an application for a license to operate a motor vehicleby a state for a cause related to the operation of a motor vehicle whileintoxicated by alcohol or a drug, while impaired by alcohol or a drug,or while under the influence of alcohol or a drug. (d) A motor vehicle action occurring after [the effective date of the finalrule] and within 3 years of a previous motor vehicle action is groundsfor_(1) Denial of an application for any certificate or rating issued underthis part for a period of up to 1 year after the date of the last motorvehicle action; or (2) Suspension or revocation of any certificate or rating issued underthis part. (e) Each person holding a certificate issued under this part shall providea written report of each motor vehicle action that occurs after [3 yearsbefore the effective date of the final rule] not later than [60 days afterthe effective date of the final rule] or not later than 60 days after themotor vehicle action, whichever is later. The report must include the person'sname; address; date of birth; pilot certificate number; the type of violationthat resulted in the conviction or the administrative action; and the statewhich holds the record of conviction or administrative action. Each personshall forward the report to the FAA, Airmen Certification Branch (AAC-260),P.O. Box 25082, Oklahoma City, OK 73125. Failure to comply with this sectionis grounds for_(1) Denial of an application for any certificate or rating issued underthis part for a period of up to 1 year after the date of the failure toreport a motor vehicle action; or (2) Suspension or revocation of any certificate or rating issued underthis part. 3. By amending andSection; 61.23 by adding new paragraph (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 61.23</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duration of medical certificates. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) Each airman medical certificate, issued to a person who holds a certificateissued under this part, expires in accordance with paragraphs (a), (b),or (c) of this section or on the 61st day after a motor vehicle actionas defined in andSection;  61.15(c) of this Part, whichever is earlier. Atthe time of any application for an airman medical certificate, each applicantholding a certificate issued under this part, who is the subject of a motorvehicle action occurring after the applicant's last medical examinationand after (the effective date of the final rule) shall present to the aviationmedical examiner_(1) Documents that substantiate the applicant's participation in an alcoholor substance abuse treatment program, if any; and (2) Evidence that the applicant is in compliance with a court-ordered programresulting from the motor vehicle action, if any. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 67_MEDICAL STANDARDS AND CERTIFICATION </ITAG>4. The authority citation for Part 67 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1355, 1421, and 1422; 49 U.S.C.106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983).</ITAG>5. By adding new andSection; 67.3 to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 67.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Access to the National Driver Register. </ITAG>At the time of application for a certificate issued under this part, eachperson who applies for or receives a medical certificate shall executean express consent form requesting the chief driver licensing officialof a state to transmit information contained in the National Driver Registerabout the person to the Administrator. The Administrator shall make informationreceived from the National Driver Register, if any, available to the personfor review and written comment.<ITAG tagnum="20">Issued in Washington, DC, on May 11, 1989.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Monte R. Belger, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Administrator for Aviation Standards.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-11917 Filed 5-17-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>