<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89929-0032 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-29-89.f2.A1031</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 592</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket 89-6; Notice 2]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2127-AC97</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Registered Importers of Vehicles Not Orginally Manufactured to Conformto Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),DOT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>With certain exceptions, the National Traffic and MotorVehicle Safety Act, as amended by the Imported Vehicle Safety ComplianceAct of 1988, will permit a motor vehicle not originally manufactured toconform to Federal motor vehicle safety standards to be imported only bya person who has registered with this agency, or by an individual who hasa contract with a registered importer for making the modifications necessaryfor bringing the vehicle into conformance with applicable safety standards.In partial implementation of the 1988 amendments, this rule adopts proceduresand requirements regarding the registration of importers and the dutiesand obligations of registered importers. In most instances, the particularprovisions of these procedures and requirements are mandated by the 1988amendments. Part 592 establishes eligibility requirements for persons wishing to acquireand maintain registration. Among the requirements are ones regarding recordkeeping,allowance of inspection of records and facilities relating to the motorvehicles which the importer has imported and/or modified, certificationto the Administrator that the vehicles have been brought into compliance,and insurance to ensure that the importer will be able technically andfinancially to carry out noncompliance and defect notification and remedyresponsibilities should they arise. Part 592 also adopts procedures forrevocation or suspension of importer registration (and reinstatement) forfailures to pay required fees or comply with regulations, or for filinga misleading or false certification. The rule also adopts post-modificationvehicle inspection and bond release procedures.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>The effective date for the rule is October 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Taylor Vinson, Office of ChiefCounsel, NHTSA (202-366-5263).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On October 31, 1988, the Presidentsigned Public Law 100-562, the Imported Vehicle Safety Compliance Act of1988 (``the 1988 Act''). Notice of its enactment was published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on December 5, 1988 (53 FR 49003), and a noticeof proposed rulemaking with respect to part 592 was published on April25, 1989 (54 FR 17780). As the notice stated, the 1988 Act amends thoseprovisions of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966(``the Vehicle Safety Act'') (15 U.S.C. 1381, at 1397) that relate to theimportation of motor vehicles subject to the Federal motor vehicle safetystandards. Specifically, the amendments strike paragraphs (b)(3) and (b)(4)of 15 U.S.C. 1397, (section 1397 may also be cited as section 108 of theVehicle Safety Act), redesignates paragraph (b)(5) as paragraph (b)(3),redesignates paragraph (c) of 15 U.S.C. 1397 as paragraph (k), and addsnew paragraphs (c) through (j).As the agency explained in its proposal, and now repeats so that readerswill have an overview of part 592, the category of importer primarily affectedby the 1988 Act is the importer of motor vehicle that was not originallymanufactured to conform to the Federal motor vehicle safety standards thatapplied to vehicles of its type at the time of its original manufacture.Under the current regulation, 19 CFR 12.80(b)(1)(iii), a nonconformingvehicle may be imported by any person. Under the 1988 Act, an importerwill have to be, subject to certain exceptions, a ``registered importer''(one who meets the statutory criteria and has registered with the agencypursuant to the terms and conditions of the regulation that this noticeadopts), or an individual who has contracted with a registered importer.The principal obligations of the Registered Importer with respect to thevehicles it imports are (1) to bring those vehicles into compliance, orto demonstrate that they have been brought into compliance before importation,(2) to provide the Administrator with certification that the vehicles conform,and (3) in the event that noncompliances or safety related defects occurin vehicles it certifies, to notify owners, and provide a remedy. Withrespect to those vehicles it imports for resale, a Registered Importerfalls within the long-standing definition of ``manufacturer'' under theVehicle Safety Act and is responsible for notification of purchasers andremedy of noncompliances and safety related defects determined to existin those vehicles. The 1988 Act adds a further responsibility: it makesthe Registered Importer responsible for notification and remedy coveringany vehicle covered by its certificate of conformity to the standards,including vehicles imported by individuals who have contracted with theRegistered Importer, if a noncompliance or defect is determined to existin substantially similar vehicles originally manufactured and certifiedfor sale in the United States. However, the manufacturer or RegisteredImporter would be afforded an opportunity to demonstrate to NHTSA thatthe vehicles covered by the certification do not contain the noncomplianceor defect.NHTSA is attempting in this rulemaking action to formulate a program thatwill ensure that all imported motor vehicles conform to the Federal motorvehicle safety standards without imposing unnecessary burdens on importers.Therefore, NHTSA has tried in part 592 to impose only those requirementsthat are mandated by the 1988 Act, with amplifications only where it appearednecessary to implement the safety intent of the statute.There were 10 substantive comments on the proposed rule, including questionsraised by telephone or letter. Four were received from manufacturers orauthorized importers (General Motors Corporation, Volkswagen of America,Mercedes-Benz of North America, and IVECO), and one each from a foreignconverter (Gerhard Feldevert), authorized import dealer association (TheDealer Action Association), an importer of Canadian vehicles (Auburn Motors,Inc.), a dealer association (National Automotive Dealer Association), atruck importer (LaPine Truck Sales and Equipment Co.), and a member ofthe public (George Ziolo). General comments and questions to other docketsby the States of Texas and Virginia, and U.S. Trade Corp. appeared relevant,and will be discussed.<ITAG tagnum="84">Requirements for Registration as Importer</ITAG>The requirements for registration as an importer and maintenance of registrationare established by paragraph 592.5. Under the regulation adopted by thisnotice, any person who wishes to become a Registered Importer, and whohas not previously had a registration revoked, may file an applicationwith the Administrator (new section 108(c)(3)(D)(i)). Comments to the docketraised basic questions as to who is permitted to register, and under whatcircumstances registration is required. IVECO, a manufacturer, asked whetherit is required to register when its activities include importing nonconformingvehicles for test purposes, or vehicles requiring further manufacturingoperations. Volkswagen raised the possibility that it might import nonconformingcars, and conform them before sale in the United States. While seeminglyrecognizing that it would have to acquire registered status, it neverthelessargued that insurance and recordkeeping requirements that NHTSA proposedfor Registered Importers would be unnecessary, and it recommended thatthe final rule exempt original manufacturers from insurance and recordkeepingrequirements. A letter from a foreign national, Gerhard Feldevert, expressinga wish to become a Registered Importer, raises the question whether the1988 Act permits a Registered Importer to be located outside the UnitedStates.The principal obligation of a Registered Importer is to certify that avehicle not originally manufactured in conformance with the Federal motorvehicle safety standards has been brought into conformity with them beforeit is licensed for use on the public roads. Since a vehicle requiring furthermanufacturing operations is a vehicle whose original manufacture is incomplete,its importer need not be a Registered Importer. This type of importationis governed exclusively by the special provision for it in section 108(e),thus excluding it from vehicles subject to the Registered Importer provisionof section 108(f). Similarly, vehicles imported for test purposes are governedby section 108(j), not section 108(f) and IVECO need not be a RegisteredImporter for these types of importations. On the other hand, Volkswagencorrectly surmises that its hypothetical importation of nonconforming vehicleswhich it intends to conform before sale subjects it to the Registered Importerrequirements. The 1988 Act does not distinguish between U.S. subsidiariesof major foreign automotive corporations and corner garages; any personwishing to import a nonconforming motor vehicle for sale in the UnitedStates must be a Registered Importer, or have a contract with a RegisteredImporter. Furthermore, the vehicle itself is subject to a determinationby NHTSA of its eligibility for importation, and Volkswagen is requiredto petition for an agency decision under part 593. To be sure, the sheersize of a company such as Volkswagen may justify a different treatmentof the issue of financial capability. Although NHTSA cannot adopt a differentrequirement in this final rule, it will study the matter with a view towardsproposing, at an early date, an alternative method for factory-authorizedimporters, or corporations of a certain size, to demonstrate their financialcapability to fulfill notification and remedy responsibilities.Finally, it seems clear from the obligations imposed by statute upon RegisteredImporters that they must be resident in the United States. The abilityof NHTSA to inspect vehicles, records, and facilities to verify conformanceand the capabilities of Registered Importers would be severely hamperedif those entities were located beyond the direct jurisdiction of the Departmentof Transportation and subject to the laws of another country. Accordingly,NHTSA will consider and grant applications only from Registered Importerswho are residents of, and whose facilities are located in a ``State'' asdefined by 15 U.S.C. 1391(8): The 50 States, the District of Columbia,the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealthof the Northern Marianas.Because section 108(c)(3)(D)(i) also provides that registration may bedenied ``to any person who is or was, directly or indirectly, owned orcontrolled by, or under common ownership or control with, a person whohas had a registration revoked * * *'', as part of its application, anapplicant will be required to disclose the names of its owners, shareholders,or partners (paragraph 592.5(a)(4)). In the opinion of Mercedes-Benz, theagency should define ``common ownership'' to include any ownership interest,no matter how small, in order to identify an importer whose registrationhas been revoked and who may hold a minority interest. The agency believesthat its requirements will accomplish this, and that a definition is notrequired. If any of the owners are corporations, a requirement to providethe names of all shareholders might be unduly burdensome, and the regulationrequires only that the names of shareholders whose ownership interest is10% or more be supplied (paragraph 592.5(a)(5)). If the agency discoversthat a revoked registrant has an ownership position in a Registered Importeror applicant, and may profit by the actions of the Importer (such as providingthe facilities where the conversion work will occur), the agency will takethis fact into consideration when it is reviewing applications or theirrenewals.Chief among the registration requirements stated in section 108(c)(3)(D)(ii)is proof of financial ability to carry out notification and remedy responsibilitiesshould a noncompliance or safety related defect be found in any vehiclethe Registered Importer has imported and/or for which it has furnisheda certificate of conformity. In developing a provision addressing the financialability of a Registered Importer to carry out its notification and remedialobligations, the agency was guided by the experience of the EnvironmentalProtection Agency (``EPA'') in developing and promulgating regulatory provisionsaddressing the financial ability of Independent Commercial Importers (``ICI's)to honor emissions warranties. (40 CFR 85.1510(b)(2)(i), 52 FR 36136).ICIs are importers of motor vehicles and engines, and have registered withthe EPA. Some of them may register with NHTSA. Thus, a NHTSA requirementthat parallels the EPA one is not likely to add significantly to the regulatoryburden of those who import nonconforming vehicles subject to Federal regulations.Commenters on EPA's regulations at the proposal stage, principally originalequipment vehicle and engine manufacturers, and the State of California,suggested that ICIs acquire prepaid insurance and/or bonds to cover ICIwarranty and recall liability for the useful life of each vehicle. Therewas no opposition from ICIs regarding this concept. Based on its experiencesunder the California emissions standards for motor vehicles, the CaliforniaAir Resources Board (CARB) noted that the modification industry is composedof small businesses, and argued that it is likely that a number of firmswill fail over time. Without a requirement for an insurance policy or bondto cover warranty and recall repairs, owners of vehicles obtained fromfirms that are no longer in business would have to bear the warranty costs.CARB offers modifiers a choice between obtaining insurance or a bond.EPA decided to require a prepaid mandatory service insurance policy that,in effect, assures effective warranty coverage. That agency reasoned thatit was unnecessary to require a bond to assure an effective recall andwarranty program. Because the prepaid mandatory service insurance policyseemed acceptable to modifiers as a means of assuring their performanceregarding recalls and warranties, NHTSA proposed in paragraph 592.5(a)(8)that the application contain ``a copy of a contract to acquire, effectiveupon its registration as an importer, a prepaid mandatory insurance policyunderwritten by an independent insurance company, in an amount sufficientto ensure that the applicant will be able financially to remedy any noncomplianceor safety related defect determined to exist in any vehicle for which ithas furnished a certificate of conformity to the Administrator * * *''However, NHTSA had no knowledge of the burden the insurance requirementmight impose upon an applicant, and requested comments on this point. NHTSAalso requested comments upon alternate appropriate means of assuring financialability to carry out notification and remedial activities. Finally, NHTSArequested comments on the amount of insurance that would be necessary todemonstrate ``sufficient financial responsibility.'' (section 108(d)(2)).The premium paid for such a policy would appear to encompass the relativelylow costs of notification (i.e., discerning, through records or R.L. Polk,the names and addresses of vehicle owners), and the somewhat higher costsof remedy (through repair, repurchase, or replacement), as affected bythe yearly number of vehicles for which the registered importer estimatesit will submit certification. NHTSA understands that one company is currentlyinsuring ICI's under EPA's program, but given the difference between Federalsafety and emission standards the cost experience is not directly comparable.Substantive comments were received on this issue from Mercedes-Benz, theDealer Action Association, National Automotive Dealers Association, andU.S. Trade Corp. Mercedes stated that its remedial experience indicatedthat a prepaid insurance policy in an amount equal to $2000 per vehicleshould be sufficient (adjusted annually for inflation), or 5% of the dutiablevalue of the vehicle), whichever is the lesser. A similar comment was forthcomingfrom the Dealer Action Association, which suggested a surety bond as analternative to the prepaid insurance policy, but for 5% of the dutiablevalue of the vehicle. It also commented that $2000, self-adjusting forinflation, seemed a fair estimate of remedial costs. U.S. Trade Corp.,a potential applicant to become a Registered Importer, commented that afinancial ability requirement parallel to that of EPA would probably notadd much to the Registered Importer's burden, but would add to the coststo the consumer. It argued that possession of standard liability insurancethat covers the work of each Registered Importer should be sufficient tocover the vehicle owner.The agency has reviewed these comments. Given the historical fact thata large portion of nonconforming vehicles have been originally manufacturedby Mercedes-Benz, NHTSA has carefully considered the comments of Mercedes-Benzof North America. The figure of $2,000 per vehicle was supported by theDealer Action Association, and, to NHTSA, appears a reasonable estimateof the costs to repair or replace a major component of a motor vehicle.The agency will review campaigns involving Registered Importers to determinewhether this figure requires adjustment for inflation or other factors,but is not requiring a self-adjusting feature. Although a Registered Importerwould be required, when repair is impossible, to replace the vehicle withan equivalent one, or repurchase the vehicle, at a cost that might wellexceed $2,000, such a contingency has occurred so infrequently in NHTSA'shistory that, for the present, the agency has concluded that it need notbe part of a Registered Importer's showing of financial capability. Withrespect to the alternative suggestion that the policy amount be 5% of theentered value of the vehicle, the agency observes that repair costs forolder vehicles of low value could be as expensive as for newer models.Further, percentage calculations would appear to add variables into theprocess whereas a flat figure of $2,000 per vehicle treats all vehicleson an equal basis.Additional comments were offered. The Dealer Action Association recommendedthat the policy be sufficient to compensate authorized dealers when RegisteredImporters are unable to perform recall work. NADA suggested that NHTSAconsider EPA's approach toward vehicle repair in the final rule, to ensurethat repairs are adequately performed and paid for, if not performed by,the Registered Importer. It recommended that the vehicle owner be providedwith a transferable copy of the service insurance contract to facilitaterepairs at facilities other than those of the Registered Importer. Althoughoriented towards compensation of authorized dealers, these comments aredirected towards situations where it may not be practicable for the ownerof a vehicle to return the vehicle to the facilities of the RegisteredImporter, such as when the Registered Importer is located at a great distancefrom the vehicle owner.This possibility is a likely one, and of concern to NHTSA. In the agency'sopinion, the Registered Importer's obligation to remedy without chargeis an absolute one, and cannot be contingent upon the Importer itself performingthe repairs, even for defects or noncompliances it has introduced in theconversion process. Thus the question is, how may NHTSA best ensure thatrepairs without charge be furnished a vehicle owner when repairs are performedby persons other than the Registered Importer. It was suggested that NHTSAconsider EPA's approach, but the agency does not find this exactly on point.Under the provisions of the Clean Air Act, converters are required to supplyowners with engine performance warranties. The warranties are requiredto be insured, transferable, and provide that warranty work may be performedanywhere if the converter's facility is not reasonably available (i.e.,within 50 miles) 40 CFR 85.1510(b)(2). The regulation thus does not touchupon the mechanics of compensation for warranty work performed elsewhere.In the absence of regulatory guidance. NHTSA assumes that an owner paysfor the repairs at the non-converter service facility, and presents thebill to the converter for reimbursement. If such a course were followedby owners of vehicles converted to meet the safety standards, it wouldmeet the statutory requirement of remedy without charge, although the ownerwould be temporarily out of pocket for the repair expenses. However, aRegistered Importer should have the right to impose reasonable restrictionsupon the type of facility to which a vehicle for which it has remedialresponsibility may be taken. A reasonable restriction would be that thevehicle must be repaired at a factory-authorized dealership for its make(e.g., a gray market Jaguar must be repaired by the service facilitiesof a Jaguar new-car dealership). Because the remedial obligation existswith respect to the vehicle and not the owner, no specific requirementfor transferability of insurance is required. Some of the comments indicatethat a form of insurance may be available under which a claim for compensationmay be made by a non-converter repair facility directly to an insurancecompany. Remedy without charge through this mechanism would also fulfillthe statutory requirement. The agency believes that the method of ensuringremedy without charge should be the choice of the person who is requiredto provide it. The requirement it is adopting in response to these commentsis one that follows the EPA specification for allowance of repairs at alternativelocations when the Registered Importer's facility is not reasonably available,and one which requires an explanation of how remedy without charge willbe ensured. The agency notes that the Registered Importer must provideNHTSA with copies of its communications to vehicle owners, and must supplythe owner with NHTSA's address for complaints in the event remedy withoutcharge is not provided. NHTSA therefore anticipates that no serious problemswill arise. Further it expects that authorized dealers, or others performingcampaign repairs, will be adequately compensated.In developing part 592, the agency proposed that the application containa statement whether the Registered Importer would modify the vehicles forwhich it will furnish certificates of conformity, and if not, to providethe names and address of all agents who would be the actual modifiers.The concept that a Registered Importer could delegate actual conformancework was opposed by Mercedes-Benz and The Dealer Action Association. Bothcommenters argued that this did not fulfill the statutory purpose of increasedaccountability for conversions, and cited statements from the CongressionalRecord in support. In Mercedes' opinion, NHTSA would open an area of potentialdispute when the object of the 1988 Act was to clarify NHTSA's jurisdiction.Conformance operations must be carried out by Registered Importers, theiremployees, or subsidiaries. The legal line between an ``agent'' and an``independent contractor'' is not always clear, raising the possibilitythat a Registered Importer might structure a relationship to avoid actsof a modifier, including fraud.NHTSA has carefully considered these comments. It believes that the provisionsof the 1988 Act are complex enough that regulations should not be adoptedthat open additional avenues of potential dispute or complications withRegistered Importers that might dilute the responsibility imposed by the1988 Act, and which might result in less than full achievement of the intentof Congress when these approaches have not been specifically directed byCongress. Therefore, it agrees with the comments of Mercedes and the DealerAction Association, and has not adopted those aspects of the proposal thatcountenanced delegation of conformance responsibilities to an agent.The 1988 Act also requires that the regulation contain ``provision forensuring that the importer (or any successor in interest) will be able* * * to carry out the importer's responsibilities * * * relating to discovery,notification, and remedy of defects.'' Paragraph 592.5(a)(9) requires thatthe applicant show that it will maintain a system of VINs, and names andaddresses of owners of vehicles for which it provides certifications. Althoughthe 1988 Act contemplates that a Registered Importer could have a ``successorin interest'', NHTSA proposed that registrations not be transferable. Sucha prohibition appears the most feasible way to ensure that notificationresponsibilities are met, as well as ensuring that transfers do not occurto Importers whose registration may have been revoked or suspended. Therewas no comment on this point, and, accordingly, the agency has adoptedparagraph 592.5(g) which states that registrations are not transferable.If there is a change in ownership interest, such as a transfer resultingin a new person acquiring more than 10% of ownership, a Registered Importermust notify NHTSA (paragraph 592.5(f)). This paragraph requires notificationof changes in any of the information supplied with the application. A registrationwill continue indefinitely until revoked or suspended. However, a RegisteredImporter, in order to maintain its registration, will be required to affirmannually that there has been no change in previously provided information(paragraph 592.5(e)). This should ensure that the financial ability ofa Registered Importer can be monitored, and that fees are received in atimely manner.<ITAG tagnum="84">Duties of a Registered Importer</ITAG>Paragraph 592.6 sets forth the duties of a Registered Importer. The firstduty specified is to provide a bond for each vehicle that it imports toensure that it will bring the vehicle into conformance, or that it willbe exported or abandoned to the United States (paragraph 592.6(a).The second duty required for a Registered Importer is that it establish,maintain, and retain for 8 years from the date of entry of a vehicle forwhich it furnishes a certificate of conformity the records specified inparagraph 592.6(b) (1) through (5), generally relating to substantiationof conformance work and vehicle ownership. Eight years was proposed becauseit is the period specified in the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle SafetyAct for which a manufacturer is obliged to remedy a noncompliance or safetyrelated defect at no cost to the vehicle owner (15 U.S.C. 1414(a)(1)(4)).For a fuller interpretation as to how the 8-year limit affects the obligationsof a Registered Importer, the reader should consult the section of thisnotice discussing paragraph 592.6(f).Comments on record-keeping were submitted by NADA and Mercedes-Benz. NADAcommented that the final rule should emphasize the continuing duty of RegisteredImporters towards the vehicle, by requiring that they continually updatetheir owner lists since notification obligations extend beyond first purchasers.It is true that there is a continuing obligation towards the vehicle, butNHTSA believes that existing notification procedures, which will be applicableto Registered Importers, sufficiently meet the need for safety. To requirean updated list of owners would create an obligation that does not existwith respect to original manufacturers, and would be of questionable successshould an owner fail to respond to a Registered Importer's query. Sucha requirement would impose an unnecessary burden upon a Registered Importer.The vehicle is identifiable through its VIN and in the event of notification,the Registered Importer is required by 15 U.S.C. 1413(c)(1) to notify owners``whose named and address is reasonably ascertainable by the manufacturerthrough State records or other sources available to him.'' Mercedes-Benzcommented that based upon past experience it is not likely that many graymarket importers will remain in business for the normal useful life ofthe vehicles they certify. It recommended that the final rule address theissue of retention of records on dissolution of a business, and that RegisteredImporters be required to deliver all vehicle conformance records to NHTSAin this event in order to assure the ability to reach gray market owners.NHTSA believes that one effect of the 1988 Act will be that the numberof gray market importers will be substantially reduced, and that thosewhich remain will be relatively stable financially. Mercedes' comment appearsbased upon the assumption that, in the absence of a Registered Importer<T3>qua </T3>manufacturer, NHTSA must make its own determinations of noncomplianceor safety related defect, and that its ability to notify owners in theaftermath of such determinations will be impaired without such records.This assumption is based upon an erroneous understanding of NHTSA's procedures.The statutory purpose of NHTSA's determinations is to order the manufacturerto notify and remedy when the manufacturer fails to make its own determination.If there is no viable manufacturer (or Registered Importer), NHTSA willnot proceed to such a determination. Should safety considerations warrant,NHTSA may issue a press release advising owners of the conditions givingrise to concern and advise precautions to be taken. Thus, NHTSA has notadopted this suggestion.The third major responsibility of a Registered Importer is to affix a certificationlabel to each vehicle it conforms in the manner required of original vehiclemanufacturers, which identifies the Registered Importer (paragraph 592.6(c)).NADA recommended that the certification label specifically designate thevehicle as ``Nonconforming Import'', consistent with labels required forincomplete or intermediate vehicle manufacturers, that it include specificreference to conformance with Theft Prevention Act requirements, as wellas language consistent with certification by alterers pursuant to 49 CFR567.7(a). The agency declines to adopt the suggestions. The imported vehiclewill presumably no longer be ``Nonconforming'' after its modification.Under existing regulations, certification to Theft Prevention requirementsmust be provided separately from certification to other standards (paragraph567.4(k)), and no good reason has been advanced to require otherwise. Unlikethe alterer, who supplements an existing certification, a Registered Importercertifies <T3>de novo, </T3>and thus must certify according to 49 CFR 567.4. As theperson affixing the label to the vehicle under that regulation, the RegisteredImporter will be clearly identified, as will the original manufactureror assembler of the vehicle.The fourth duty of a Registered Importer is to provide NHTSA with certificationupon completion of modifications that the vehicle conforms and that itis the party responsible for conformity (paragraph 592.6(d)). NHTSA proposedthat substantiation of certification through photographic and documentaryevidence be submitted for the initial certification provided for a specificmodel and model year only, and with subsequent certifications of that modeland model year only if requested by NHTSA. The proposal has been adoptedas written (paragraph 592.6(e)), although the Dealer Action Associationargued that NHTSA should require full documentary evidence for each vehicle.In essence, NHTSA does: paragraph 592.6(b)(4) requires the Registered Importerto keep records both photographic and documentary reflecting the modificationsmade and submitted to NHTSA pursuant to paragraph 592.6(e), which mustbe made available to NHTSA to inspect (paragraph 592.6(g)). NHTSA doesnot wish to create unnecessary burdens upon either a Registered Importeror itself by requiring excessive documentation. If a Registered Importerfails in its obligations to conform the vehicle (not always apparent throughphotographic evidence), its registration may be suspended or revoked, andcivil penalties imposed.A Registered Importer also has notification and remedial obligations imposedby the 1988 Act. These obligations have been incumbent upon manufacturersof motor vehicles since enactment of the Vehicle Safety Act. Although a``manufacturer'' includes any person importing motor vehicles for resale,these obligations have not always been understood or followed by importersfor resale of nonconforming vehicles, nor have they always been enforcedby NHTSA. However, Congress has specifically indicated its intent thatthese importers fulfill this sometimes dormant responsibility (section103(d)), and broadened its applicability. For purposes of notificationand remedy, the Registered Importer shall be treated as the manufacturerwith respect to any motor vehicle that it imports (regardless of whetheror not it imports the vehicle for resale), or brings into conformity onbehalf of an individual importer who has a contract with it. Furthermore,if the vehicle is one that is substantially similar (as determined underpart 593) to one certified for sale in the United States by its originalmanufacturer, and a noncompliance or safety related defect is determinedto exist in the substantially similar vehicle, the 1988 Act deems it toexist in the conformed vehicle as well, unless the manufacturer or RegisteredImporter can show otherwise. These obligations are reflected in paragraphs592.6(f). NADA commented that the final rule should emphasize that thisresponsibility encompasses conditions created by the modification process,as well as incorporated into the vehicle by its original manufacturer.NHTSA regards this suggestion as well made, and paragraph 592.6(f)(2) incorporatesit.In reviewing the relationship of the notification/remedial requirementsof the 1988 Act to those already existing in the Vehicle Safety Act, NHTSAhas identified an ambiguity as to the length of time for which remedy withoutcost must be provided. According to 15 U.S.C. 1414(a)(4), the requirementshall not apply ``if the motor vehicle * * * was purchased by its firstpurchaser more than 8 years * * * before * * * notification is furnished* * *.'' The general intent of Congress appears to be that manufacturersshould not be required to provide free remedy for vehicles whose age exceeds8 years, even if no corresponding limitation is imposed upon notification.If the date of first purchase is known for used imported nonconformingvehicles (such as through title documents accompanying it), there willbe no difficulty determining when the 8-year period begins. However, ifthe date of first purchase is not known, NHTSA believes that any vehiclemanufactured within 8 years of the date of notification should be eligiblefor remedy without charge. However, noncompliances or safety related defectscould be created by a Registered Importer in the conformance process, andthey may be introduced in an imported vehicle approaching or beyond anage of 8 model years. It seems fairest in this instance to regard conformanceoperations as a ``manufacturing'' process, and to commence the 8-year periodwith the sale of the vehicle to its first purchaser, regardless of itsage. Disagreements may arise as to whether a safety related defect is attributableto the manufacturer or the Registered Importer, but these will simply haveto be handled on an <T3>ad hoc</T3> basis.The agency also notes that one duty of a Registered Importer arises underthe bond given upon importation of each vehicle: the fulfillment of thecondition that if vehicle conformance is not achieved, the vehicle willbe exported at no cost to the United States by the Secretary of the Treasury,or abandoned to the United States (section 108(c)(2)(B)). If this duty,set forth in paragraph 592.6(f), is not fulfilled, and the vehicle is soldwithout full conformance, not only will the bond be forfeit but groundswill then exist to suspend or revoke the Importer's registration.A final question relating to the duties of a Registered Importer was askedby LaPine: who establishes the amount of charges to be made by the RegisteredImporter for conformance work? These charges are a matter of contract betweenthe Registered Importer and the person for whom the work is done, and arenot established by Federal regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Revocation, Suspension, and Reinstatement of Registration</ITAG>Paragraph 592.7 establishes the requirements for revocation, suspension,and reinstatement of the registration of Registered Importers.Section 108(c)(3)(D)(iii) requires the Secretary to establish proceduresfor revoking or suspending the registration of any Registered Importerfor failure to comply with any requirement of section 108 of the VehicleSafety Act or of any regulation issued under that section. Those proceduresare also required to provide for automatically suspending the registrationof a Registered Importer which knowingly files a false or misleading certification,or fails to pay a required fee in a timely manner. To cover the expensesof the registration program and certain other activities, the statute providesthat each Registered Importer will have to pay an annual fee; this feewill be established on a fiscal year basis. A Registered Importer undersuspension may be reinstated when the cause giving rise to the suspensionceases to exist. In determining revocation or suspension, other than automaticsuspension as provided by section 108(c)(3)(D)(iii) for nonpayment of feesor for knowingly filing a false or misleading certification, the Administratorwill provide notice in writing to the Registered Importer, affording itan opportunity to present data, views, and arguments as to why its registrationshould not be suspended or revoked. Other than its provision for automaticsuspension, the 1988 Act does not distinguish suspension from revocation;either may be invoked for failure to comply with any requirement of section108 or the regulations issued under section 108. The agency interpretsthe 1988 Act as leaving the decision whether to suspend or to revoke tothe discretion of the Administrator, with the exception of the automaticsuspension provisions discussed above.No comments were received on this aspect of the rulemaking, and it is adoptedas proposed.<ITAG tagnum="84">Inspection; Release of Vehicles and Bond</ITAG>Paragraph 592.8 establishes the requirements for inspection of modifiedvehicles, and their release for registration, as well as release of theperformance bond under which they entered. As is currently required, animporter of record, whether a Registered Importer or one who has a comformancecontract with a Registered Importer, will have to furnish the Secretaryof the Treasury (the U.S. Customs Service, acting for NHTSA), a bond foreach vehicle it imports to ensure that the vehicle is brought into compliancewith the safety standards, or that it is exported at no cost to the UnitedStates, or abandoned to the United States. When the modifications of animported vehicle are completed, the Registered Importer will have to attachits label to the vehicle stating that it complies with the safety standards,and certify that conformance to NHTSA. If the vehicle is one that the Administratorhas determined to be substantially similar to one certified by its originalmanufacturer for sale in the U.S., the Registered Importer may rely inmaking its certification on the original manufacturer's certification withrespect to identical safety features if it certifies to the Administratorthat its modifications did not affect compliance of the vehicle's safetyfeatures. Under the 1988 Act, the Registered Importer will be able to licensethe vehicle, or release the vehicle from its custody for licensing, 30days after its submission of the certification to NHTSA. NHTSA, however,can demand an inspection of the vehicle within the 30-day period, or askfor certification verification. In that event, the vehicle can be releasedonly upon the agency's written notice of its acceptance of the certificationor written notice of its completion of an inspection that does not showany failure to comply. The vehicle and the performance bond can be releasedimmediately upon issuance of either notification. Section 108(c)(3)(E)(v),added by the 1988 Act, provides that any release of bond, however, doesnot constitute a determination under section 152 of the Vehicle SafetyAct that the vehicle conforms with all applicable standards.Section 108(c)(3)(E)(i) requires NHTSA and the Secretary of the Treasuryto establish procedures to ensure the release of a motor vehicle and bondat the expiration of the 30-day period, and this was proposed as paragraph592.8(f). At the time of the proposal, it had not been detemined whetherthe bond would be one of the U.S. Customs Service, or of NHTSA. The determinationhas been made that the bond will be NHTSA's, and therefore no such provisionis required in the final rule. NHTSA will continue to inform Customs whenrequirements subject to the general importation bond (bumper and theftprevention standards) have been met, and will make these determinationscontemporaneously with those regarding compliance with the safety standards.These requirements were the subject of little comment. In paragraph 592.8(b),NHTSA had proposed that each submission shall be provided either by certifiedmail (return receipt requested), or electronically in a manner to be specifiedby NHTSA. George Ziolo found this too restrictive, and recommended allowingsubmission through private concerns and in person as well. This commentis well taken. It is important that a Registered Importer know when itssubmission has been received, and, hence, when the 30-day period has begun.Given the agency's own experience with failure to receive certified mailreturn receipts, it believes that a Registered Importer must be able tosubmit its certification in the manner it believes will best inform itof the date of receipt. The final rule is adopted as suggested. Further,NHTSA has specified in the final rule the electronic means it prefers,and has provided the FAX number of the agency.Auburn Motors, an importer of cars from Canada, thought that RegisteredImporters of such cars should not have to wait 30 calendar days after submissionof certification to be informed by NHTSA of their release. It should benoted that 30 days is the maximum period, and it may well be that in practicebonds may be released more expeditiously.The State of Texas asked for clarification of the events that would transpirein the event the bond was forfeited. In the event that NHTSA determinesthat the primary condition of the performance bond, the conformance ofthe vehicle, has not been met, the agency will demand fulfillment of oneof the remaining two alternative conditions: the export of the vehicleat no cost to the United States, or its abandonment to the United States.NHTSA shall specify a time in which this is to be accomplished. Becausethe 1988 Act requires strict adherence to these provisions, it does notappear to allow the agency to consider petitions for mitigation on suchgrounds as hardship, or the achievement of partial compliance. If the bondis forfeited through failure to fulfill any of the three conditions ofperformance, NHTSA will review the circumstances of the case and, whenappropriate, inform Customs that the importer appears to have made a falsedeclaration under the conforming regulation, 19 CFR 12.80. Customs hasappropriate sanctions, including the seizure of the vehicle, when violationsof its regulations occur. Civil penalty sanctions may be also be imposedby NHTSA. As discussed previously, if a Registered Importer forfeits aperformance bond, its registration will be subject to suspension or revocation.Commenting that in some jurisdictions a DOT bond release letter is requiredbefore registration of vehicles is allowed, Texas also asked what wouldoccur if a vehicle is automatically released at the end of 30 days withouta bond release letter having been issued. If a vehicle is automaticallyreleased from custody of the Registered Importer at the end of 30 dayswithout a bond release letter having been issued, there are two possiblescenarios. The first is that such a letter will eventually be forthcomingif the certification is found acceptable. If the certification is unacceptable,no such letter will be forthcoming, and conformance problems will haveto be resolved between NHTSA, the Registered Importer, and the owner ofthe car who presumably will have taken possession of it, but may have foundhimself unable to license it. Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles wondered if NHTSA and EPA could issuea single release notice. NHTSA has previously considered the feasibilityof parallel action with EPA such as a common declaration form. This doesnot appear practicable. Two different Federal agencies are involved, proceedingunder two different legislative authorities, with their own distinctiverequirements. Although the regulated persons are of the same class (importersof motor vehicles) there is not a sufficient identity of regulatory actionto allow common forms or time frames. In fact, the motor vehicle standardsadministered by NHTSA itself that must be met by imported vehicles originatein three distinctly different regulatory authorities: Title I of the NationalTraffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (safety standards), and Titles I (bumperstandard) and VI (theft prevention) of the Motor Vehicle Information andCost Savings Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">Impacts</ITAG>After considering the impacts of this rulemaking action, NHTSA has determinedthat the final rule is not major within the meaning of Executive Order12291 ``Federal Regulation''. It implements Public Law 100-562 under whichmotor vehicles not originally manufactured to conform to the Federal motorvehicle safety standards may be imported only by importers who have registeredwith NHTSA under this part, or by those who have contracts with them. Noris it significant under Department of Transportation regulatory policiesand procedures. The final rule involves no substantial public interestor controversy. It has no substantial effect on state and local governments.There is no substantial impact on a major transportation safety program.Nevertheless, a regulatory evaluation analyzing the economic impacts ofthis and the related final rules required by Public Law 100-562 has beenprepared, and is available for review in the docket, as part of the RegulatoryFlexibility Analysis.NHTSA has analyzed this rule for purposes of the National EnvironmentalPolicy Act. The rule will not have a significant effect upon the environmentalbecause it is anticipated that the annual volume of motor vehicles importedthrough Registered Importers will not vary significantly from that existingbefore promulgation of the rule.The agency has also considered the effects of this rule in relation tothe Regulatory Flexibility Act. I certify that this rule will not havea significant economic impact upon a substantial number of small entities.Although entities that currently modify nonconforming vehicles are smallbusinesses within the meaning of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the agencyhas no reason to believe that a substantial number of these companies couldnot qualify to become registered importers. However, small businesses currentlyconforming vehicles may choose not to register as importers because ofthe recordkeeping and other requirements, and the obligation to notify/remedyin the event of the occurrence of a noncompliance or safety related defect,and these businesses would no longer be able to perform conformance workon vehicles imported on or after January 31, 1990. The cost to owners orpurchasers of modifying nonconforming vehicles to conform with the safetystandards may be expected to increase to the extent necessary to reimbursethe Registered Importer for the fees payable to the agency for the costof administering the registration program, for making determinations thatnonconforming vehicles are eligible for entry, and to compensate Customsfor its bond processing costs. The Registered Importer's fee for administrationof the registration program will be $255, and it is probable that a shareof this cost may be assigned to each vehicle conformed. If a vehicle hasbeen imported pursuant to a determination petition filed by its RegisteredImporter, a share of the petition fees ($1,560 or $2,150 depending uponthe type of petition) may also be assigned to each vehicle conformed. Whenthese costs are divided among the number of vehicles that a RegisteredImporter may conform, they are not expected to add significantly to theprice of an imported vehicle that, past experience shows, is likely tobe in the upper ranges of the luxury market. The cost of compensating Customsfor its bond processing costs will be $4.35 per vehicle, and it is expectedthat this will be a direct cost to owners or purchasers of nonconformingvehicles. Governmental jurisdictions will not be affected at all sincethey are generally neither importers nor purchasers of nonconforming motorvehicles. However, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis covering all regulationsproposed to implement the 1988 Act has been prepared, and placed in thepublic docket.The agency has analyzed the rule in accordance with the principles andcriteria contained in Executive Order 12612 ``Federalism'' and determinedthat the rule does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrantthe preparation of a Federalism Assessment.The registration requirements in this rule are considered to be informationcollection requirements, as that term is defined by the Office of Managementand Budget (OMB) in 5 CFR part 1320. Accordingly, these requirements havebeen submitted to OMB for its approval, pursuant to the requirements ofthe Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>). The information collection requirements in this rulebecome effective when they have been approved by OMB.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 49 CFR Part 592</ITAG>Imports, Motor vehicle safety, Motor vehicles.In consideration of the foregoing, a new part 592, <T3>Registered Importers of Vehicles not Originally Manufactured to Conformto the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, </T3>is added to title 49,chapter V, to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 592_REGISTERED IMPORTERS OF VEHICLES NOT ORIGINALLY MANUFACTUREDTO CONFORM TO THE FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARDS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.1 Scope.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.2 Purpose.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.3 Applicability.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.4 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.5 Requirements for registration and its maintenance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.6 Duties of a registered importer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.7 Revocation, suspension and reinstatement of registration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">592.8 Inspection; release of vehicle and bond.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 100-562, 15 U.S.C. 1401, 1407; delegation ofauthority at 49 CFR 1.50.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;592.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope.</ITAG>This part establishes procedures under section 108(c)(3)(D) of the NationalTraffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 1397(c)(3)(D)),for the registration of importers of motor vehicles that were not originallymanufactured to comply with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safetystandards. This part also establishes the duties of Registered Importers.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;592.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose.</ITAG>The purpose of this part is to provide content and format requirementsfor persons who wish to register with the Administrator as importers ofmotor vehicles not originally manufactured to conform to all applicableFederal motor vehicle safety standards, to provide procedures for the registrationof importers and for the suspension, revocation and reinstatement of registration,and to set forth the duties required of Registered Importers.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;592.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability.</ITAG>This part applies to any person who wishes to register with the Administratoras an importer of nonconforming vehicles, and to any person who is registeredas an importer.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;592.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>All terms in this part that are defined in section 102 of the NationalTraffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1391) are used as definedtherein.<T3>Administrator </T3>means the Administrator, National Highway TrafficSafety Administration.<T3>NHTSA </T3>means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.<T3>Registered Importer </T3>means any person that the Administrator hasregistered as an importer pursuant to section 592.5(b).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;592.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Requirements for registration and its maintenance.</ITAG>(a) Any person wishing to register an as importer of motor vehicles notoriginally manufactured to conform to all applicable Federal motor vehiclesafety standards must file an application which:(1) Is headed with the words ``Application for Registration as Importer'',and submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway TrafficSafety Administration, Washington, DC 20590, Attn: Importer Registration.(2) Is written in the English language.(3) Sets forth the full name, address, and title of the person preparingthe application, and the name, address, and telephone number of the personfor whom application is made.(4) Sets forth, as applicable, the names of all owners, including shareholders,partners, or sole proprietors, of the person for whom application is made.(5) If any of the owners listed in paragraph (a)(4) of this section arecorporations, sets forth the names of all shareholders of such corporationwhose ownership interest is 10 percent or greater.(6) Contains a statement that the applicant has never had a registrationrevoked pursuant to andSection;592.7, nor is it or was it, directly or indirectly,owned or controlled by, or under common ownership or control with, a personwho has had a registration revoked pursuant to andSection;592.7.(7) Contains a certified check payable to the Treasurer of the United States,for the amount of the initial annual fee established pursuant to part 594of this chapter.(8) Contains a copy of a contract to acquire, effective upon its registrationas an importer, a prepaid mandatory service insurance policy underwrittenby an independent insurance company, or a copy of such policy, in an amountthat equals $2,000 for each motor vehicle for which the applicant willfurnish a certificate of conformity to the Administrator, for the purposeof ensuring that the applicant will be able financially to remedy any noncomplianceor safety related defect determined to exist in any such motor vehiclein accordance with part 573 and part 577 of this chapter. If the applicationis accompanied by a copy of a contract to acquire such a policy, the applicantshall provide NHTSA with a copy of the policy within 10 days after it hasbeen issued to the applicant.(9) Sets forth in full data, views, and arguments of the applicant sufficientto establish that the applicant will be able, through a records systemof acquiring and maintaining names and addresses of owners of vehiclesfor which it furnishes a certificate of conformity, and Vehicle IdentificationNumbers (VINs) of such vehicles, to notify such owners that a noncomplianceor safety related defect exists in such vehicles, and that it will be financiallyable to remedy a noncompliance or safety related defect through repurchaseor replacement of such vehicles, or technically able through repair ofsuch vehicles, in accordance with part 573 and part 577 of this chapter.(10) Segregates and specifies any part of the information and data submittedunder this part that the applicant wishes to have withheld from publicdisclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter.(11) Contains a statement that the applicant will fully comply with allduties of a registered importer as set forth in andSection; 592.6.(12) Has the applicant's signature acknowledged by a notary public. (b) If the information submitted is incomplete, the Administrator notifiesthe applicant of the areas of insufficiency, and that the application isin abeyance.(c) If the Administrator deems it necessary for a determination upon theapplication, NHTSA conducts an inspection of the applicant and/or its agents.Subsequent to the inspection, NHTSA calculates the costs attributable tosuch inspection, and notifies the applicant in writing that such costscomprise a component of the initial annual fee and must be paid beforea determination is made upon its application.(d) When the application is complete (and, if applicable, when a sum representingthe inspection component of the initial annual fee is paid), it is reviewedand a determination made whether the applicant should be granted the statusof Registered Importer. Such determination may be based, in part, uponan inspection by NHTSA of the conformance, storage, and recordkeeping facilitiesof the applicant and agents, if any. If the Administrator determines thatthe application is acceptable, (s)he informs the applicant in writing thatits application is approved, and issues it a Registered Importer Number.If the information is not acceptable, the Administration informs the applicantin writing that its application is not approved. No refund is made of thosecomponents of the initial annual fee representing the costs of processingthe application, and conducting an inspection. Refund is made of that componentof the initial annual fee representing the remaining costs of administrationof the registration program. (e) In order to maintain its registration, a Registered Importer shallprovide an annual statement that affirms that all information providedunder paragraphs (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)(9), and (a)(11) of this sectionremains correct, and that includes a current copy of its insurance policyprocured pursuant to paragraph (a)(8) of this section. Such statement shallbe titled ``Yearly Statement of Registered Importer'', and shall be filednot later than October 31 of each year. A Registered Importer shall alsopay such annual fee or fees as the Administrator may from time to timeestablish under part 594 of this chapter. An annual fee shall be paid notlater than October 31 of any calendar year, and shall be the annual feefor the fiscal year that began on October 1 of that calendar year. Anyother fee shall be payable not later than 30 calendar days after the datethat the Administrator has notified the Registered Importer of it in writing.(f) A Registered Importer shall notify the Administrator in writing ofany change that occurs in the information which is submitted in its application,not later than the end of the 30th calender day after such change.(g) A registration granted under this part is not transferable.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 592.6</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duties of a registered importer.</ITAG>Each Registered Importer shall:(a) With respect to each motor vehicle that it imports into the UnitedStates, furnish to the Secretary of the Treasury (acting on behalf of theAdministrator) a bond in an amount not less than the entered value of thevehicle, as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, nor more than150 per cent of such value, to ensure that such vehicle either will bebrought into conformity with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safetystandards prescribed under part 571 of this chapter within 120 calendardays after such importation, or will be exported (at no cost to the UnitedStates) by the importer or the Secretary of the Treasury, or abandonedto the United States.(b) Establish, maintain, and retain for 8 years from the date of entryof any nonconforming vehicle for which it furnishes a certificate of conformitypursuant to paragraph (e) of this section, organized records, correspondenceand other documents relating to the importation, modification, and substantiationof certification of conformity to the Administrator, including but notlimited to:(1) The declaration required by andSection; 591.5 of this chapter, and 19CFR 12.80.(2) All vehicle or equipment purchase or sales orders or agreements, conformanceagreements with importers other than Registered Importers, and correspondencebetween the Registered Importer and the owner or purchaser of each vehiclefor which it has furnished a certificate of conformity.(3) The last known name and address of the owner or purchaser of each motorvehicle for which it has furnished a certificate of conformity, and theVIN number of such vehicle. (4) Records, both photographic and documentary, reflecting the modificationsmade and submitted to the Administrator pursuant to paragraph (e) of thissection.(b) Records, both photographic and documentary, sufficient to substantiateeach subsequent certificate furnished to the Administrator for a vehicleof the same model and model year for which documentation has been furnishedNHTSA in support of the initial certificate.(c) Permanently affix to each motor vehicle, upon completion of modifications,a label that meets the requirements of andSection; 567.4 of this chapter,which identifies the Registered Importer, and provide to the Administratora photocopy of the label attesting that such vehicle has been brought intoconformity with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumperstandards. (d) Certify to the Administrator, upon completion of modifications, thatthe vehicle has been brought into conformity with all applicable Federalmotor vehicle safety and bumper standards, and that it is the person legallyresponsible for bringing the vehicle into conformity.(e) In substantiation of the initial certification provided for a specificmodel and model year, submit to the Administrator photographic and documentaryevidence of conformance with each applicable Federal motor vehicle safetyand bumper standard, and with respect to subsequent certifications of suchmodel and model year, such information, if any, as the Administrator mayrequest.(f) With respect to any motor vehicle for which it has furnished a certificateof conformity to the Administrator, provide notification and remedy accordingto part 573 and part 577 of this chapter, under any determination.(1) That a vehicle to which it is substantially similar, as determinedunder part 593 of this chapter, incorporates a safety related defect orfails to conform with an applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standard.However, this obligation does not exist if the manufacturer of the vehicleor Registered Importer demonstrates to the Administrator that the defector noncompliance is not present in such vehicle.(2) That the vehicle incorporates a safety related defect or fails to conformwith an applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standard, without referenceto whether such may exist in a vehicle to which it is substantially similar,or whether such exists because it was created by the original manufactureror by the Registered Importer.(i) The requirement of 15 U.S.C. 1414(a)(2)(B) that remedy shall be providedwithout charge shall not apply if the noncompliance or safety related defectexists in a motor vehicle whose first sale after importation occurred morethan 8 calendar years before notification respecting the failure to complyis furnished pursuant to Part 577 of this chapter, except that if a safetyrelated defect exists and is attributable to the original manufacturerand not the Registered Importer, the requirements of 15 U.S.C. 1414(a)(2)(B)shall not apply to a motor vehicle whose date of first purchase, if known,or, if not known, whose date of manufacture, as determined by the Administrator,is more than 8 years from the date on which notification is furnished pursuantto part 577 of this chapter.(ii) Notification furnished pursuant to this paragraph and part 577 ofthis chapter shall include the statement that in the absence of the RegisteredImporter's facility being within 50 miles of the owner's mailing addressfor performance of repairs, such repairs may be performed at a specificfacility designated by the Registered Importer within 50 miles, or, ifno such facility is designated, anywhere, and shall also include an explanationhow repair is to be accomplished without charge to the vehicle owner.(g) In order to allow the Administrator to determine whether a RegisteredImporter is meeting its statutory responsibilities, admit representativesof NHTSA during operating hours, upon demand, and upon presentation ofcredentials, to copy documents, or to inspect, monitor, or photograph anyof the following:(1) Any facility where any vehicle, for which a Registered Importer hasthe responsibility of providing a certificate of conformity to applicablesafety standards, is being modified, tested, or stored; (2) Any facility where any record or other document relating to modification,testing, or storage of vehicles being conformed, is filed;(3) Any part or aspect of activities relating to the modification, testing,and/or storage of vehicles by the Registered Importer.(4) Any motor vehicle for which it has provided a certification of conformityto the Administrator, and which remains in its custody or under its control.(h) Maintain in effect a prepaid mandatory service insurance policy underwrittenby an independent insurance company as a guarantor of its performance underparagraph (f) of this section.(i) With respect to any motor vehicle it has imported and for which ithas furnished a performance bond, to deliver such vehicle to the Secretaryof the Treasury for export, or to abandon it to the United States, upondemand by the Administrator if such vehicle has not been brought into conformitywith all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 592.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Revocation, suspension and reinstatement of registration.</ITAG>(a) If the Administrator has not received any fee assessed and owing bythe end of the 30th calendar day after such fee is due and payable, a registrationis automatically suspended at the beginning of the 31st calendar day, andthe Registered Importer is immediately notified in writing of the suspensionat the address contained in its most recent annual statement or amendmentthereof.(b) If the Administrator has reason to believe that a Registered Importerhas knowingly filed a false or misleading certification, and that its registrationshould be automatically suspended or revoked, (s)he notifies the RegisteredImporter in writing of the facts giving rise to such reason to believe,affording an opportunity to present data, views, and arguments, eitherin writing or in person, within 30 calendar days after receipt of the Administrator'sletter, as to whether it has submitted false or misleading certification,and as to why the registration ought not to be revoked or suspended. TheAdministrator then makes a decision after the 30-day period on the basisof all information then available. If, after consideration of all the dataavailable, the Administrator determines that the Registered Importer hasknowingly filed a false or misleading certification, the registration isautomatically suspended or revoked, and the Registered Importer notifiedin writing. Any suspension or revocation is effective as of the date ofthe Administrator's determination. The Administrator shall state the periodof any suspension in the notice to the Registered Importer.(c) The Administrator may suspend a registration if a Registered Importerfails to comply with any requirement set forth in 15 U.S.C. 1397(c)(3)(D),andSection; 592.5(c), or andSection; 592.6, or if s(he) denies an applicationfiled under andSection; 592.5(d). The Administrator may revoke a registrationafter any failure to comply with any such requirement, or if (s)he deniesan application filed under andSection; 592.5(d). If the Administrator hasreason to believe that there has been such a failure to comply and thatthe Registered Importer's registration should be revoked or suspended,(s)he notifies the Registered Importer in writing, affording an opportunityto present data, views, and arguments, either in writing or in person,within 30 calendar days after receipt of the Administrator's letter, asto whether there has been a failure to comply and as to why the registrationought not to be revoked or suspended. The Administrator then makes a decisionafter the 30-day period on the basis of all information then available.If the Administrator determines that a registration should be revoked orsuspended, (s)he notifies the Registered Importer in writing. A revocationis effective immediately. A suspension is effective beginning with a datespecified in the written notification.(d) A Registered Importer whose registration has been revoked or suspendedmay request reconsideration of the revocation or suspension if the requestis supported by factual matter which was not available to the Administratorat the time the registration was suspended or revoked.(e) If its registration has been revoked, a Registered Importer is ineligibleto apply for reregistration under this part. No refund is provided of anyannual or other fees the Registered Importer has paid for the fiscal yearin which its registration is revoked. If its registration has been suspended,it may file an application for reinstatement of its registration.(f) The Administrator shall reinstate a suspended registration if the causethat led to the suspension no longer exists, as determined by the Administrator,either upon the Administrator's motion, or upon the submission of furtherinformation or fees by the Registered Importer.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 592.8 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Inspection; release of vehicle and bond.</ITAG>(a) With respect to any motor vehicle for which it is obligated to providea certificate of conformity to the Administrator as required by andSection;592.6(d), a Registered Importer shall not obtain licensing or registrationof the motor vehicle for use on the public roads, or release custody ofit for such licensing and registration, except in accordance with the provisionsof this section.(b) When conformance modifications to a motor vehicle have been completed,a Registered Importer shall submit the certification required by andSection;592.6(d) to the Administrator. In certifying a vehicle that the Administratorhas determined to be substantially similar to one that has been certifiedby its original manufacturer for sale in the United States, the RegisteredImporter may rely on any certification by the original manufacturer withrespect to identical safety features if it also certifies that any modificationthat it undertook did not affect the compliance of such safety features.Each submission shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,or by private carriers such as Federal Express, to: Administrator, NationalHighway Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC, 20590 ATTN: NEF-32,or be submitted electronically by FAX (202-366-2536), or in person. Eachsubmission shall identify the location where the vehicle will be storedand is available for inspection, pending NHTSA action upon the submission.(c) Before the end of the 30th calendar day after receipt of certificationof a motor vehicle pursuant to andSection; 592.6(d), the Administrator mayinform the Registered Importer in writing that an inspection of the vehicleis required to ascertain the veracity of the certification. Written noticeincludes a proposed inspection date, which is as soon as practicable. Ifinspection of the vehicle  indicates that the vehicle has been properlycertified, at the conclusion of the inspection the Registered Importeris provided an instrument of release. If inspection of the vehicle showsthat the vehicle has not been properly certified, the Registered Importershall either make the modifications necessary to substantiate its certification,and provide a new certification for the standard(s) in the manner providedfor in paragraph (b) of this section, or deliver the vehicle to the Secretaryof the Treasury for export, or abandon it to the United States. Beforethe end of the 30th calendar day after receipt of new certification, theAdministrator may require a further inspection in accordance with the provisionsof this subsection.(d) The Administrator may by written notice request certification verificationby the Registered Importer before the end of the 30th calendar day afterthe date the certification was received by the Administrator. If the basisfor such request is that the certification is false or contains a misrepresentation,the Registered Importer shall be afforded an opportunity to present writtendata, views, and arguments as to why the certification is not false ormisleading or does not contain a misrepresentation. The Administrator mayrequire an inspection pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section. The motorvehicle and performance bond involved shall not be released unless theAdministrator is satisfied with the certification.(e) If a Registered Importer has received no written notice from the Administratorby the end of the 30th calendar day after it has furnished a certificationto the Administrator, the Registered Importer may release from custodythe vehicle that is covered by the certification, or have it licensed orregistered for use on the public roads.(f) If the Administrator accepts a certification without requiring an inspection,(s)he notifies the Registered Importer in writing, and provides a copyto the importer of record. Such notification shall be provided not laterthan the 25th calendar day after the Administrator has received such certification.(g) Release of the performance shall constitute acceptance of certificationor completion of inspection of the vehicle concerned, but shall not precludea subsequent determination by the Administrator pursuant to section 152of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1451) that the vehicle fails to conform to any applicableFederal motor vehicle safety standard.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on September 26, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jeffrey R. Miller,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-23081 Filed 9-27-89; 11:19am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>