<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89329-0050 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-29-89.f2.A1049</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4703"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 58 / Tuesday, March 28, 1989 /Notices <ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 54, No. 58 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Tuesday, March 28, 1989 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">ACTION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Neighborhood-Based Illicit Drug Use Prevention Projects, NationalDemonstration Grant; Availability of Funds Notice </ITAG>ACTION, the Federal Domestic Volunteer Agency, announces the availabilityof funds for a national demonstration program that consists of illicitdrug use prevention projects conducted in a select number of neighborhoodsin up to nine jurisdictions throughout the country, whose principal aimwill be to mobilize neighborhood awareness activities designed to preventand reduce the incidence of use and trafficking in illicit substances.This demonstration program will operate under the Special Volunteer Programsauthorized by the Domestic Volunteer Service Act of 1973, as amended (Pub.L. 93-113, Title 1, Part C; 42 U.S.C. 4992). ACTION, historically a principal source of volunteer leadership in America,has been mandated by the President and Congress to respond to the crisisof illegal drug use by fostering innovative prevention programs that capitalizeon volunteer resources on the local level. Volunteers of all ages and fromevery segment of the community can make vital contributions to drug preventionand awareness programs, and ACTION intends to support programs which encourageand sustain the spirit of voluntarism as a weapon in America's fight againstdrugs. As documented by the White House Conference for a Drug-Free America, thebest strategy to combat illegal drug use is to prevent it from starting.In high-risk neighborhoods where drug trafficking is rampant, preventionefforts must be combined with effective intervention strategies and requirethe involvement of every segment of the community, particularly law enforcement,drug abuse treatment professionals, parents, youth and the schools. Recognizingthat no single approach will work in every locale, comprehensive approachesassure that clear, consistent ``no use'' messages are delivered and reinforcedby a variety of community resources. This announcement solicits innovativeproposals in response to that need. <ITAG tagnum="84">A. Eligible Strategy </ITAG>National nonprofit organizations are encouraged to submit proposals eitherto establish or expand neighborhood-based illicit drug use prevention projectsin up to 9 jurisdictions, preferably one in each ACTION Region. In each of these 9 jurisdictions, there should be established more thanone special high-risk, geographically limited zones or neighborhoods thatexhibit particularly high levels of drug trafficking and use and are atrisk of (or already display) economic and social deterioration exacerbatedby the illegal drug trade. Within such neighborhoods, extra community-wideresources and effort will be targeted, and neighborhood residents willbe mobilized and involved in volunteer efforts to make these neighborhoodsdrug free. The concept of establishing drug free neighborhoods or zonesis that specific defined areas, with special attention and citizen participation,can be largely rid of illegal drugs, thereby offering greater safety tothe general public and the residents of the area, as well as offering optimismto residents of other parts of the community that progress against drugscan be made. This requires the active participation and cooperation ofa number of local public agencies (including police, prosecutors, courts,social welfare, health and education), as well as neighborhood-based groups,businesses, rental housing owners/associations, youth-serving organizationsand individual citizens. The grant recipient will develop an overall plan which includes detailedsite-specific plans for these local projects. This plan would also includeany proposed sub-grants to a local organization in each of the 9 proposedjurisdictions. Prior to implementation or execution, the overall plan andall proposed individual sub-grants must be approved by ACTION. In addition,the grant recipient will provide national leadership, policy guidance,training and technical assistance for the local projects. The following are illicit drug use prevention strategies successfully implementedby neighborhood-based or community organizations which should be primaryamong the planned activities of the drug free neighborhood projects: 1. <T3>Public Awareness_</T3>A strong public awareness component should beimplemented which identifies, quantifies and publicizes the economic andhuman costs associated with drug trafficking and use within the communityin general, and within the targeted neighborhood in particular. Such informationshould include, but not be limited to, the dangers of illegal drugs tousers and their families; the statistical relationship between illegaldrugs and serious crime in that local community; the impact on victimsof crime; the economic impact on the community; the impact drug traffickinghas on the security, freedom of movement and other civil liberties of communityresidents; the role of individual responsibility in preventing and stoppingillegal drug use; and specific neighborhood opportunities for citizen participation.Among the activities that may contribute to an effective public awarenesseffort may be the local media thoroughly reporting on the impact of thedrug problem, as well as providing appropriate public service programming;city officials, civic leaders, and religious leaders speaking out againstthe use of illegal drugs; and law enforcement and school officials takingevery opportunity to inform and reinforce anti-drug sentiment within thecommunity.Residents of the targeted areas should be mobilized to share informationand to help involve their neighbors. Further, every organized group inthe community can play a part by informing and educating its membership.Effective public awareness efforts must be based on accurate assessmentsof the costs of illegal drug use and trafficking in the community. In addition,public awareness materials and programs must be developed and disseminated,which include all facets of the comprehensive strategy contained in thisAnnouncement. 2. <T3>Zero Tolerance_</T3>Every segment of the community can establish thestandard of ``zero tolerance'' of illegal drugs to support the preventioninitiative within the specially defined areas. This standard is invokedand reinforced by such activities as housing officials evicting drug trafficking/usingtenants, neighborhood watch groups and citizens informing on drug use/saleslocations; employers taking appropriate action against drug-using employees,which may include sanctions and/or the provision of intervention or treatmentservices; employees, police and prosecutors invoking the full weight ofthe law against drug violators; school officials providing security againstdrug activity on school property; and intervention and treatment programsproviding opportunities for drug-using residents to obtain rehabilitationand treatment assistance. Public awareness efforts are important to assuringthat a community-wide ``zero tolerance'' standard has a chance to succeed,but without the substantive (and continually reinforced) response by individualcitizens, neighborhood/community organizations and public agencies, sucha policy will have no impact. 3. <T3>Neighborhood Watch_</T3>According to numerous studies at national andlocal levels, Neighborhood Watch/Block Watch programs have had a salutaryeffect on preventing a wide range of personal and property crimes in localitiesthroughout the country. These strategies can play an equally effectivepart in preventing and reducing the use and trafficking of illegal drugs.Neighbors watching out for one another has proven to be an extraordinarilypowerful tool that should be part of any neighborhood-based effort to stopthe use and trafficking of illegal drugs. In neighborhoods with activeWatch programs, efforts can be made to inform participants about illegaldrugs and their relation to crime, economic development, and general neighborhoodquality of life. Such information can include facts about illegal drugs,advice on identifying drug use and sales, and on appropriate means to informauthorities. In neighborhoods without active Watch, a commitment to ``zerotolerance'' of illegal drugs may provide an outstanding opportunity forvolunteers and local law enforcement to organize Watch programs_particularlyin heavily drug-infested neighborhoods. Watch programs can be establishedin public housing projects and apartment buildings as well. It should beremembered that, even if a Watch program is started primarily to combatillegal drugs, its impact will be much greater in terms of restoring safetyand security to the neighborhood. 4. <T3>Victim Emphasis_</T3>A major impact of the illegal drug problem isthe personal victimization which accompanies illegal drugs. National statisticsshow that a significant percentage of violent and property crime is directlyrelated to illegal drug use. For example, the U.S. Department of Justicehas found that in 12 major American cities, between 50 percent and 80 percentof arrestees were on drugs at the time of their arrest. Other studies haveshown that more than 90 percent of arrestees for certain crimes were usingillegal drugs. Each of these crimes has one or more victims whose painand loss should not be ignored, and whose voices can be powerful communicatorsof the personal cost of drug trafficking and use beyond the user and theseller. A community-wide project to prevent the use of illegal drugs shouldinvolve victims of crimes committed by drug-using offenders or drug traffickersto help the public understand the terrible impact of victimization andto become more aware of the price society pays for its tolerance of illegaldrugs. Victims can speak out within the community, can advocate for changesin policy and law, and can help other victims of crime cope with theirtrauma. They constitute an underutilized source of dedicated volunteermanpower. In addition, public awareness efforts should assure that theperspectives of crime victims are incorporated. 5. <T3>Community Coalition Building_</T3>A community-wide drug preventionproject requires involvement of a variety of individuals and entities fromthroughout the community, if it is to be comprehensive and effective. Amongthe groups that must participate in developing and conducting strategiesare school, law enforcement and city officials, clergy, business community,medical community, drug abuse treatment and intervention professionals,media, members of tenant organizations and neighborhood associations, and,very importantly, parents and youth. Only such all-inclusive participationwill ensure that all potential resources for the initiative will be mobilized,and that the concerns of prevention, enforcement, intervention and treatmentare properly considered and integrated. The parameters of involvement,commitment to this initiative, and responsibility of each significant entityshould be detailed and included in the community plan. An important emphasisof this coalition-building process must be the development of appropriatealternative activities and other drug prevention efforts focusing on youthat particularly high risk of becoming involved in the use of illegal drugs.Every group or individual participating in an effective coalition willbe able to contribute particular elements of the targeted area's anti-drugeffort, but must also play a role of educating and informing the communityabout the drug problem. For example, physicans have a critical role toplay in the community's response to illegal drugs by the provision of medicalservices, but they can and should speak out forcefully within the communityin support of needed changes. <ITAG tagnum="84">B. Eligible Applicants </ITAG>Only applications from national private non-profit organizations with experiencein mobilizing local initiatives will be considered. The successful applicantwill display significant experience in the development and management ofcommunity or neighborhood-based volunteer initiatives. Organizations mustevidence the capacity, knowledge, and experience to: 1. Provide leadership for the selection, development, and implementationof up to 9 local neighborhood-based community-wide drug prevention projects,including the distribution and oversight of any sub-grant funds. 2. Provide appropriate training for local projects' staffs and volunteers,and technical assistance and other management support to the local projectsto maximize their successful implementation.3. Identify and mobilize existing networks or relationships to developand support leaders of drug-free neighborhood initiatives. 4. Cooperate and coordinate efforts at national levels with other existingprevention programs_whether privately or federally sponsored. 5. Encourage and provide means for cooperation and coalition-building atthe project level among all segments of the community. <ITAG tagnum="84">C. Available Funds </ITAG>The announcement will result in the award of a single grant not to exceed$1 million for a period of up to 24 months. ACTION, based on prior experiencewith national multi-jurisdictional grants, expects applicants to developbudget plans allocating approximately 65% of these funds for sub-grantsto local projects, approximately 15% for provision of technical assistanceand training to the local projects, and approximately 20% for overall grantmanagement and administrative support costs. Applicants should be aware that renewal funding for this project is notlikely. The proposal should, therefore, include specific plans for ensuringcontinuity and self-sufficiency of local projects receiving sub-grantsat the end of the two-year period. <ITAG tagnum="84">D. General Criteria for Grant Review </ITAG>Grant applications will be reviewed and evaluated based on the criteriaoutlined below, as well as on conformance to instructions contained inthe application kit. Applications incorporating significant use of volunteerswill receive priority. 1. Plans for developing and implementing more than one neighborhood-baseddrug prevention project within nine geographically-diverse jurisdictions.It will be especially important to assure that unique local needs, characteristics,and resources are appropriately considered and that the local projectsare implemented in cooperation with existing prevention activities. This will require a commitment to participate and cooperate as evidencedby letters of support from a number of local public agencies (includingpolice, prosecutors, courts, social welfare, health and education), aswell as neighborhood-based groups, youth-serving organizations, businessesand rental housing associations. 2. Ability, capacity, and willingness of identified local sponsoring organizations,as evidenced by background descriptions and letters of support/commitmentincluded in the overall plan, to design and implement neighborhood-baseddrug prevention projects in their respective jurisdictions. 3. Plans for the joint development with each proposed local sponsoringorganization of a detailed workplan and budget for ACTION approval. Eachworkplan should (1) incorporate, at a minimum, the strategies cited inSection A, with particular emphasis on the involvement of neighborhoodorganizations and residents, particularly youth; and (2) contain lettersof commitment to participate from any local organizations not includedin the initial application. 4. Capacity and specific plans to provide national leadership, training,technical assistance, and support for local project sites. 5. Evidence, including letters of support, of commitment and intent toparticipate in projects from appropriate national and local organizations,entities, and of existing or to-be-formed partnerships whose participationwill provide in-kind support for the project. This should also includeletters from potential members of the program's advisory board or localsponsoring organizations' board of directors. 6. Plans for involving non-stipended volunteers in all aspects of projectactivity, with quantifiable, measurable and time-phased goals. 7. Likelihood of continuing or expanding national program and local levelprojects following completion of grant period. 8. Evidence of public and private sector financial and in-kind supportat both national and local levels. While a specific level of match is notrequired, non-federal contributions to this initiative are highly encouragedand are considered as important indicators of a public/private partnershipand likelihood of future project self-sufficiency. 9. Detailed schedule for accomplishing objectives, including implementationof local sites and participation of volunteers. 10. Plans for assessing the overall effectiveness of the national demonstrationprogram as well as the specific accomplishments and impact of the localprojects in achieving drug-free neighborhoods. E. The Associate Director of Domestic and Anti-Poverty Operations may useadditional factors in choosing among applicants who meet the minimum criteriaspecified above, such as:1. Geographic distribution; 2. Applicants accessibility to alternate resources, both technical andfinancial; 3. Allocation of Program Demonstration/Drug Alliance resources in relationto other ACTION funds; <ITAG tagnum="84">F. Application Review Process </ITAG>Applications submitted under this announcement will be reviewed and evaluatedby ACTION's Program Demonstration and Development Division. ACTION's AssociateDirector for Domestic and Anti-Poverty Operations will make the final selection.ACTION reserves the right to ask for evidence of any claims of past performanceor future capability. <ITAG tagnum="84">G. Application Submission and Deadline </ITAG>One signed original and two copies of all completed applications must besubmitted to ACTION's Program Demonstration and Development Division nolater than 5:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on Monday, May 29, 1989. Onlythose applications that are received at ACTION Headquarters by 5:00 p.m.Eastern Standard Time on this date will be eligible. All grant applications must consist of: a. Application for Federal Assistance (ACTION Form A-1036) with narrativebudget justification and a narrative of project goals and objectives, andassurances. b. CPA certification of accounting capability. c. Articles of Incorporation. d. Proof of non-profit status or an application for non-profit status,which should be made through documentation.<ITAG tagnum="10">Items b, c and d above are not required for public agencies of stateand local government.e. Current resume of the candidate for the position of project director,if available, or the current resume of the director of the applicant agencyor project. f. Organization chart of the applicant organization showing how the projectis related to the organization and how proposed local sponsoring organizationswill relate to the project. g. List of the current board of directors showing their names, addressesand organizational and community affiliations. h. A signed copy (with an original signature) of the ``Certification RegardingDrug-Free Workplace Requirements,'' ACTION Form A-1452 (2/89). To receive an application kit, please contact ACTION's Program Demonstrationand Development Division. The application kit can be obtained by writingto: ACTION, Program Demonstration and Development, Room M-513, 806 ConnecticutAve. NW., Washington, DC 20525, or by telephoning (202) 634-9757.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 23rd day of March 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Donna M. Alvarado, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7299 Filed 3-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6050-28-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>