<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89414-0130 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-14-89.f2.A1129</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Social Security Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Statement of Organization, Functions and Delegation of Authority </ITAG>Part S of the Statement of Organization, Functions and Delegations of authorityfor the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) covers the SocialSecurity Administration (SSA). Notice is given that Chapter S2 is amendedto add division and staff level subcomponents and functions within theOffice of the Deputy Commissioner, Operations (DCO). The new material andchanges are as follows: Section S2EA.10 <T3>The Office of Central Records Operations</T3>_(Organization): Subsection D. The Division of Earnings, Eligibility and Accountability(S2EAL). Change Title to: The Division of Earnings and Adjustments (S2EAL). Section S2EA.20 <T3>The Office of Central Records Operations</T3>_(Functions): Subsection D. The Division of Earnings, Eligibility and Accountability(S2EAL). Change Title to: The Division of Earnings and Adjustments (S2EAL). Add: 4. Ensures that Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payment records areinterfaced with various external payment programs such as the VeteransAdministration, the Railroad Retirement Board (RRB), the Office of PersonnelManagement and the Department of Defense. Section S2EC.10 <T3>The Office of Disability and International Operations</T3>_(Organization):Subsection D. The Office of Disability Operations (S2ECA). Add: 1. The Process Divisions (S2ECAG,H,J,K,L). 2. The Division of Appealed Claims (S2ECAQ). Subsection E. The Office of International Operations (S2ECB1). Add: 1. The International Process Division (S2ECBl). 2. The Division of Reconsideration and Disability Determinations (S2ECB2).3. The International Operations and Totalization Staff (S2ECB3).Subsection F. The Office of Support Services (S2ECC). Add: 1. The Division of Management Support (S2ECCl). 2. The Division of Operations Support (S2ECC2). 3. The Systems Planning Staff (S2ECC3). Section S2EC.20 <T3>The Office of Disability and International Operations</T3>_(Functions):Subsection D. The Office of Disability Operations (S2ECA). Add: 1. The Process Divisions (S2ECAG,H,J,K,L). a. Make initial determinations of disability and reconsider disabilitydeterminations of claims excluded from State agency jurisdiction. Makedeterminations of continuing disability entitlement. b. Make determinations of entitlement or eligibility to primary or auxiliarybenefits, and authorize allowance or disallowance of disability claimsnot authorized by district offices and reconsider those cases appealedfor  issues other than the existence of disability. Make representative-payeedeterminations and process representative-payee accountability reports.c. Adjust, suspend and terminate benefits, and prepare benefit paymentdata for introduction into the computer system; process all actions tomaintain beneficiary payment rolls; recover or waive recovery of amountsincorrectly paid to beneficiaries, prepare and release award certificates,denial letters and other claims-related notices and maintain the Officeof Disability Operations' (ODO) files of claims folders. d. Answer inquiries regarding individual cases and ensure expeditious processingof actions where claimant hardship is indicated. e. Contact outside Federal/State components such as the Department of Labor(DOL), RRB, Workmen's Compensation Commissions  (WCC) and other SSA components,as necessary, to resolve disability claims actions. 2. The Division of Appealed Claims (S2ECAQ). a. Processes, through payment or denial, those cases where the issue ofdisability has been decided in the administrative hearing process. Makesdeterminations of entitlement or eligibility of claimants to primary orauxiliary benefits, and authorizes allowance or disallowance based on nondisabilityentitlement factors in those cases. Completes full adjudication and paymentimplementation, including payment of attorney fees and determinations ofoffsetting amounts of disability insurance benefits due to previous entitlementto SSI. Makes representative-payee determinations. b. Implements payment to beneficiaries and establishes benefit paymentrecords in the computer system. Takes actions needed to convert benefitand claims  data into acceptable computer format. Recovers or waives recoveryof amounts incorrectly paid to beneficiaries. c. Prepares and releases award certificates, denial letters and other claims-relatednotices, and controls large volumes of claims folders during the adjudicativeprocess. d. Answers inquiries about individual cases and ensures expeditious processingof actions where claimant hardship is indicated. e. Contacts outside Federal/State components, such as DOL, WCC and otherSSA components, particularly the Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA),as necessary, to implement disability claims actions. Subsection E. The Office of International Operations (S2ECB). Add: 1. The International Process Division (S2ECBl). a. Develops and adjudicates Retirement, Survivors and Disability Health Insurance (RSDHI) claims, and makes decisions on continuing eligibilityfor persons living in foreign countries. This includes cases filed underthe totalization agreements. b. Determines health insurance eligibility and proper payees for thesebeneficiaries; makes decisions regarding recovery of overpayments; processesnonreceipt allegations and congressional, critical, hardship and controlledcorrespondence and cases; performs material associations and record maintenanceactivities; types notices and other correspondence. c. Processes requests for Social Security numbers from individuals residingin foreign countries. d. Provides translation services to SSA, including translation of programmaterial for foreign visitors, materials relating to foreign pension systems,documents and other materials required to process foreign claims and somedomestic claims. 2. The Division of Reconsideration and Disability Determinations (S2ECB2).a. Reconsiders determinations on claims for benefits filed by persons livingin foreign countries; prepares claims material for appealed cases. Reconsiderscertain adverse claims involving benefits by persons in foreign countries;approves fees for attorneys and other representatives of claimants outsidethe United States. b. Makes findings of administrative finality. Determines proper applicationof regulations governing the disclosure of confidential records. c. Performs functions similar to domestic State agencies related to thedetermination of entitlement to, and processing of, foreign disabilityclaims. Includes the development and review of medical evidence and otherfactors required for the adjudication of initial claims. d. Processes continuing disability reviews for foreign beneficiaries. 3. The International Operations and Totalization Staff (S2ECB3). a. Provides liaison with the Department of State and other Government agenciesto ensure SSA operations, systems and administrative policies and proceduresare correctly carried out as they affect the Social Security program overseas.b. Evaluates and provides direction and guidance to the Social Securityrepresentatives stationed overseas, and ensures that necessary administrativesupport is provided to carry out SSA's mission abroad. c. Furnishes information on Social Security foreign program matters andconcerns to other SSA components, officials in HHS, other Government agencies,members of Congress and the public. Designs and conducts validation andother special studies to foster integrity in the Social Security programoverseas. d. Oversees the operational implementation of totalization agreements.Participates in negotiations with foreign government representatives andnegotiates operational accords and procedures with foreign Social Securityagencies. e. Prepares forms and procedures for the Office of Disability and InternationalOperations (ODIO) and foreign service post employees, and participateswith the Office of International Policy (OIP) in the development of districtoffice instructions, applications, notices, public information materialsand systems requirements for totalization processing, and continually evaluatesthe processing of cases under existing agreements. Subsection F. The Office of Support Services (S2ECC).Add: 1. The Division of Management Support (S2ECC1). a. Provides administrative support services to the director, ODIO; theDirector, Disability Operations and the Director, International Operationsin such areas as:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Budget development and monitoring. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Personnel management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Labor relations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Management information. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Facilities/materiel management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Organization planning.</ITAG>b. Develops and conducts ODIO-wide operational training and employee developmentactivities. Analyzes and evaluates training needs and effectiveness. Ensuresthat required agency-level, other Government agency and private vendortraining is provided. c. Performs independent reviews to detect and prevent employee and beneficiaryfraud. Plans, develops and implements ODIO's security program and conductssecurity reviews. Reviews beneficiary fraud cases and determines whethercases will be referred for prosecution. Determines proper application ofregulations governing the disclosure of confidential records. 2. The Division of Operations Support (S2ECC2). a. Provides automated data processing (ADP) hardware and software supportfor ODIO. Conducts analyses relating to user software application development,contract maintenance and equipment use. b. Serves as SSA liaison with the Department of Treasury to ensure timelypayments. c. Integrates and controls benefit payment processing operations. d. Delivers, distributes and dispatches mail for ODIO. e. Oversees the ODIO folder and record control operations. Identifies andresolves folder and record control problems and coordinates case locationactivities. 3. The Systems Planning Staff (S2ECC3). a. Directs the development of long-range systems planning for ODIO andevaluates ongoing systems requirements. b. Analyzes office automation activities and systems operations, and recommendsenhancements to improve capabilities. Evaluates systems changes prior toimplementation and conducts post-implementation analysis. c. Oversees procurement of ADP hardware and software for ODIO. d. Provides technical advice and information to managers and employeesin ODIO on systems development and changes that affect operations. Section S2EB.10 <T3>The Office of Systems Operations_</T3>(Organization): Subsection D. The Office of Computer Processing Operations (S2EBA). Add: 1. The Division of Production Systems Operations (S2EBAl). 2. The Division of Computer Operations Production Control (S2EBA2). 3. The Division of Computer Operations Systems Software (S2EBA3). 4. The Division of Telecommunications Systems Operations (S2EBA4). 5. The Division of Integration and Environmental Testing (S2EBA5). Subsection E. The Office of Systems Support and Planning (S2EBB). Add: 1. The Division of Operational Capacity Performance Management (S2EBBl).2. The Division of Standards and Control (S2EBB2). 3. The Division of Operational Resource Management (S2EBB3). Section S2EB.20 <T3>The Office of Systems Operations_</T3>(Functions) Subsection D. The Office of Computer Processing Operations (S2EBA). Add: 1. The Division of Production Systems Operations (S2EBAl).a. Operates the centralized Office of Systems Operations (OSO) computerfacility, which includes computer systems hardware and associated peripheralequipment. b. Directs the continuous operations of SSA's host telecommunications computersin support of SSA-designed networks. c. Schedules day-to-day workflow for the ADP facility within plans andpriorities established by the Office of Central Processing Operations'(OCPO) Division of Computer Operations Production Control. d. Controls the flow of materials into ADP production jobs. Reviews productionresults for accuracy and completeness. e. Analyzes equipment problems, isolates malfunctions and oversees correctionactions by SSA or vendor personnel. f. Schedules and assures preventive maintenance of all equipment underthe operational control of OCPO. g. Develops and maintains a centralized integrated control center for usein monitoring the operating systems utilization, network control facilitiesand environmental status. 2. The Division of Computer Operations Production Control (S2EBA2). a. Manages the production workload of OSO and administers effective resourceutilization. b. Designs, develops, implements and operates production control ADP systemswhich supervise library controls, automates the scheduling and allocatesthe production workload. c. Manages and directs the automated magnetic media processes, and directsthe activity of the magnetic tape library funtion. d. Participates in the design reviews of proposed application systems toassure operational support and control aspects are being considered. Analyzesapplications systems to assure compliance with systems standards. Approvesapplications systems for production status and incorporates them into theproduction library. e. Assembles input material for ADP production jobs and delivers them tothe Division of Production Systems Operations. f. Expedites processing of critical jobs, operations and corrections. g. Provides liaison with the users on status of production jobs and/orassociated problems as required. h. Maintains the integrity, manages and performs required recovery of alloperational data, data media, tape and direct access for systems. i. Maintains and enhances a transaction system for the control of a high-volumetape library. j. Analyzes performance of the ADP production processes, and recommendsand implements improvements. Destroys sensitive material in compliancewith provisions of the Privacy Act and SSA procedures. 3. The Division of Computer Operations Systems Software (S2EBA3). a. Directs the analysis, design, development, implementation and maintenanceof computer operating systems and utility software in support of programmaticand management information workloads for SSA's central data processingcenter and field components. b. Directs the design, development, testing and continuing support of specializeddata communications control software used to support SSA's data communicationssystems. c. Directs the design, development, implementation and maintenance of informationsystems software in support of the central data processing center's problem,change and configuration management systems.d. Supports the utility software and user activities in the areas of computergraphics, small computers and nonimpact printers. e. Supports the user liaison and systems development activities of otherOSO components in the resolution of technical and operational problems.4. The Division of Telecommunications System Operations (S2EBA4). a. Directs the operations of SSA's telecommunications network facilitiesfor the transmission of program and management data over SSA-establishednetworks. b. Manages traffic flow between the telecommunications complex and otherSSA computers. Monitors telecommunications operations, analyzes equipmentproblems and effects proper maintenance and repair. c. Directs the implementation of new or revised operating policies andprocedures. Recommends new procedures  and appraises telecommunicationsoperating instructions, centrally and in the field. d. Establishes and enforces standards for controlling workflow and forassuring the integrity of data processed through the various data communicationsoperations. e. Acts as liaison with common carriers and network equipment vendors tomaintain operational effectiveness of equipment. f. Directs the operational performance evaluation of SSA's data communicationssystems. g. Provides technical expertise and assistance on data communications procurementsand other SSA systems modernization projects. h. Directs the design, development and implementation of software to gatherand report statistical information on the functioning of telecommunicationsnetworks. Distributes the information to other SSA components to reporton  network performance and equipment utilization. i. Designs and implements security software for SSA's telecommunicationsnetwork, and ensures that related procedures are followed by technicalpersonnel. j. Manages the installation, removal and relocation of local and remotetelecommunications facilities, assuring compliance with governing Federalregulations. k. Maintains an integrated control center, centrally and at the remotenetwork modes, to provide a point of contact of field offices reportingequipment or operational problems. 1. Conducts ongoing analyses of network configurations and workloads, andinitiates changes to the network topology to optimize cost/performance.m. Develops standards and procedures for applications developers in interfacingto SSA's data communications network. Evaluates requested or proposed applications for impact on network resources. n. Maintains and controls an inventory of all remote data communicationsequipment which assesses SSA's telecommunications networks, and the historyand status of equipment outages for all SSA-owned or leased data communicationsequipment. o. Assigns, maintains and provides to data communications systems users,telecommunications site routing codes and terminal identifiers consistentwith Governmentwide network addressing conventions. p. Conducts investigations and analysis of system problems affecting localand remote users of the data communications networks, and provides liaisonwith regional staffs in identifying and correcting chronic problems andtrends. 5. The Division of Integration and Environmental Testing (S2EBA5). a. Directs and controls all activities with the release of new or enhancedversions of host programmatic and telecommunications-related software.Enforces software acceptance and certifications standards. Directs theinitial staging of program modules to be tested, including generation ofexecutable code. b. Develops and maintains extensive test data bases for use in the acceptance,integration and environmental testing processes. Develops and incorporatesthe use of software simulators and emulators in software acceptance testing.c. Directs the integration testing of new or enhanced communications hostsoftware, remote network/terminal and microprocessor software and networkcommunications software. Participates in the movement and/or migrationof software systems and associated data files between complexes and processingcomponents. d. Directs environmental testing to ensure that new or enhanced softwareis compatible with changing hardware configurations. Directs the integrationof new or enhanced SSA programmatic software. Administers the generationof finalized testing results for evaluation. Directs software performanceevaluations, parallel testing, timing studies, inter/intrasystem relationshipand testing trend analysis. e. Responsible for administering ADP hardware integration and acceptancetesting. f. Provides the checks and balances on SSA's ADP systems and equipmentprocurements for complying with contractual performance requirements throughoutthe life cycle of the procurement. Subsection E. The Office of Systems Support and Planning (S2EBB).Add: 1. The Division of Operational Capacity Performance Management (S2EBB1).a. Evaluates computer performance and monitors resource utilization toensure that the ADP and telecommunications systems are utilized effectivelyand efficiently. Analyzes systems capacity as it relates to utilizationand service objectives, and prepares recommendations for upper management.As directed, performs similar functions for other SSA components includingthe program service centers. b. Ensures that sufficient ADP capacity is available to process presentand future workloads, coordinating decisions on target systems for new/modifiedworkloads and system configuration changes. c. Monitors the OSO service delivery to ensure that systems performanceobjectives, as defined in the User  Service Agreements, are being met.Provides recommendations to enhance delivered service as necessary, andensure that data bases are efficiently implemented. d. Provides advice and services to other OSO components in the use of computerperformance evaluation tools and the interpretation of reports/data resultingfrom evaluation and utilization studies. e. Uses operations research tools (e.g., simulation and mathematical modelsand statistical analyses) to investigate operational efficiency problemsand develop relationships between transaction volumes, resource utilizationand resulting service delivery. f. Schedules, arranges, conducts and reports on structured systems' effectivenessreviews to compare OSO service commitments with delivered levels of performance,and contributes  towards planning and enhancement of existing systems.g. Coordinates, assists in the development/maintenance and monitors allSystems service level agreements. Represents OSO in the User Service Agreementnegotiations. h. Performs a wide range of user coordination and problem resolution functions.Gathers and disseminates timely information, related to operational problems,errors and changes that affect the users. 2. The Division of Standards and Control (S2EBB2). a. Develops, publicizes and implements standards and mandatory systemsprocedures within OSO. Develops controls and enforcement mechanisms toensure adherence to operational standards. Recommends development of operationalstandards to other OSO components and, based on their responses, reviews,modifies and  approves them. Administers the Federal and HHS systems standardsprograms within OSO. b. Directs the planning, implementation and evaluation of the physicalsystems security program in OSO under HHS, SSA and OSI privacy and securitypolicies. c. Services as OSO liaison with other Systems components in matters ofprivacy and security. d. Provides for the physical security of all OSO resources in the centralizedOSO computer facility, and manages the facility within boundaries establishedby DCM. e. Provides planning, evaluation and oversight on disaster recovery capabilitiesin order to maintain continuity of data center operations. f. Develops, implements and evaluates systems and procedures for the securityand protection of data. g. Formulates an OSO-wide Systems Plan and assigns responsibility amongmajor  OSO components for various parts of the Plan. Work with OSO componentsto evaluate their proposed systems objectives in terms of technical feasibility,availability of OSO resources and systems costs. Identifies the major OSOactivities and resources needed to support these objectives. h. Directs and coordinates the OSO activities associated with operationalplanning and ADP Systems Planning. i. Coordinates and directs the development of the total OSO technical workpower,equipment and other special costs for the SSA budget process and justifiesthese on the basis of the Operational Systems Plan. Allocates resourcesand monitors projects for all OSO activities, directs the preparation ofdetailed plans on the project or operational activity level and authorizesthe use of resources by OSO components in support of these plans. j. Monitors progress and use of workpower and equipment resources by OSOcomponents against their approved plans. k. Assists OSO components in the use of standard methods for project management.3. The Division of Operational Resource Management (S2EBB3). a. Directs OSO's participation in the Information Technology Systems (ITS)procurement process. b. Performs technical and cost reviews of all OSO/ITS procurements. c. Provides support for ITS Technical Evaluation Committees. d. Supports contract administration for all OSO/ITS contracts. e. Provides technical support to Project Officers in the development, modificationand administration of ITS contracts. f. Directs the renewal process for existing lease and maintenance contractsfor ITS and telecommunications equipment and services. g. Manages the fiscal administration of all implemented ITS contracts,collecting, analyzing and reporting performance data to support requiredfiscal and other contractual proceedings. h. Manages a centralized inventory of all SSA ITS and telecommunicationsequipment, and manages the ITS excess equipment process. i. Provides for the centralized certification and authorization for thelease and maintenance of SSA's ITS and telecommunications equipment. j. Provides necessary staff support to the users within OSO for the developmentof procurement documents and documentation. k. Develops and maintains the OSO macroprocurement plan which relates toplanned major acquisitions of ITS equipment, software, system design andsystem support services. 1. Serves as Project Officer for ITS recompetition/ongoing maintenancecontracts. Section S2GB.10 <T3>The Office of Systems Requirements</T3>_ (Organization): Subsection D. The Office of Claims and Payment Requirements (S2GBl). Add: 1. The Division of Claims and Control (S2GBll). 2. The Division of Payment Processes (S2GB12). 3. The Division of RSDI Postentitlement Systems (S2GB13). 4. The Division of Supplemental Security Income Systems (S2GB14). Subsection E. The Office of Pre-Claims Requirements (S2GB2). Add:  1. The Division of Enumeration and Employer Identification (S2GB21). 2. The Division of Earnings Reporting and Maintenance (S2GB22). 3. The Division of Records Use and State Reporting (S2GB23). 4. The Division of User Support and Interfaces (S2GB24). Subsection G. The Office of Planning, Control and Validation (S2GB4). Add: 1. The Division of Planning and Support (S2GB41). 2. The Division of Requirements Support, Standards and Security (S2GB42).3. The Division of Validation (S2GB43). Section S2GB.20 <T3>The Office of Systems Requirements</T3>_ (Functions):  Subsection D. The Office of Claims and Payment Requirements (S2GBl). Add: 1. The Division of Claims and Control (S2GBll). a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including security and fraud detection for the initial claims process;control of claims folders and claims-related material; the transactioncontrol operation; earnings data requests; RSDI disallowances; appealsprocesses and management data reports.b. Participates with the Office of Planning, Control and Validation (OPCV)in the planning and conduct of unit validation tests of new systems andmodifications to existing systems against user-defined requirements andperformance criteria, and certifies that the changes are in conformancewith functional specifications. c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for the claims and control process.d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of claims and control to the Officeof Systems Design and Development (OSDD) for development of ADP specificationsand systems design. e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations and policy changes affectingthe claims and control process. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto existing claims and control processes with OSDD and OSO representatives.g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices toensure the efficiency and effectiveness of program information needs andoverall systems support. 2. The Division of Payment Processes (S2GB12). a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including security and fraud detection, for the Master Beneficiary Record(MBR) update operations; titles II and XVI check-related areas, the taxationprocess, overpayment, underpayment, attorney fees, misuse, fraud and civilsuit actions and benefit-related accounting operations. b. Participates, with OPCV, in the planning and conduct of unit validationtests of modifications to existing systems against user-defined requirementsand performance criteria, and certifies that the changes are in conformancewith functional specifications. c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for the payment process. d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of titles II and XVI payment processesto OSDD for the development of ADP specifications and systems design. e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations and policy changes affectingthe payment process. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto existing payment processes with OSDD and OSO representatives. g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices andFederal and State agencies to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness ofprogram information needs and overall systems support. 3. The Division of RSDI Postentitlement Systems (S2GB13). a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including security and fraud detection, for ADP of RSDI postentitlementreports and events (work notices, student reports, etc.) that involve manual/automatedsuspensions, terminations or reinstatements; related beneficiary notices;address and/or representative-payee changes and Medicare enrollment, withdrawaland termination actions and Black Lung processes. b. Participates, with OPCV, in the planning and conduct of unit validationtests of modifications to existing systems against user-defined requirementsand performance criteria, and certifies that the changes are in conformancewith functional specifications. c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for the RSDI Postentitlement process.d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of RSDI Postentitlement to OSDDfor the development of ADP specifications and systems design.e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations and policy changes affectingthe RSDI Postentitlement process. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto the existing RSDI Postentitlement process with OSDD and OSO representatives.g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices andFederal and State agencies to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness ofprogram information needs and overall systems support. 4. The Division of Supplemental Security Income Systems (S2GB14). a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including security and fraud detection for title XVI (SSI) processes andredetermination operations. b. Participates, with OPCV, in the planning and conduct of unit validationtests of modifications to existing systems against user-defined requirementsand performance criteria, and certifies that the changes are in conformancewith functional specifications. c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for the SSI process. d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of SSI Initial Claims and PosteligibilityOperations to OSDD for the development of ADP specifications and systemsdesign. e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations and policy changes affectingthe SSI process. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto the existing SSI process with OSDD and OSO representatives. g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices andFederal and State agencies to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness ofprogram information needs and overall systems support. Subsection E. The Office of Pre-Claims Requirements (S2GB2). Add: 1. The Division of Enumeration and Employer Identification (S2GB21).a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including those relating to security and fraud detection for the establishment,correction and maintenance of Social Security numbers, for the issuancesof new or duplicate cards, for the maintenance and use of employer informationincluding employer identification numbers, for the reconciliation of wagereports with the Internal Revenue Service, and for control and trackingof wage report data. b. Participates, with OPCV, in the planning and conduct of unit validationtests of modifications to existing systems against user-defined requirementsand performance criteria, and certifies that the changes are in conformancewith functional specifications. c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for the enumeration and the employeridentification and control process. d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of enumeration and employer identificationand control to OSDD for the development of ADP specifications and systemsdesign. e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations memoranda of understandingand policy changes affecting the enumeration process and the employer identificationand control process. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto existing enumeration and employer identification and control processeswith OSDD and OSO representatives. g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices andFederal and State agencies to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness ofprogram information needs and overall systems support. 2. The Division of Earnings Reporting and Maintenance (S2GB22). a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including those relating to security and fraud detection, for reportingprivate and public sector earnings data; for establishment, correctionand maintenance of earnings records and for reconciling disagreements andresolving discrepancies. b. Participates, with OPCV, in the planning and conduct of unit validationtests of modifications to existing systems against user-defined requirementsand performance criteria, and certifies that the changes are in conformancewith functional specifications. c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for the earnings reporting and maintenanceprocess.d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of earnings reporting to OSDD forthe development of ADP specifications and system design. e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations and policy changes affectingthe earnings reporting process. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto the existing earnings reporting and maintenance process with OSDD andOSO representatives. g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices andFederal and State agencies to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness ofprogram information needs and overall systems support. 3. The Division of Records Use and State Reporting (S2GB23). a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including those relating to security and fraud detection for use, accessand exchange of earnings, Social Security number, and employer data; forproviding earnings data to support titles II and XVI programmatic processes;for issuing earnings and benefit estimate statements; for reconciling disagreementsand resolving discrepancies related to earnings data, for the establishmentand maintenance of a vested pension rights information system and for providingresidual support for the collection and accounting of State and local contributionson wages paid prior to tax year 1987. b. Participates, with OPCV, in the planning and conduct of unit validationtests of new systems or modifications to existing systems against user-definedrequirements and performance criteria, and certifies that the changes arein conformance with functional specifications. c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for earnings data use and State andlocal contribution and liability, and data accessing processes. d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of earnings data use and Stateand local contributions and liability, and data accessing processes toOSDD for the development of ADP specifications and systems design. e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations and policy changes affectinguse and maintenance of earnings data and State and local contributionsand liability, and data accessing processes. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto earnings data uses, existing State and local contributions and liability,and data accessing processes with OSDD and OSO representatives. g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices andFederal and State agencies to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness ofprogram information needs and overall system support. 4. The Division of User Support and Interfaces (S2GB24). a. Plans, develops, evaluates and implements organizational informationrequirements, functional specifications, procedures, instructions and standards,including security and fraud detection for data exchanges between SSA systemsand other Federal and State agencies; data bases; data base access forinformation, teleprocessing and for statistical and administrative information.b. Participates, with OPCV, in the planning and conduct of unit validationtests of modifications to existing systems against user-defined requirementsand performance criteria, and certifies that the changes are in conformancewith functional specifications.c. Develops and maintains a comprehensive, updated and integrated set ofsystem requirements specifications for the interface and data base accessprocesses and the statistical and administrative information process. d. Performs requirements analyses and definition, conveying SSA-approveduser needs and requirements in the area of data base accesses and interfacesto OSDD for the development of ADP specifications and systems design. e. Evaluates legislative proposals, regulations and policy changes affectingthe interface and administrative and statistical systems. f. Represents users in resolving system discrepancies and errors relatingto the existing interface and administrative and statistical processeswith OSDD and OSO representatives. g. Coordinates user requirements with SSA central and field offices andFederal and State agencies to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness ofprogram information needs and overall systems support. Subsection G. The Office of Planning, Control and Validation (S2GB4). Add: 1. The Division of Planning and Support (S2GB4A). a. Directs development, operation and maintenance of Management SupportSystems which provide automated support to the Office of Systems Requirements(OSR) planning, monitoring, project and resource management functions.Analyzes management requirements and needs of other OSR components, anddevelops appropriate systems support capability. Acquires necessary ADPcapability to meet user needs through equipment acquisition or timesharingagreements. Works with the Office of Strategic Planning and Integration(OSPI) and the Office of Information Management (OIM) contractors and otherinvolved components to develop, maintain and implement systems' managementsupport and control processes to integrate OSR's management support systemsand processes systems-wide. b. Provides standards, procedures, systems support and technical assistanceto OSR project managers to facilitate preparation of work plans. Directsreview of project work plans to ensure completeness, comparability withstandards and managerial directives, and requirements and conformity tothe ADP Plan, Configuration Control Board (CCB) decisions and other managementdecisions. Coordinates systems-wide approval of new and modified plans,and ensures that differences and conflicts among components are resolved.Provides for monitoring progress of work projects against work plans andreporting status to systems management. c. Works with systems management to develop, maintain and implement configurationcontrol and systems change control processes. Directs review and controlof requests for modification of SSA systems. Ensures that all requestsare in accordance with ADP Plan and CCB decisions and correspond to approvedproject work plans. Monitors change requests through the systems life cycle,and ensures that all necessary concurrences and approvals are obtainedand that implementation is scheduled for appropriate systems versions.d. Develops, maintains and manages the office automation and networkingfunctions for OSR. e. Plans and analyzes information and resource requirements to determinethe requirements for new or improved systems processes to support long-termagency needs, and develops a final list of recommended requirements fornew or improved systems, setting priorities among the requirements. f. Develops, maintains and publishes the overall approved SSA plan forfulfilling short-term and long-range information system requirements, includingdetermining, classifying and ranking systems needs of all SSA components,and recommends final priorities for approval; documents all critical issueshaving major Agency-wide impact and forwards them to the Associate Commissionerfor Systems Requirements for resolution. g. Coordinates approved system requirements changes for pre-claims andclaims areas with system modernization plans maintained by OSDD.2. The Division of Requirements Support, Standards and Security (S2GB4B).a. Conducts studies to define Agency processes, information needs, dataflow and interrelationships among organizational and systems components,data bases and processes. b. Develops appropriate standards and procedures for functional requirementsdefinition and analysis (RDandamp;A) stage activities; e.g., functional requirementsdocumentation; evaluates the effectiveness of the standards and reviewsOSR products for quality to ensure that the standards are being maintained.Serves as focal point for coordinating the development and maintenanceof the Project Management Handbook, as well as maintenance of SoftwareEngineering Technology (SET) for all OSR's standards and procedures. c. Develops controls, auditability and security standards for the organizationalinformation requirements for all SSA systems, and ensures the implementationof the standards within all areas of OSR's functional responsibilities.Also, develops methods to improve control and security features based onestablished standards and cost/benefit considerations. d. Reviews functional requirements documents, requests for system modifications,procedural issuance and related material developed by OSR components todetermine adherence to SSA, HHS and the Office of Management and Budgetstandards relating to the security and integrity of SSA data processingand information systems. e. Leads and/or coordinates reviews of programmatic processes and systemsto identify weaknesses in control, auditability and security features,makes recommendations for improvement, and coordinates activities withother SSA components to ensure that approved recommendations are implemented.f. Provides the capability for, and performs dynamic testing and statictesting of, all programmatic systems in support of SSA and oversight Agencyrequirements, as well as in support of OSR control and audit process reviews.g. Develops requirements for, and authorizes systems software changes to,various Control and Audit Test Facility software modules and programmaticmodules used in the performance of static and dynamic testing, and validatesthose changes. Authorizes changes to the SSA Data Acquisition and ResponseSystem's security system. h. Coordinates with users and all systems components on Privacy Act andFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) issues to ensure that functional requirementsand procedures are in conformance with that legislation.i. Supports the use and integration of automated tools; e.g., Computer-AidedSoftware Engineering (CASE) tools, Problem Statement Language/Problem StatementAnalyzer (PSL/PSA), etc., in support of OSR's development and maintenanceof functional requirements, documents and data models for SSA's programmaticsystems. j. Provides assistance to the configuration management process by developingstrategies and guidelines for baselining automated FR data bases. k. Develops and maintains a framework for interrelating data models, FRsand software design. Develops requirements for standardizing data collectionacross application areas. 3. The Division of Validation (S2GB4C). a. Develops, evaluates and implements automated techniques and methodologiesfor the validation phase of system development in accordance with establishedstandards and in support of modified operational systems and system modernizationefforts. b. Identifies and documents requirements for automated validation toolsand validation data bases. c. Develops requirements for test file and historical data bases, testtools and model test plans for use by OSR components in conducting unitvalidation tests. d. Performs integration/validation tests and analyzes the results to ensurethat program, records and enumeration, administration and statistical processesand major OSR developmental projects accurately and effectively meet userrequirements, and orders modifications where appropriate. e. Coordinates with other system components and users in evaluating theanalysis of the validation. f. Performs unit, integration and pilot validation tests, including operationalprocedures, to ensure that the functional requirements have been met andthat the systems are free of operating faults. g. Certifies resulting systems for operational acceptance. h. Constructs periodic software version releases for modified operationalsystems and software modernization projects using systems change controlprocedures. Section S2GA.10 <T3>The Office of Systems Design and Development</T3>_(Organization): Subsection E. The Office of Software Improvement and Engineering (S2GA2).Add: 1. The Logical Application Group I_Data Gathering and Architectural Software(S2GA21). 2. The Logical Application Group II Programmatic Processing Software (S2GA22).3. The Logical Application Group III Specialized Support Software (S2GA23).4. The Division of Data Administration (S2GA24).Subsection F. The Office of Programmatic Systems (S2GA3). Add: 1. The Division of Earnings Systems (S2GA31). 2. The Division of RSDI Data Systems (S2GA32). 3. The Division of RSDI Transaction Systems (S2GA33). 4. The Division of Supplemental Security Income Systems (S2GA34). Section S2GA.20 <T3>The Office of Systems Design and Development</T3>_(Functions): Subsection E. The Office of Software Improvement and Engineering (S2GA2).Add: 1. The Logical Application Group I_Data Gathering and Architectural Software(S2GA2A) designs, develops, coordinates and implements new or redesignedsoftware to meet SSA's automated data processing needs in the broad areaof data gathering for programmatic processes. Projects would include datagathering for areas such as initial claims, postentitlement, debt management,earnings and enumeration data. Such specific systems needs are definedthrough functional specifications provided by OSR. Systems design projectsare national in scope, affect all SSA components and are integral to thesatisfactory completion of the Agency Strategic Plan (ASP). 2. The Logical Application Group II_Programmatic Processing Software (S2GA2B)designs, develops, coordinates and implements new or redesigned softwareto meet SSA's automated data processing needs in the broad area of programmaticprocesses. Projects would include such areas as earnings eligibility/entitlement,pay/computations and debt management. Specific systems needs are definedthrough functional specifications provided by OSR. Systems design projectsare national in scope, affect all SSA components and are integral to thesatisfactory completion of ASP. 3. The Logical Application Group III_Specialized Support Software (S2GA2C)designs, develops, coordinates and implements new or redesigned softwareto meet SSA's ADP needs in the broad area of specialized support. Projectswould include such areas as notice utilities, workload management inquiries,data exchange and accounting. Specific systems needs are defined throughfunctional specifications provided by OSR. Systems design projects arenational in scope, affect all SSA components and are integral to the satisfactorycompletion of ASP. 4. The Division of Data Administration (S2GA2D). a. Plans, designs, develops and implements the Data Base Integration Program.b. Provides for the establishment, issuance and enforcement of standardsfor physical data definition, record and file design and for the selectionand implementation of data storage architectures. c. Establishes systems and procedures for protecting and monitoring thesecurity data. This includes data access controls, data base backup andrecovery and data access audit trails.d. Selects, establishes, modifies and maintains data base structures, accessmethods and associated software, as required by changes in objectives,data storage technologies and performance requirements. e. Designs and develops new or improved applications support software topromote data independence and to facilitate interaction between data basesand application software. f. Establishes and maintains the Data Resource Management System (DRMS)which provides automated support for the analysis, design, development,maintenance and control of SSA software. g. Designs, evaluates, conducts analyses, and provides support servicesrelated to data administration and data base management improvement projects.Prepares draft requirement statements and statements of work for use inthe acquisition of software packages/tools and software contractor supportservices related to the project areas. Subsection F. The Office of Programmatic Systems (S2GA3). Add: 1. The Division of Earnings Systems (S2GA3A) performs the systems analysis,design, programming and testing necessary to develop and maintain current,new and redesigned systems in response to approved user systems requirementsfor preentitlement earnings and enumeration applications. These systemsestablish, correct and maintain Social Security number records, updateand maintain records of new and duplicate Social Security cards, establishand maintain summary earnings records, process earnings and adjustments,investigate incorrectly reported earnings and post to the proper account;provide earnings record information to employers, employees and self-employedindividuals and establish, correct and maintain vested pension rights identificationand notification records.2. The Division of RSDI Data Systems (S2GA3B) performs the systems analysis,design, programming and testing necessary to develop and maintain current,new and redesigned systems in response to approved user systems requirementsand the SET manual for RSDI data base establishment and maintenance applications.These systems edit incoming new records and transactions, control in-processand stored transactions, retrieve and display transaction and MBR-relateddata both in an online and off line environment, exchange data with non-SSAsystems, produce monthly benefit payment information, produce yearly benefitpayment statements, generate personalized earnings benefit statements,and provide statistical and actuarial study data. Conducts liaison withother SSA components and Federal and State agencies to plan the developmentof RSDI systems applications. Provides the Associate Commissioner for SystemsDesign and Development and other SSA offices with a technical assessmentof the effect of legislation, administrative and systems offices with atechnical assessment of the effect of legislation, administrative and systemsmodernization proposals on existing RSDI applications. 3. The Division of RSDI Transaction Systems (S2GA3C) performs the systemsanalysis, design, programming and testing necessary to develop and maintaincurrent, new and redesigned systems in response to approved user systemsrequirements for RSDI transaction processing. These systems calculate insuredstatus, primary insurance amounts, benefit estimates and benefit paymentrates; record and modify entitlement and eligibility factors; identifyoverpayments and control their disposition; provide beneficiary notices;update and maintain a variety of records and materials which record theresults of automated processing; produce or extract management informationdata for management use; and provide data exchange information for otherSSA and non-SSA systems. Translates user requirements, as approved by OSR,into detailed design, development and testing activities and system documentationfor current, new or redesigned systems. 4. The Division of Supplemental Security Income Systems (S2GA3D). a. Provides the systems analysis, design, programming and testing necessaryto develop and maintain current, new and redesigned application systemsto support the SSI program. These systems: edit new records and transactions;maintain and revise the SSI master file to reflect changes; compute bothFederal SSI benefit and State supplementary payments and produce paymentinformation for the Treasury Department; account for disbursement of Federaland State funds; prepare recipient notices of claims decisions and changesin status and payment; identify and control overpayment activity; selectand control cases requiring redetermination; exchange data with Governmentrecord systems to verify recipient income; generate data for State usein determining supplementation amounts and Medicaid eligibility; providerecord query and response capability; control folder location and movement;produce statistical, management and actuarial data as needed and controlexception processing and diary control mechanisms. b. Translates approved user requirements for SSI systems and performs detaileddesign, development, testing and system documentation activities to makechanges to existing systems or produce new or redesigned systems in responseto user requirements. c. As directed, conducts liaison with other SSA components and Federaland State agencies to determine the feasibility and to plan the developmentof SSI claims, transaction and support systems. d. Provides the Associate Commissioner for Systems Design and Developmentand other SSA offices, as appropriate, with a technical assessment of theimpact of legislative, administrative and systems modernization proposalson exiating SSI systems.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John R. Dyer,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Commissioner for Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-8925 Filed 4-13-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4190-11</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>