<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89302-0034 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-02-89.f2.A1033</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 40 / Thursday, March 2, 1989 /Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">30 CFR Parts 773, 778, and 843</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Requirements for Surface Coal Mining and Reclamation Permit Approval;Ownership and Control Information; Reporting of Violations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement(OSMRE) of the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI) is revising its regulationsgoverning the requirements for an application for a permit to conduct surfacecoal mining operations. This rule will require a permit applicant to submitmore detailed information on persons who own or control it, and will revisethe requirements for reporting violations. The rule also will require aregulatory authority to make its decision to approve or disapprove a permitapplication on the basis of up-to-date information concerning the compliancerecord of the applicant and related persons. The revisions are needed toconform the permit application requirements with changes in the permittingprocess and to insure that permits are issued based on current compliancereview information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>April 3, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Andrew F. DeVito, Office of SurfaceMining Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1951Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20240; telephone (202) 343-5241(Commercial or FTS).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="20">I. Background</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">II. Discussion of the Rule</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">III. Discussion of Public Comments</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">IV. Procedural Matters</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>This rule conforms the requirements for an application for a permit toconduct surface coal mining operations with related changes in the permitreview process. On October 3, 1988 (53 FR 38868) OSMRE published a finalrule which amended its regulations dealing with the review and approvalof permit applications. That rule added a definition of the terms ``ownedor controlled'' and ``owns or controls'' as these concepts are used insection 510(c) of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977(the Act or SMCRA), 30 U.S.C. 1201 et seq., and expanded the scope of thecompliance review which a regulatory authority is required to make priorto the approval of a permit application.This rule will require a permit applicant to include in his or her applicationdetailed information on the owners and controllers of related operations,and to update that information immediately prior to the issuance of a permit.The rule also will require a regulatory authority to use the updated informationin making a final decision to approve or disapprove the application.The information reported under this rule will provide an essential partof the data contained in OSMRE's computer-based Applicant/Violator System,which processes multiple sources of applicant and violation informationto match applicants and their owners and controllers to violators of theAct and its implementing regulatory programs. It is important that theinformation submitted pursuant to this rule be as complete and up-to-dateas is reasonably possible to insure a thorough and accurate review of thecompliance record of the permit applicant and related persons prior tomaking a decision on whether to issue a permit.The proposed rule to amend 30 CFR 773.15(e) was published on July 16, 1986(51 FR 25822). The proposed rule to amend 30 CFR 773.17, 778.13 and 778.14was published on May 28, 1987 (52 FR 20032). No request was received fora public hearing and none was held. The two proposals are being adoptedtogether because their information reporting requirements are interrelated.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Discussion of the Rule </ITAG>The rule language in the proposed rule published on May 28, 1987 has beenmodified to clarify the reporting requirements in response to commentsand to break them into logical components. Any substantive changes fromthe proposed rule are noted in the preamble discussions of the varioussections. Section 773.15(e)_Final Compliance Review Under 30 CFR 773.15(b)(1), a regulatory authority may not issue a permitto an applicant if any surface coal mining and reclamation operation ownedor controlled by either the applicant or by any person who owns or controlsthe applicant is currently in violation of the Act or certain other environmentallaws and regulations. Experience has shown that the time that elapses betweenthe submission of an application and the issuance of the permit typicallyis several months at a minimum. Information submitted with the applicationmay become dated by the time of permit issuance, thus making it impossiblefor the regulatory authority to make an accurate compliance review underandSection; 773.15(b)(1). This rule adds to andSection; 773.15 a new paragraph (e) to require thatbefore a permit is issued the regulatory authority reconsider its initialandSection; 773.15(b)(1) compliance review in light of any new informationsubmitted pursuant to andSection;andSection; 778.13(i) and 778.14(d) of thisrule, which are discussed subsequently. If the applicant fails or refusesto respond as required, the regulatory authority will be unable to makethe final compliance review required by andSection; 773.15(e) and a permitwill not be issued. The final compliance review based on this updated informationwill insure that the regulatory authority makes an accurate permittingdecision under andSection; 773.15(b)(1). Authority for this section is containedin sections 101, 102, 201(c)(1), 201(c)(2), 412(a), 501(b), 504, 505, 507(b)(4),510 (a), (b) and (c), 511, 518, 701(16) and 701(19) of the Act. The proposed rule, published on July 16, 1986, would have added paragraphs(e)(1)(i), (e)(1)(ii) and (e)(2) to andSection; 773.15. Proposed paragraphs(e)(1)(i) and (e)(1)(ii) have been adopted in this rule as andSection;andSection;778.13(i) and 778.14(d), respectively, and are discussed later in thispreamble. Proposed andSection; 773.15(e)(2) has been adopted in this ruleas andSection; 773.15(e). Section 773.17(i)_Permit Condition Section 773.17(i) is a new permit condition requiring the submission, correctionor update of certain information after the issuance of a cessation order.It applies to all permits to conduct surface coal mining operations, includingthose issued prior to the adoption of this rule. Section 773.17(i) will require that within thirty days of the issuanceof a cessation order under 30 CFR 843.11, or the State program equivalent,the permittee of the surface coal mining and reclamation operation forwhich the cessation order was issued shall either submit, correct or updateand furnish to the regulatory authority that issued the permit, the informationrequired by andSection; 778.13(c) of this rule concerning the identity ofpersons who own or control the permittee. The information must be currentto the date the cessation order was issued. If there has been no changein the information previously submitted, the permittee must notify theregulatory authority of that fact in writing. The regulatory authoritywill enter any new information into the Applicant/Violator System, whichwill insure that the data in the System is current. A permittee's failure to comply with this permit condition will resultin appropriate enforcement action by the regulatory authority. The obligationto furnish the updated information applies even if the cessation orderis under appeal. This obligation is consistent with 43 CFR 4.1116, whichstates that except where temporary relief is granted pursuant to section525(c) or 526(c) of the Act, cessation orders issued under the Act shallremain in effect during the pendency of review before an administrativelaw judge or the Interior Board of Land Appeals. If temporary relief froma cessation order is granted, the permittee need not comply with the permitcondition as long as the temporary relief is in effect. The proposed rule would have required that this information be updatedand furnished to the regulatory authority on an annual basis. However,once a permit is issued the updated information is needed only if a violationwhich would require that a new permit be denied occurs and remains uncorrected.In response to comments objecting to the burden of information submittal,OSMRE has decided to require the information update at the issuance ofa cessation order, which is such a violation. This will eliminate a superfluousreporting obligation for the majority of permittees who operate in accordancewith their permits. If a notice of violation is issued, timely abatementof the violation will avoid not only the issuance of a failure-to-abatecessation order, but also the obligation to submit updated informationon owners and controllers. In this manner, the commenters' concern overthe amount of information that must be submitted is partially alleviated.The rule will insure that the regulatory authority obtains the names ofthe owners and controllers of the permittee at the time a cessation orderis issued in order to withhold the issuance of new permits to such personsif the underlying violation remains unabated. Section 778.10_Information collection Section 778.10 of the rule concerns the information collection requirementsin 30 CFR Part 778 including approval by the Office of Management and Budget(OMB) to collect the information and the clearance number assigned by OMB.This rule revises andSection; 778.10 by deleting the reference to clearancenumber </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">1029-0037. As stated in andSection; 778.10, the clearance number assignedby OMB to the information collection requirements in Part 778 is 1029-0034.Section 778.13_Identification of Interests As stated in the May 28, 1987 proposed rule, the information reportingrequirements in this final rule have been conformed as necessary to therecently promulgated final definition of ``owned or controlled'' and ``ownsor controls'' at 30 CFR 773.5. Section 778.13(b) of the rule will require each applicant for a permitto conduct surface coal mining operations to include in his or her applicationthe name, address, telephone number, and, as applicable, the employer identificationnumber of the applicant, the applicant's resident agent who will acceptservice of process and the person who will pay the abandoned mine landreclamation fee. Section 778.13(b) also requests the social security numbersof the above persons, but indicates that the disclosure of any social securitynumber is voluntary. Section 7(a) of the Privacy Act of 1974, 88 Stat. 1896, specifies thatit shall be unlawful for any Federal, State or local government agencyto deny to any individual any right, benefit or privilege provided by lawbecause of such individual's refusal to disclose his or her social securitynumber unless the disclosure is required by Federal law or was requiredunder statute or regulation prior to January 1, 1975. Since SMCRA doesnot specifically require the disclosure of an individual's social securitynumber, and since the information was not required prior to January 1,1975, no benefit, right or privilege, including a permit to conduct a surfacecoal mining operation, may be denied for failure to disclose a social securitynumber under this rule. Section 7(b) specifies that when an individual is asked to disclose hisor her social security number, the individual shall be told whether therequirement is mandatory or voluntary. OSMRE is requesting the voluntarydisclosure of an individual's social security number pursuant to the authoritygranted under sections 201 (c)(1) and (c)(2) of the Act. The informationwill be used to process permit applications and to perform the compliancereview required by section 510(c) of the Act and 30 CFR 773.15(b)(1). Thisexemption from mandatory disclosure applies only to a social security numberand not to an employer identification number, which is the taxpayer identificationnumber for business entities such as corporations and partnerships, andfor sole proprietors if they pay wages to one or more employees. The submissionof the employer identification number is mandatory under this rule. The requirement in andSection; 778.13(b) of this rule to supply the nameof the person who will pay the abandoned mine land reclamation fee is inaddition to the requirement in andSection; 778.13(c) to list the operator.Section 402(a) of the Act requires that an operator of a surface coal miningand reclamation operation pay the reclamation fee required by the Act.Experience has shown that often the reclamation fee is paid for the operatorby agents such as attorneys, trustees, accounting firms, banks or othercompanies, or by the permittee if different from the operator. Furnishingthe name of the person paying the reclamation fee will assist OSMRE incollecting the money and arranging for audits when necessary. Supplyingthe name of the person who will actually pay the reclamation fee does notin any way alter the legal obligation of other persons responsible forits payment. As originally proposed, paragraph (b) requested the social security number<T3>or </T3>taxpayer identification number of the applicant, the operator,the applicant's resident agent, the person who will pay the abandoned mineland reclamation fee, and any contractor who will conduct the surface coalmining and reclamation operation. Since a taxpayer identification numbercan be either a social security number or an employer identification number,OSMRE has substituted the term ``employer identification number'' for theterm ``taxpayer identification number'' in order to eliminate any confusion.The final rule requests the disclosure of both a social security number<T3>and </T3>an employer identification number. OSMRE is requesting bothnumbers because of the possibility that a person may have used a socialsecurity number on some occasions and an employer identification numberon others. Requesting both numbers will help to insure that the data inthe Applicant/Violater System is complete. A similar change has been madein paragraph (c). The reference in proposed andSection; 778.13(b) to the operator, and therequirement to furnish information concerning the operator, have been transferredto paragraph (c) of the final rule.Proposed andSection; 778.13(b) also requested the name of any contractorwho will conduct the surface coal mining and reclamation operation. Inthe final rule, the requirement to furnish information concerning contractmining operations has been transferred to paragraph (c). Final andSection; 778.13(c) will require the applicant to submit the followinginformation, as applicable, for any person who owns or controls the applicantunder the definition of ``owned or controlled'' and ``owns or controls''in 30 CFR 773.5: (1) The person's name, address, social security number, and employer identificationnumber; (2) The person's ownership or control relationship to the applicant, includingthe percentage of ownership and location in the organizational structure;(3) The title of the person's position, date position was assumed, andwhen submitted under andSection; 773.17(i) of this rule, the date of departurefrom the position; (4) Each additional name and identifying number, including, employer identificationnumber, Federal or State permit number and MSHA number with date of issuance,under which the person owns or controls, or previously owned or controlled,a surface coal mining and reclamation operation in the United States withinthe five years preceding the date of the application; and (5) The application number or other identifier of, and the regulatory authorityfor, any other pending surface coal mining operation permit applicationfiled by the person in any State in the United States.Under the referenced definition in 30 CFR 773.5 the permit applicant mustfurnish the above information for all: (1) Operators; (2) officers, directors,and any other persons who perform a function similar to an officer or director;(3) persons having the ability to commit the financial or real propertyassets or working resources of an entity; (4) general partners; (5) shareholdersowning of record a ten percent or greater interest; (6) persons owningor controlling the coal to be mined under the proposed permit under a lease,sublease or other contract, and having the right to receive such coal aftermining or having authority to determine the manner in which the proposedsurface coal mining and reclamation operation is to be conducted; (7) personswho have any other relationship with the permit applicant which gives themauthority directly or indirectly to determine the manner in which the proposedsurface coal mining operation is to be conducted; and (8) persons who ownor control the persons specified in paragraphs (1) through (7), eitherdirectly or indirectly through intermediary entities.The requirements to list ``persons having the ability to commit the financialor real property assets or working resources of an entity,'' and ``personsowning or controlling the coal to be mined * * *'' have been added to thefinal rule because under the definition of ``owned or controlled'' and``owns or controls'' at 30 CFR 773.5 those persons are presumed to ownor control the permit applicant. The addition was necessary in order toconform these information reporting requirements with the definition.Like the proposed rule, the final rule requires a permit applicant to reportboth direct and indirect ownership and control relationships. As explainedin the October 3, 1988 final rule (53 FR 38868) defining ``owned or controlled''and ``owns or controls,'' the ten percent ownership presumption appliesat each level of a business structure. If a ten percent or greater ownershipinterest exists at any level, that interest must be reported along withthe controllers at that level. For example, if company ``A'' owned tenpercent of company ``B,'' and company ``B'' owned ten percent of company``C,'' and company ``C'' owned ten percent of the applicant, the permitapplication must list companies ``A,'' ``B'' and ``C'' along with the controllersof companies ``A,'' ``B'' and ``C.'' However, if company ``A'' owned tenpercent of company ``B'', and company ``B'' owned nine percent of company``C,'' and company ``C'' owned ten percent of the applicant, the permitapplication would be required to list only company ``C'' and its controllers.The permit applicant would not be required to list company ``A'' or company``B'' because the ownership interest between company ``B'' and company``C'' was less than ten percent.If the operator is a business entity and a subsidiary of another corporation,then the operator, its owners and controllers and the owners and controllersof the parent corporation must be reported by the permit applicant. Thesame also applies to anyone owning or controlling the coal to be minedby another person under a lease, sublease or other contract and havingthe right to receive such coal after mining or having authority to determinethe manner in which that person or another person conducts a surface coalmining and reclamation operation. If that person is a business entity anda subsidiary of another corporation, then the owners and controllers ofthe parent corporation must be reported by the permit applicant, alongwith an explanation of how each person is linked in the chain of ownershipor control.The requirement of andSection;778.13(c) to furnish information on anyoneowning or controlling the coal to be mined by another person under a lease,sublease or other contract and having the right to receive such coal aftermining or having authority to determine the manner in which that personor another person conducts a surface coal mining and reclamation operationdoes not apply to persons who receive coal as an in-kind royalty payment.However, simply labeling the receipt of coal as in-kind royalty paymentswill not automatically exempt a person or operation from the reportingrequirements of this section if the in-kind payment is more than a simpleroyalty or if the recipient otherwise controls the conduct of the surfacecoal mining operation.Under final andSection;778.13(c)(2), the permit applicant must explain eachidentified person's ownership or control relationships to the applicant,including the percentage of ownership and the location of the owner orcontroller in the organizational structure. In the example given above,if company ``A'' owns ten percent of company ``B,'' and company ``B'' ownsten percent of company ``C,'' and company ``C'' owns ten percent of theapplicant, the permit application must list companies ``A,'' ``B'' and``C'' along with the controllers of ``A,'' ``B'' and ``C'', and must clearlyindicate that ``A'' owns ``B,'' and that ``B'' owns ``C''. The applicantmust also furnish the percentage of ownership at each level, and when listingofficers, directors, general partners, and other persons required to bereported, indicate the business entity they work for. All of the informationmust be furnished in a manner that will enable the regulatory authorityto precisely determine the organizational structure of the applicant andits owners and controllers.In the proposed rule at andSection;778.13(d), OSMRE requested the ``permitor application numbers or other identifiers'' for all current and previouscoal mining permits in the United States during the five year period precedingthe date of the application. In the final rule, OSMRE has reworded thisrequirement to ``Federal or State permit number, and MSHA number with dateof issuance.'' OSMRE has specifically included the MSHA number here andelsewhere in the final rule so that there is no doubt the number must beincluded in the permit application. The date of issuance of the MSHA numberis being asked for because MSHA reassigns previously issued numbers. Ifa violation is linked to a particular MSHA number and the number is laterreassigned, the date the number was reassigned will allow the regulatoryauthority to determine that the current site should not be associated withthe prior violation.Final andSection;778.13(d) will require for any surface coal mining operationowned or controlled by either the applicant or by any person who owns orcontrols the applicant under the definition of ``owned or controlled''and ``owns or controls'' in 30 CFR 773.5, the operation's:(1) Name, address, identifying numbers, including employer identificationnumber, the Federal or State permit number and MSHA number, the date ofissuance of the MSHA number, and the regulatory authority; and(2) Ownership or control relationship to the applicant, including the percentageof ownership and the location in the organizational structure.Section 778.13(i) of the final rule requires that after an applicationhas been approved but before the permit to conduct a surface coal miningoperation is issued, the applicant shall, as applicable, bring up to date,correct, or indicate that no change has occurred in the information previouslysubmitted under paragraphs (a) through (d). If the applicant fails or refusesto submit the information required under andSection;778.13(i), the regulatoryauthority will not issue the permit. The updated information will enablethe regulatory authority to make an accurate andSection;773.15(b)(1) compliancereview and to take appropriate action.This provision was proposed on July 16, 1986 (51 FR 25828) as andSection;773.15(e)(1)(i). It has been codified in the final rule in andSection; 778.13(i)so that the obligation to update information will be located with the requirementfor the information that must be updated. Under andSection; 778.13(j), a permit applicant will be required to submitthe information required by andSection;andSection; 778.13 and 778.14 in anyprescribed format that is issued by OSMRE. In the final rule, OSMRE hassubstituted the term ``format'' for the term ``form.'' OSMRE has made thesubstitution to allow for the electronic transfer of data if that can bedone in a manner compatible with the operation of the Applicant/ViolatorSystem. For the present OSMRE contemplates use of a standard form as the prescribedformat. If a standard form is issued, use of the form will be requiredby all permit applicants when submitting the information regardless ofwhether the permit application is filed with OSMRE or a State regulatoryauthority. The form will cover only the information required by andSection;andSection;778.13 and 778.14, and will be in addition to any permit application formsrequired by any of the State regulatory authorities.Use of a standard form should facilitate the imput of legal, financialand compliance data into the Applicant/Violator System and help reduceerrors when that data is transferred from a permit application to the computer.It should also prove helpful to those applying for permits because it willindicate what information must be furnished pursuant to the regulations.OSMRE will state on any forms requesting a social security number thatthe submission of a social security number is voluntary. Development anduse of any such form will not limit any additional information collectionrequirements of any approved program. Section 778.14_Violation InformationSection 778.14(c) will require a permit applicant to submit a list of allviolation notices received by the applicant and a list of all cessationorders and air and water quality violation notices received by any surfacecoal mining operation owned or controlled by either the applicant, or byany person who owns or controls the applicant, during the three year periodpreceding the application date. The list must cover violations of any provisionof the Act, or of any law, rule or regulation of the United States, orof any State law, rule or regulation enacted pursuant to Federal law, ruleor regulation pertaining to air or water environmental protection. Thelists also must contain any identifying numbers for the operation, includingthe Federal or State permit number and MSHA number, the date of issuanceof the violation notice and MSHA number, the name of the person to whomthe violation notice was issued, and the name of the issuing regulatoryauthority, department or agency. The purpose of this information is toprovide the data necessary to perform the compliance review required bysection 510(c) of the Act and 30 CFR 773.15(b)(1) prior to making a finaldecision on whether to issue a permit. A <T3>violation notice, </T3>as defined in 30 CFR 701.5, includes any writtennotification from a governmental entity of a violation of law, whetherby letter, memorandum, legal or administrative pleading, or other writtencommunication. While all notices of violation (NOV's) are violation notices,not all violation notices are NOV's. For example, a violation notice mayalso be a cessation order issued by a regulatory authority or a noticeof noncompliance issued by the Environmental Protection Agency. Under andSection;778.14(c), the permit applicant must list all violation notices, includingNOV's, cessation orders, notices of noncompliance, and other citations,regardless of terminology, for any violation of any provision of the Act,or of any law, rule or regulation of the United States, or of any Statelaw, rule or regulation enacted pursuant to Federal law, rule or regulationpertaining to air or water environmental protection in connection withany surface coal mining operation. For any surface coal mining operationowned or controlled by either the applicant or by any person who owns orcontrols the applicant only cessation orders and air and water qualityviolation notices must be reported. The proposed rule would have required the date of issuance of the violationnotice, the name of the person to whom the violation notice was issued,and the issuing regulatory authority department or agency. In the finalrule, OSMRE is also requesting any identifying numbers, including the Federalor State permit number and MSHA number associated with the operation, andthe dates of issuance of the violation notice and MSHA number. This additionalinformation will assist the regulatory authority in linking a violationnotice to a particular mine site and its owners and controllers. The requirement in the prior regulations to list violation notices, includingNOV's, received by any subsidiary, affiliate, or persons controlled byor under the common control with the applicant has been deleted for tworeasons. First, the information concerning NOV's incurred by any subsidiary,affiliate, or persons controlled by or under common control with the applicantis not required by the Act and is not needed in view of a presumption containedin revised 30 CFR 773.15(b)(1). That presumption holds that in the absenceof a failure-to-abate cessation order an NOV is presumed to be in the processof being corrected to the satisfaction of the agency that has jurisdictionover the violation. It is because of the presumption that cessation ordersbut not NOV's must be reported for any surface coal mining operation ownedor controlled by the applicant or by any person who owns or controls theapplicant. In spite of the presumption, all NOV's received directly bythe applicant must still be reported under revised andSection; 778.14(c)because section 510(c) of the Act requires that an application list allNOV's incurred directly by the applicant.The second reason for revising the previous requirement to list violationnotices ``received by any subsidiary, affiliate, or persons controlledby or under the common control with the applicant'' was the desire of OSMREto eliminate confusion and conform the scope and language of the personsabout whom information must be submitted with the coverage of the compliancereview requirements of 30 CFR 773.15 (b)(1) and (b)(3). As revised on October3, 1988 (53 FR 38868), those sections do not use the terms ``subsidiary,''``affiliate'' or ``common control.'' Instead they refer to operations ``ownedor controlled by either the applicant or by any person who owns or controlsthe applicant.''Section 778.14(d) of the rule requires that after a surface coal miningand reclamation permit application has been approved, but before the permitis issued, the applicant shall, as applicable, bring up to date, corrector indicate that no change has occurred in the information previously submittedunder andSection; 778.14(c). If the applicant fails or refuses to submitthe information required under andSection; 778.14(d), the regulatory authoritywill not issue the permit. The updated information will enable the regulatoryauthority to make an accurate andSection; 773.15(b)(1) compliance review.Section 778.14(d) was proposed on July 16, 1986 (51 FR 25828) as andSection;773.15(e)(1)(ii). It has been codified in the final rule in andSection; 778.14(d)so that the requirement to update information will be located with therequirement to provide the information that must be updated.<T3>Section 843.11_Cessation Orders</T3>Section 843.11(g) required that where OSMRE is the regulatory authority,within sixty days of the issuance of a cessation order, OSMRE must notifyall owners and controllers identified pursuant to 30 CFR 778.13(c) thatthe cessation order has been issued and that they have been identifiedas owners or controllers of the violator.As described earlier in this preamble, andSection; 773.17(i) of the rulerequires a permittee to submit to the regulatory authority within thirtydays after a cessation order is issued, updated information on its ownersand controllers. Upon receipt of this information, OSMRE will send thenotification required by andSection; 843.11(g). If updated information isnot received, OSMRE will send the notice to the persons currently in itsrecords as owners or controllers.OSMRE has added this provision to the final rule for three reasons. First,notification to the owners and controllers will insure that they are awareof the violation, and that unless the violation is abated their names willbe linked to the violation in the Applicant/Violator System. Second, wherethe person notified of the violation is no longer linked with the violator,notification will allow the person to immediately notify the regulatoryauthority that a link no longer exists. This will help prevent any problemsin the future for that person should the permittee fail to submit the updateinformation required by andSection; 773.17(i) indicating that the link nolonger exists or if it submits erroneous information. Third, where theviolator is a corporation, the notification to the individual owners andcontrollers will also provide a basis for the assessment of an individualcivil penalty under section 518(f) of the Act and 30 CFR Part 846 or theState program equivalent.Since this section contains a procedural requirement relating to enforcementsanctions, pursuant to andSection; 840.13(c) each state regulatory authoritymust adopt the same or similar requirements.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Discussion of Public Comments</ITAG>One commenter objected to the rule on procedural grounds. The commentersaid that the proposed rule was based on the April 16, 1986 (51 FR 12879)option for defining ownership and control, and not on the option publishedfor comment on May 4, 1987 (52 FR 16275). The commenter said that the datacollection requirements varied dramatically between the two proposed definitionsof ownership and control, and that it was not possible for the public tocomment intelligently on the agency's approach to data collection. Thecommenter said that this failure violated the basic tenets of the AdministrativeProcedure Act (APA).OSMRE disagrees. The APA requires that an agency publish ``either the termsor substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects andissues involved.'' 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(3). OSMRE complied with this requirementon May 28, 1987 (52 FR 20032) when it published proposed rule languagewhich would conform the permit application requirement in andSection;andSection;778.13 and 778.14 with the April 16, 1986 option for the definition for``owned or controlled'' and ``owns or controls.'' The requirements adoptedin this rule are substantially similar to those published on May 28, 1987.The requirements published on May 28, 1987 were based on the April 16,1986 option because the definitions discussed in that option were moreinclusive than the option published on April 5, 1985 (50 FR 13724).In the May 28, 1987 notice, OSMRE also stated that if the May 4, 1987 optionfor the definition were selected rather than the April 16 option, the informationreporting requirements might be changed, and indicated the nature of thechange and specifically requested comments on alternative reporting requirements.Thus, this rule complies with the requirements of the APA.One commenter objected to including in the rule any provision which wouldrequire an applicant to submit any information other than that specificallyrequired by section 507(b) of the Act. The commenter argued that sincethe Congress articulated, with specificity, precise permit informationrequirements with respect to the applicant's corporate officers and owners,it was arbitrary and capricious for OSMRE to impose more expansive informationreporting requirements. In support for this position, the commenter citedIn re: Permanent Surface Mining Regulation Litigation, 14 E.R.C. 1083,1097 (D.D.C. February 26, 1980).OSMRE disagrees. The case cited by the commenter dealt with the narrowissue of whether the Secretary of the Interior could require the submissionof hydrologic information for areas outside a permit area. In its decisionthe court concluded that the Congress articulated, with specificity, thoseinstances in which hydrologic information outside the permit area was necessary,and consequently the Secretary's requirements which went beyond those instancesspecified by the Congress were arbitrary and capricious. <T3>Id.</T3>In the case of In re: Permanent Surface Mining Regulation Litigation, 653F.2d 514 (D.C. Cir. 1981), cert. denied, 454 U.S. 822 (1981), the U.S.Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit decided the questionof whether the Secretary had rulemaking authority to require a permit applicantto submit any items of information beyond those enumerated in the Act.The court held that the Act's explicit listings of permit information werenot exhaustive and did not preclude the Secretary from requiring additionalinformation needed to ensure compliance with the Act.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Id.</T3> at 527. The court held that both sections 201(c)(2) and 501(b)of the Act provide adequate authority for the Secretary to require thesubmission of additional information.    Section 201(c)(2) authorizes the Secretary to ``publish and promulgatesuch rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposesand provisions of this Act.'' Section 501(b) directs the Secretary to promulgateregulations ``establishing procedures and requirements for preparation,submission and approval of State programs.''    In addition to the two sections cited by the court, support for the rulemay also be found in sections 201(c)(1), 507(b), 510(c) and 517(b)(1)(E)of the Act. The rule aids implementing the section 102(c)(1) requirementthat permits be withheld for noncompliance with the Act. Section 507(b)requires the identification of owners and controllers, and also requestsinformation on any suspension, revocation or bond forfeiture incurred bythe applicant or any subsidiary, affiliate or person controlled by or undercommon control with the applicant in the five years preceding the dateof the application. Section 510(c) requires a listing of all notices ofviolation incurred by the applicant during the three year period precedingthe date of the application. Section 517(b)(1)(E) authorizes the regulatoryauthority to require any permittee to provide such other information relativeto surface coal mining and reclamation operations as the regulatory authoritydeems necessary for purposes of developing or assisting in the development,administration and enforcement of any approved State or Federal program,or of determining whether any person is in violation of any requirementof any such State or Federal program. It is evident, therefore, that theSecretary has ample authority to adopt the information reporting requirementscontained in this rule.    One commenter said that the final andSection; 733.15(b)(1) compliance reviewrequired by andSection; 773.15(e) should be limited to any new informationreceived in the information update required by andSection;andSection; 778.13(i)and 778.14(d). Presumably the comment was made out of concern that thefinal compliance review could delay the issuance of the permit.    OSMRE believes that the final compliance review will not be a time-consumingprocess. When the updated information is submitted by the applicant pursuantto andSection;andSection; 778.13(i) and 778.14(d) of this rule, OSMRE or theappropriate State regulatory authority will enter the information intothe Applicant/Violator System. Both the initial and the second andSection;773.15(b)(1) compliance review may be made using the Applicant/ViolatorSystem. Use of the computer-based system to make the review will take verylittle time and should not result in a delay in the issuance of the permitif the updated information does not result in a match between the applicantand a violator.    One commenter stated that a permit should be rescinded if the permitteefailed to comply with the requirement of andSection; 773.17(i) to updatecertain information on its owners and controllers on an annual basis. Inthe proposed rule OSMRE stated that failure to submit the information couldresult in rescission of the permit.    As previously discussed, the updating requirement in andSection; 773.17(i)has been changed in the final rule to make it contingent upon the issuanceof a cessation order. Once such a provision is incorporated into a regulatoryprogram, if the permittee fails to furnish the required information, thepermittee will have violated a permit condition and be subject to appropriateenforcement measures under the applicable regulatory program.    One commenter requested clarification concerning the requirement in andSection;778.13(b) to furnish the name, address and telephone number of the personwho will pay the abandoned mine land reclamation fee. The commenter wantedto know if the regulation required the submission of an organization suchas a bank, or the name of a particular person at the bank who would makethe payments on behalf of the operator.    The term person is defined in section 701(19) of the Act to mean an individual,partnership, association, society or joint stock company, firm company,corporation or other business organization. Consequently, if a financialinstitution makes the required payment for the operator the name of theinstitution would suffice. The name of the person actually paying the abandonedmine land reclamation fee on behalf of the operator is being requestedin order to facilitate requests for audits and financial information.   Several commenters objected to the requirement in andSection; 778.13(i) and778.14(d) of the rule for an applicant to submit updated information atthe time a permit is approved but before it is issued. One commenter objectedon the grounds that the Act requires that the information be submittedonly once, and that the requirement to update the permit application informationimmediately prior to the issuance of the permit would be burdensome.   OSMRE disagrees. The commenter submitted no evidence to support the assertionthat the requirement would be burdensome. The requirement could be burdensomeonly if numerous changes had occurred since the permit application wassubmitted. Where such changes have occurred in the ownership or controlof the proposed mining operation or in the type and number of outstandingviolations, it is only appropriate that the compliance history of the permitapplicant and its owners and controllers be reviewed to insure that thepermit is not issued in violation of section 510(c) of the Act.Another commenter said that the proposed requirement to update the informationin the permit application at the time of the submission of the bond woulddestroy the two-step process envisioned by the Act for permit issuance.The commenter stated that the decision to issue the permit should be basedon the material submitted with the permit application, and the decisionto accept the bond should be based on satisfaction of the bonding requirementsin section 509 of the Act.OSMRE disagrees. There is nothing in the Act to prevent the Secretary fromrequiring that the permit application be complete and accurate at the timeof permit issuance. Clearly, it is the intent of the Congress that thepermit be issued based on accurate information contained in the permitapplication.Another commenter said that any delays between the submission of the permitapplication and the issuance of the permit were caused by the regulatoryauthority. Therefore, the commenter concluded, the applicant should notbe required to update the information in the application.OSMRE disagrees. Very often the delay between the time when a permit applicationis submitted and when the permit is issued is the result of factors suchas the large size of the planned mining operation, the extent of the miningplan, requests for clarification concerning information in the permit application,or the need to prepare environmental documents. The lapse of time causedby such factors can be minimized but not entirely avoided. The only wayof insuring that the permit is approved based on current information isto require that the information be updated. It is to the advantage of thepermit applicant to update the information in the application in orderto insure that the permit is issued based on accurate information.One commenter suggested that the entire package of compliance informationshould be required only once at the time of bond submittal.The suggestion to have the compliance information submitted only at thetime the bond is submitted could delay the issuance of a permit. If thecompliance information is submitted only at the time the bond is submitted,OSMRE or a State regulatory authority would not be able to conduct a compliancereview until the very end of the permit application review process. Byrequiring the information to be submitted in the beginning, the regulatoryauthority is able to make an initial compliance review of the applicationand alert the applicant to any potential problem early enough to give theapplicant sufficient time to correct it or to submit information indicatingthat the results of the initial compliance review were erroneous. Thisprocess should reduce or eliminate delays in the issuance of a permit.In addition, the regulatory authority's communication with the applicantat the outset concerning any problem that could preclude permit issuancewill allow the regulatory authority to avoid expending resources on technicalreview of a permit application until a substantial likelihood exists thatwithholding of the permit will not be required.One commenter suggested that OSMRE should have the responsibility to updatethat information at the time of permit issuance, based upon the informationcontained in the original application and OSMRE records.OSMRE disagrees. The regulatory authority cannot totally update informationwithout assistance from the applicant because it would have no way of knowingwho any new owners or controllers of the applicant may be or what new violationsmay exist, but have not yet been entered into the Applicant/Violator System.One commenter objected to the rule on the grounds that it did not requiresufficient information concerning the rebuttable presumptions containedin the definition of ``owned or controlled'' and ``owns or controls''.The commenter argued that the rule should require the submission of informationdescribing the role of each officer in a company, and the legal authorityand duties of each director. In effect, the commenter wanted a permit applicantto submit sufficient information to either rebut or confirm the presumptionscontained in the definition of ownership and control. The commenter wasconcerned that if the information were submitted at the time of a permitblock, the individuals linked to a violator would ``come forth on a piece-mealbasis with self-selected information'' to rebut the presumption.OSMRE did not adopt the commenter's suggestion. Under the definition at30 CFR 773.5 certain relations create a presumption of ownership or control.For example, owning at least ten percent of the applicant, or being anofficer, director, general partner, or operator of the applicant resultsin a presumption of control. However, for the purpose of processing permitapplications a presumption of control is important only if there is anoutstanding violation to which a shareholder, officer, director, generalpartner, operator or other person covered by the definition is linked.If there is a violation, then it becomes important to determine if thecontrol presumed by the rule does not in fact exist. OSMRE believes thatit would result in an unreasonable expenditure of time, effort and resourcesby both the regulatory authority and the permit applicant if the regulationswere to require all permit applicants to submit the information neededto rebut a presumption of control if no link to a violation existed andtherefore there was no reason to rebut the presumption. An applicant canalways submit the information if the compliance review indicates a linkbetween an applicant and a violator. Once the link is discovered, boththe applicant and the regulatory authority can focus their attention onthe specific relationship in question and will know what information isactually needed to rebut the presumption.One commenter objected to the exception in andSection; 778.14(c) of the rule,which does not require the permit applicant to report all notices of violation(NOV's). Section 778.14(c) requires that only NOV's incurred directly bythe applicant be reported. NOV's incurred to surface coal mining and reclamationoperations owned or controlled by the applicant or by anyone who owns orcontrols the applicant need not be reported. The commenter argued thatall NOV's should be listed and that they should be taken into considerationduring the compliance review because the absence of a cessation order doesnot indicate the absence of a violation. The commenter further argued thatthe receipt of an NOV serves as an important indicator of an applicant'swillingness and ability to comply with necessary legal restrictions andpermit requirements. OSMRE did not adopt the commenter's suggestion that NOV's incurred by operationsowned or controlled by the applicant or by anyone who owns or controlsthe applicant be reported. Section 778.14(c) as adopted complies with therequirements of section 510(c) of the Act. That section requires that noticesof violations incurred ``by the applicant'' be listed. The Act does notrequire that notices of violations incurred at surface coal mining operationsowned or controlled by the applicant or by any person who owns or controlsthe applicant be reported. OSMRE believes that the exception to reportingNOV's incurred by operations owned or controlled by the applicant or byany person who owns or controls the applicant is reasonable in view ofthe Secretary's revision of the scope of the compliance review in andSection;773.15(b)(1) and the presumption contained in that section that ``in theabsence of a failure-to-abate cessation order, the regulatory authoritymay presume that a notice of violation has been or is in the process ofbeing corrected to the satisfaction of the agency with jurisdiction overthe violation, except where evidence to the contrary is set forth in thepermit application.'' In addition to the above, the Secretary is adding to the regulations inandSection; 778.14(d) a new requirement. That section requires that afterthe approval of the permit, but before its issuance, the permit applicantmust bring up to date, correct, or indicate no change has occurred in theviolation information previously submitted pursuant to andSection; 778.14(c).Consequently, any unreported NOV's which were outstanding at the time thepermit application was filed, and for which a cessation order was subsequentlyissued prior to the issuance of the permit, would have to be reported inthe information update required immediately prior to the issuance of thepermit, and would result in the permit being blocked unless the violationwas in the process of being abated or else was the subject of a good faithappeal, in which case the permit would be conditionally issued.  Several commenters said that the information reporting requirements ofthe rule would be very burdensome. As an example, one commenter said thatan existing company might be required to list on a permit application thenames and addresses of one direct parent company, five second generationparent corporations (none of whom were primarily engaged in coal production),and an unknown number of third generation owners holding ten percent ormore of the stock of the five second generation owners; three affiliateswhich are coal producing companies and ten affiliates which are not; inaddition to officers, directors and violations of all of the above. Bythe commenter's calculations, the permit applicant would be required tolist information for forty-three surface coal mining operations in tenStates. OSMRE is aware that for some large corporations the reporting requirementsof this rule could be extensive. After the initial compilation of suchmaterial, however the incremental amount of effort to maintain and updatethe data for future applications would be less than the initial effort.These requirements are well within the discretion granted to the Secretaryby the Act and are necessitated by the complex business structures createdby companies mining coal. One commenter disagreed with OSMRE's determination that the time and effortrequired to fulfill the data collection requirements of this rule wouldbe minimal. The commenter said that the operating costs, time and effortinvolved in complying with the rule would have a substantial impact onall companies regardles of size. The commenter said that the annual updatingof permit information could easily require an additional man-year or moreto track all corporate personnel changes and violations and their ultimateresolution. OSMRE's determination of the impact of the rule was based on calculationscontained in its Determination of Effects, which indicates that in 1985,73.4% of all operations could be classified as small operations. The resultwould be that most operations would not need much time to gather, organizeand mail information required under the rule. The commenter did not submitany evidence to support the assertion that one man-year or more would berequired. Moreover, the commenter said that many companies have alreadydeveloped their own computerized data processing systems to track someof the required information. This should minimize any increase in burdenthat might result. Also, in order to address concerns about the informationreporting requirements, OSMRE did not adopt an annual update. Instead,updated information is required only after a cessation order is issued.Thus companies acting in compliance with their permits, or who abate violationswithin the time specified in a notice of violation can avoid having tosubmit updates of ownership and control information. One commenter said that the regulatory authority should collect ownershipinformation up and down the corporate chain. The commenter stated thatrequiring such information will not place a burden on coal companies becausethis data should be readily available in coal company records.OSMRE agrees that such information must be submitted in a permit application.The rule requires the submission of information on owners and controllersof the permit applicant as well as mining operations owned or controlledby the applicant. See andSection; 778.13 (c) and (d) of the rule and thepreamble discussion of those two sections. One commenter asked for clarification of how OSMRE would determine controlbased on indirect ownership. For an example and discussion of indirectownership, see the OSMRE final rule defining ``owned or controlled'' and``owns or controls,'' published on October 3, 1988 (53 FR 38868) at page38874. One commenter objected to the requirement in andSection; 778.13(j) for theuse of a standard form to report the information required by this rulebecause it could cause additional burdens for the many companies that havealready developed their own data processing systems to track some of therequired information. OSMRE believes that use of a standard form to report the information requiredby this rule can assist those applying for a permit application by indicatingon the face of the form what information they must submit with regard tothe identification of interests and violation history. Also, the use ofa standard form can assist OSMRE and the State regulatory authorities inentering the information from the permit application into the Applicant/ViolatorSystem and minimize the amount of data entry error that might result. Anyadditional burden the use of a standard form might impose would be offsetby these important advantages. One commenter said that a permit applicant should be required to list allviolations for which a permit block can be imposed. OSMRE disagrees. While it is true a permit block can be imposed for violationsan applicant is not required to list, OSMRE does not believe that it isnecessary for the permit applicant to submit all of the information forwhich a permit block may be imposed because much of the information alreadyis available to OSMRE and the State regulatory authorities. Final andSection;778.14(c) and the existing regulations in andSection; 778.13 (a) and (b)together require the submission of most of the information suggested bythe commenter, with the exception of outstanding Federal and State civilpenalties and delinquent AML fees. With regard to outstanding Federal civil penalties and delinquent AML fees,OSMRE has two computer-based systems which supply Federal violation datato the Applicant/Violator System. One is the Collection Management InformationSystem (CMIS), and the other is the Abandoned Mine Land Fee CollectionSystem (AML System). CMIS contains information on all delinquent Federalcivil penalties while the AML System contains information on delinquentAML fees. With regard to delinquent State civil penalties, OSMRE intendsto collect the relevant data and add it to the Applicant/Violator Systemat a later date after the quality of the data has been checked. One commenter suggested that the rule should include a general provisionwhich requires ownership and control information for anyone in an ownershipor control relationship with the applicant or operator. For example, thecommenter said, family members are frequently used as shams or fronts byirresponsible coal operators, and it would be a minimal burden to the applicantand the operator to list immediate family members who have mined in thepast five years. The commenter also suggested that information be requestedon mine managers, subcontractors and mine foremen. OSMRE did not adopt the commenter's suggestion. The final rule at andSection;778.13(c) requests information for any person who owns or controls theapplicant under the definition of ``owned or controlled'' and ``owns orcontrols'' at 30 CFR 773.5. Under andSection; 778.13(c) the permit applicantis required to list the operator and those who own or control the operator.If a family member, mine manager or subcontractor controls the applicant,there is an obligation under andSection;andSection; 778.13(c) and 773.5(a)(3)to list that person in the permit application. However, the rule does notspecifically require information when control does not exist. First, theAct does not require OSMRE to collect such information, and second, theCongress has imposed limitations on information collection. OSMRE, likeall other Federal agencies, is required by the Congress to reduce wherepossible the information collection burden it imposes on the public. Inorder to do this OSMRE has limited the information reporting requirementsof this rule to those specifically required by the Act or clearly necessaryfor the compliance review required by 30 CFR 773.15(b). There has to besome reasonable limit on the information collected for the compliance review.If OSMRE were to request all data which may be useful but not essentialfor performing the compliance review, the data when added to that alreadyrequired by other sections of the Act and regulations would be difficultand expensive to process for both the permit applicant and the regulatoryauthority. The regulations at 30 CFR 773.13(b) allow for public participation in thepermitting process. Through that process, the regulatory authority canreceive, and often does receive, pertinent information about the permitapplicant and its owners and controllers, which may affect the permittingdecision.  One commenter said that there should be a specific requirement for theapplicant to state whether the proposed operation is a contract mine, andif so, the applicant should be required to list the entity or entitiesinvolved in that relationship. The commenter stated that ownership andcontrol information should be required for both parties to the contract,and a copy of the contract should be required as part of the permit application,If the contract is oral, its basic provisions should be described in theapplication. OSMRE agrees in part. The rule in andSection; 778.13(c) requires that thepermit application contain the name of any person owning or controllingcoal to be mined under the proposed permit under a lease, sublease or othercontract, and having the right to receive such coal after mining or havingauthority to determine the manner in which the proposed surface coal miningoperation is to be conducted. Section 778.13(e) requires that the permitapplication contain the name and address of each legal or equitable ownerof record of the mineral property to be mined and each leaseholder of recordof any leasehold interest in the property to be mined. Consequently, withthe exception of the terms of the contract, information concerning theparties to a contract mining operation, where control is presumed, is requiredby the rule. Information on the contracts of other mines is not neededunless the contracts result in control over the mines. Although the submittalof every contract would reduce the likelihood of the regulatory authoritynot discovering control relationships, a requirement for applicants tosubmit and regulatory authorities to review such information appears overlyburdensome.Under the definition of ``owned or controlled'' and ``owns or controls''at 30 CFR 773.5, there is a presumption of control for any person who ownsor controls coal to be mined by another person under a lease, subleaseor other contract and has the right to receive this coal after mining orhas authority to determine the manner in which the other person mines thecoal. If a presumption of control exists in a particular permitting situation,the permit applicant may rebut the presumption if the compliance reviewindicates a link between the applicant and the violator. In order to rebutthe presumption in a contract mining situation, the applicant would berequired, at a minimum, to submit the terms of the contract for examination.OSMRE does not believe that it should require the submission of the contractuntil such time as there is a need to rebut the presumption of controlbecause of a potential permit block.The same commenter also wanted the permit application to contain informationon past contract mining operations of the applicant and operator alongwith the permit number, Mine Safety Health Administration (MSHA) number,and any outstanding violations.OSMRE agrees in part with the commenter. This information with regard topast contract mining operations owned or controlled by the applicant isrequired by the rules in andSection;andSection; 778.13(c)(4) and 778.14(c)(1).One commenter suggested that previous andSection; 778.14(c) should be retainedwithout change. Prior to revision, andSection; 778.14(c) required informationon violation notices received by the applicant or any subsidiary, affiliateor persons controlled by or under common control with the applicant. Asrevised, andSection; 778.14(c) requires information on violation noticesreceived by the applicant or any surface coal mining operation owned orcontrolled by the applicant or by anyone who owns or controls the applicant.OSMRE declined to adopt the commenter's suggestion. The language adoptedin andSection; 778.14(c) mirrors the language in 30 CFR 773.15(b)(1) governingcompliance review. The language is no less inclusive than the compliancereview required by section 773.15(b)(1), and in fact results in a reviewof companies under common control with the applicant. Use of this sameterminology in both andSection;andSection; 778.14(c) and 773.15(b)(1) willeliminate confusion.One commenter stated that andSection; 778.14(c) of the rule should requirethe applicant to include the status of any violation. This informationis already required by andSection; 778.14(c)(4) of the existing regulations.One commenter also suggested that the permittee be required to submit updatedinformation on an annual basis concerning all outstanding violations previouslyreported pursuant to andSection; 778.14(c).OSMRE disagrees. The violation information submitted with the permit applicationis needed for the compliance review required by andSection; 773.15(b)(1).Once that review has been completed and the permit issued an update isnot needed because any violation which occurs after the issuance of a permitwill not affect the validity of the permit, and any violation which hasalready been reported pursuant to andSection; 778.14(c) will remain in therecords of the regulatory authority until the violation is abated.One commenter requested clarification of the responsibility of the regulatoryauthority with regard to verifying the information supplied by the permitapplicant or challenging any information the regulatory authority has reasonto believe may be incorrect.The regulatory authority may independently verify the information containedin a permit application if it has reason to believe that the informationis either inaccurate or incomplete. If the regulatory authority determinesthat the permit application is inaccurate or incomplete it may refuse toprocess the application until the missing information is submitted, orit may block the permit because of a violation or an ownership or controlrelationship discovered as a result of its own investigation. In eitherevent, the regulatory authority should notify the permit applicant to submitadditional information, which may indicate that the application is in factaccurate and complete or that a permit should be issued because there isno ownership or control link between the applicant and the violator. Aftersuch notice, the burden to respond is on the applicant.One commenter suggested that the permittee be required to update the informationat midterm review rather than on an annual basis, and to make any otherupdates only if changes occur. Another commenter suggested that updatesbe made only at the time of permit revision.OSMRE did not adopt these suggestions. As previously discussed, the finalrule requires a permittee to update the information contained in the permitapplication within thirty days of the issuance of a cessation order forthe permitted site. OSMRE believes that it will be more advantageous torequest the information at the time of a violation rather than on an annualbasis. If no violation has occurred at midterm, there is no need for aninformation update. If a violation has occurred prior to an applicationfor a permit revision, then the updated information is needed so that appropriatealternative enforcement action may be taken if necessary.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Procedural Matters</ITAG>Effect in Federal Program States and on Indian LandsThe rule will apply through cross-referencing to the following Federalprogram States: California, Georgia, Idaho, Massachusetts, Michigan, NorthCarolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee and Washington.The Federal programs for these States appear at 30 CFR Parts 905, 910,912, 921, 922, 933, 937, 939, 941, 942 and 947, respectively. Commentswere specifically solicited in the proposed rule as to whether unique conditionsexisted in any of these States relating to the proposal which should bereflected in the final rule either as changes to the national rules oras State-specific amendments to any or all of the Federal programs. Nocomments were received. The rule also applies through cross-referencingto Indian lands under the Federal program for Indian lands as providedin 30 CFR Part 750.Effect on State ProgramsFollowing promulgation of the final rule, OSMRE will evaluate permanentState regulatory programs approved under section 503 of the Act to determineany changes in these programs that will be necessary. When the directordetermines that certain State program provisions should be amended in orderto be made no less effective than the revised Federal rules, the individualStates will be notified in accordance with the provision of 30 CFR 732.17.Paperwork Reduction ActThe information collection requirements contained in this rule have beenapproved by the Office of Management and Budget as required by 44 U.S.C.3501 <T3>et seq., </T3>and assigned clearance numbers 1029-0034 and 1029-0041.The public reporting burden for this information is estimated to averageone hour per response for andSection; 773.17(i), and 13.5 hours per responsefor the sections located in Part 778 amended by this rule. The estimateincludes the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewingthe collection of information. You may send comments regarding these burdenestimates or any other aspect of this collection of information, includingsuggestions for reducing the burden, to Information Collection ClearanceOfficer, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 1951 ConstitutionAvenue NW., Washington, DC 20240; and the Office of Management and Budget,Paperwork Reduction Project (1029-0034), Washington, DC 20503.The information is needed to meet the requirements of sections 201, 507and 510 of Pub. L. 95-87. The information will be used by OSMRE in reviewingand approving permit applications. Except for the disclosure of a socialsecurity number, the obligation to respond is mandatory in accordance withsections 201(c)(1), 201(c)(2), 501(b), 507(b), 510(c) and 517(b)(1)(E).Executive Order 12291The Department of the Interior has examined the rule according to the criteriaof Executive Order 12291 (February 17, 1981) and has determined that itis not major and does not require a regulatory impact analysis. This determinationis based on the findings that the regulatory revisions and additions ofthis rule will cause very little increase in the costs of operating a minein a manner that meets the requirements of the Act. Further, there willbe no significant impacts on competition, employment, productivity, innovationor on the ability of U.S.-based enterprises to compete with foreign-basedenterprises.Regulatory Flexibility ActThe Department of the Interior has also determined, pursuant to the RegulatoryFlexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq., </T3>that the proposed rule will not have a significant economicimpact on a substantial number of small entities because although the rulewill impose new regulatory burdens on small entities, the time and effortrequired for a small entity to fulfill the additional data collection requirementswill be minimal.National Environmental Policy ActThe rule has been reviewed by OSMRE and it has been determined to be categoricallyexcluded from the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process in accordancewith the Department of the Interior Manual (516 DM 2, Appendix 1.10) andthe Council on Environmental Quality Regulations for Implementing the ProceduralProvisions of NEPA (40 CFR 1507.3).Author The principal author of this rule is Andrew F. DeVito, Office of SurfaceMining Reclamation and Enforcement, 1951 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20240; Telephone: 202-343-5241 (Commercial or FTS). <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects </ITAG>30 CFR Part 773 Administrative practice and procedure, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,Surface mining, Underground mining. 30 CFR Part 778 Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Surface mining, Underground mining.30 CFR Part 843 Administrative practice and procedure, Law enforcement, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Surface mining, Underground mining. Accordingly, 30 CFR Parts 773, 778 and 843 are amended as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: December 8, 1988. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">James E. Cason, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Assistant Secretary_Land and Minerals Management. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 773_REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITS AND PERMIT PROCESSING </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 773 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 30 U.S.C. 1201 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 16 U.S.C. 470 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 16 U.S.C. 1531 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 16 U.S.C. 661 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 16 U.S.C. 703 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 16 U.S.C. 668a <T3>et seq.,</T3> 16 U.S.C. 469 <T3>et seq.,</T3> 16 U.S.C. 470aa <T3>et seq.,</T3> and Pub. L. 100-34.</ITAG>2. Section 773.15 is amended by adding paragraph (e) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 773.15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Review of permit applications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(e) <T3>Final compliance review.</T3> After an application is approved, butbefore the permit is issued, the regulatory authority shall reconsiderits decision to approve the application, based on the compliance reviewrequired by paragraph (b)(1) of this section in light of any new informationsubmitted under andSection;andSection; 778.13(i) and 778.14(d) of this chapter.3. Section 773.17 is amended by adding paragraph (i) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 773.17 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Permit conditions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(i) Within thirty days after a cessation order is issued under andSection;843.11 of this chapter, or the State program equivalent, for operationsconducted under the permit, except where a stay of the cessation orderis granted and remains in effect the permittee shall either submit to theregulatory authority the following information, current to the date thecessation order was issued, or notify the regulatory authority in writingthat there has been no change since the immediately preceding submittalof such information: (1) Any new information needed to correct or update the information previouslysubmitted to the regulatory authority by the permittee under andSection;778.13(c) of this chapter; or (2) If not previously submitted, the information required from a permitapplicant by andSection; 778.13(c) of this chapter. <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 778_PERMIT APPLICATIONS_MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR LEGAL, FINANCIAL,COMPLIANCE AND RELATED INFORMATION </ITAG>4. The authority citation for Part 778 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Pub. L. 95-87, 30 U.S.C. 1201 <T3>et seq.,</T3> and Pub. L. 100-34.</ITAG>5. Section 778.10 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 778.10 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Information collection. </ITAG>The information collection requirements contained in Part 778 have beenapproved by the Office of Management and Budget under 44 U.S.C. 3507 andassigned clearance number 1029-0034. The information is being used to meetthe requirements of sections 201, 507(b), 508(a), and 510(c) of the Act,which require that persons conducting surface coal mining operations submitto the regulatory authority relevant information regarding ownership andcontrol of the property to be affected by such operations, compliance statusand history. This information will be used by the regulatory authorityto insure that all legal, financial and compliance requirements are satisfiedprior to making a decision to issue or deny a permit under the permanentregulatory program. Except where specifically noted, the obligation torespond is mandatory in accordance with sections 201(c)(1), 201(c)(2),501(b), 507(b), 510(c), and 571(b)(1)(E). 6. Section 778.13 is amended by revising the introductory text and paragraphs(b), (c) and (d), and by adding paragraphs (i) and (j) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 778.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of interests. </ITAG>An application shall contain the following information, except that thesubmission of a social security number is voluntary: <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) The name, address, telephone number and, as applicable, social securitynumber and employer identification number of the: (1) Applicant; (2) Applicant's resident agent; and (3) Person who will pay the abandoned mine land reclamation fee. (c) For each person who owns or controls the applicant under the definitionof ``owned or controlled'' and ``owns or controls'' in andSection; 773.5of this chapter, as applicable: (1) The person's name, address, social security number and employer identificationnumber; (2) The person's ownership or control relationship to the applicant, includingpercentage of ownership and location in organizational structure; (3) The title of the person's position, date position was assumed, andwhen submitted under andSection; 773.17(i) of this chapter, date of departurefrom the position; (4) Each additional name and identifying number, including employer identificationnumber, Federal or State permit number, and MSHA number with date of issuance,under which the person owns or controls, or previously owned or controlled,a surface coal mining and reclamation operation in the United States withinthe five years preceding the date of the application; and (5) The application number or other identifier of, and the regulatory authorityfor, any other pending surface coal mining operation permit applicationfiled by the person in any State in the United States. (d) For any surface coal mining operation owned or controlled by eitherthe applicant or by any person who owns or controls the applicant underthe definition of ``owned or controlled'' and ``owns or controls'' in andSection;773.5 of this chapter, the operation's: (1) Name, address, identifying numbers, including employer identificationnumber, Federal or State permit number and MSHA number, the date of issuanceof the MSHA number, and the regulatory authority; and (2) Ownership or control relationship to the applicant, including percentageof ownership and location in organizational structure. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(i) After an applicant is notified that his or her application is approved,but before the permit is issued, the applicant shall, as applicable, update,correct or indicate that no change has occurred in the information previouslysubmitted under paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section. (j) The applicant shall submit the information required by this sectionand by andSection; 778.14 of this part in any prescribed OSMRE format thatis issued. 7. Section 778.14 is amended by revising the introductory text, the introductorytext to paragraph (c), and paragraph (c)(1) and by adding paragraph (d)to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 778.14 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Violation information. </ITAG>Each application shall contain the following information: <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) For any violation of a provision of the Act, or of any law, rule orregulation of the United States, or of any State law, rule or regulationenacted pursuant to Federal law, rule or regulation pertaining to air orwater environmental protection incurred in connection with any surfacecoal mining operation, a list of all violation notices received by theapplicant during the three year period preceding the application date,and a list of all unabated cessation orders and unabated air and waterquality violation notices received prior to the date of the applicationby any surface coal mining and reclamation operation owned or controlledby either the applicant or by any person who owns or controls the applicant.For each violation notice or cessation order reported, the lists shallinclude the following information, as applicable: (1) Any identifying numbers for the operation, including the Federal orState permit number and MSHA number, the dates of issuance of the violationnotice and MSHA number, the name of the person to whom the violation noticewas issued, and the name of the issuing regulatory authority, departmentor agency; <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) After an applicant is notified that his or her application is approved,but before the permit is issued, the applicant shall, as applicable, update,correct or indicate that no change has occurred in the information previouslysubmitted under this section. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 843_FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT </ITAG>7. The authority citation for Part 843 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Pub. L. 95-87, 30 U.S.C. 1201 et seq., and Pub. L.100-34.</ITAG>8. Section 843.11 is amended by adding paragraph (g) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 843.11</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Cessation orders. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) Where OSMRE is the regulatory authority, within sixty days after issuinga cessation order, OSMRE shall notify in writing any person who has beenidentified under andSection;andSection; 773.17(i) and 778.13 (c) and (d) ofthis chapter as owning or controlling the permittee, that the cessationorder was issued and that the person has been identified as an owner orcontroller.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-4755 Filed 3-1-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-05-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>