<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891113-0016 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-13-89.f2.A1015</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 217 / Monday, November 13, 1989/ Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Aviation Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Parts 27 and 29</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 25287; Amdts. 27-25 and 29-29]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2120-AB35</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Airworthiness Standards; Occupant Restraint in Normal and TransportCategory Rotorcraft</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>These amendments to the airworthiness standards for normaland transport category rotorcraft add two dynamic crash impact design conditionsfor seat and occupant restraint systems and increase the static designload factors for seating devices and items of mass in the cabin or adjacentto the cabin as prescribed. These amendments also prescribe a shoulderharness for each occupant and adopt human impact injury criteria as a measurefor occupant protection for dynamic crash impact conditions. These amendments,consistent with the present state of the art, significantly improve occupantprotection for normal and transport category rotorcraft in a survivableemergency landing impact mode.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>December 13, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Mr. J. H. Major, FAA, RegulationsGroup, ASW-111, Rotorcraft Directorate, Aircraft Certification Service,Fort Worth, Texas 76193-0111, telephone (817) 624-5117 or FTS 734-5117.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>These amendments are based on Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) No.87-4 (52 FR 20938; June 3, 1987) which proposed to amend the rotorcraftairworthiness standards to improve occupant protection in normal and transportcategory rotorcraft for a survivable emergency landing impact. Notice No.87-4 proposed to increase occupant protection and to assess the capabilityof the occupant restraint system and rotorcraft seats for a combined verticaland longitudinal dynamic test and for a primarily longitudinal dynamictest which are representative of emergency landing impact scenarios andto improve occupant protection from certain items of mass in an emergencylanding impact. Occupant injury criteria were also proposed as unique pass/failcriteria for the seat and restraint system dynamic test conditions. Therestraint system encompasses the seating device, cushions, and torso restraintsystem, also known as a safety belt and a shoulder harness. This rulemakingactivity is one part of the FAA Aircraft Crash Dynamics program outlinedin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on September 21, 1984 (49 FR 37111).In light of comments, the FAA reopened the comment period until May 6,1988, and also announced in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (53 FR 7579; March 8, 1988) that a public meetingwould be held in Fort Worth, Texas, on April 20, 1988. The viewpoints presentedby participants at the public meeting helped the FAA clarify the issuesand counterproposals presented in response to the notice. A copy of themeeting transcript is contained in the docket for this rulemaking. Allinterested persons have been given an opportunity to participate in themaking of these amendments and due consideration has been given to allmatters presented. A number of nonsubstantive changes and minor changesof an editorial and clarifying nature have been made to the proposals basedupon comments received and upon further FAA review. No comments were receivedrelating to the preliminary regulatory evaluation economic impact summarycontained in the notice or to the associated economic evaluation reportfiled in the docket. Except as indicated herein, the proposals containedin the notice have been adopted without change.The proposals were based on the data, references, and conclusions containedin Report. No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11, ``Analysis of Rotorcraft Crash Dynamicsfor Development of Improved Crashworthiness Design Criteria,'' June 1985,and other data sources such as full-scale rotorcraft and small aircraftimpact test reports some of which were contained in SP622, ``Crash Dynamicsof General Aviation Aircraft,'' April 1985, published by the Society ofAutomotive Engineers (SAE). A copy of each report is contained in the regulatorydocket.Since these two reports were published in 1985, additional reports andinformation have been published about dynamic tests of aircraft seats.Much of the information, data, and conclusions from these tests provides:(1) Basic aircraft impact response data; (2) seat and anthropomorphic testdummy (ATD) interface loads and motion; (3) human injury assessments andthe relationships associated with the proposed impact conditions; and (4)assessments of aircraft seat design technology required to comply withthe proposed criteria. This body of aircraft information, data, and testresults is also applicable, in part, to rotorcraft designs and supportsthis rulemaking activity.Two dynamic test conditions were proposed in Notice No. 87-4. One testis primarily a vertical impact condition with vertical and longitudinalloads to simulate ground impact following a high rate of vertical descentwith the Rotorcraft level. This condition emphasizes occupant verticalloading and determines the effectiveness of design features provided torestrain and support the occupant and to attenuate or control the loadsimposed on the occupant. This reduces the potential for spinal compressiveinjury in an impact of this type.The second test, a longitudinal impact with yaw angle, simulates a horizontalimpact with a ground level obstruction such as a sloped ground surfaceor rise. This test condition provides an assessment of the occupant restraintsystem, potential secondary head impact with structure, etc., and seatstructural performance in this mode.Any direct correlation or relationship between the two dynamic test conditionswas not envisioned or intended. These two dynamic test conditions werederived from the civil rotorcraft accident study of Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11and other aforementioned data. These two test conditions represent theexpected aircraft response to an emergency landing impact, measured atthe cabin floor/seat attachment, which is transmitted to the occupant throughthe seat and torso restraint system. Accordingly, it was not intended toinclude a fuselage, landing gear, or a major part of the fuselage to demonstratecompliance with the proposed seat test standards.Of course, for a seat that is an integral part of the rotorcraft structure,the test setup must include a sufficient part of the fuselage to duplicatethe seat and the occupant restraint system for a proper test. These seatdynamic test conditions are consistent with the structural characteristicsof present rotorcraft designs and with the general or typical operationalemergency landing impact found. The tests also provide for measured andmeaningful protection of occupants in normal and transport category rotorcraft.The occupant injury pass/fail criteria adopted in these amendments arethe same as those proposed for small airplanes in Notice No. 86-19 (51FR 44878; December 12, 1986) and adopted in Amendment 23-36 (53 FR 30802;August 15, 1988) and are compatible with those proposed in Notice No. 86-11(51 FR 25982; July 17, 1986) and adopted in Amendment 25-64 (53 FR 17640;May 17, 1988) for transport airplanes. The injury criteria are also foundin Advisory Circular AC 21-22, ``Injury Criteria for Human Exposure toImpact,'' June 20, 1985.A major concern addressed by the proposal for occupant injury and seatand torso restraint system pass/fail criteria is the secondary head impactwhich may inflict a debilitating injury and result in concussion and possibleunconsciousness. The measurement proposed in Notice No. 87-4 is the headinjury criteria (HIC) used in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No.208 (49 CFR 571.208). The HIC must be applied when the results of the seatdynamic tests show that structure or other hard objects are within theanthropomorphic test dummy's (ATD) head strike envelope. This proposaluses a practical alternative dynamic seat test procedure rather than requiringtests with seats installed in the particular aircraft fuselage design.The head acceleration time history must be measured and recorded duringthe seat dynamic tests and then evaluated according to the HIC criteriawhenever secondary head impact may occur. This allows testing of a seatand approval whenever installed for unique interior and cockpit arrangements.Spinal injuries occurring during rotorcraft accidents are another concern.The frequency of serious spinal injuries versus the total frequency ofserious injuries in survivable helicopter accidents is approximately 30percent as shown in Figure 30 of Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11.The Dynamic Response Index (DRI) which is based on a single lumped-mass,damped-spring model of the spine and respective support mass has traditionallybeen used to predict probability of spinal injury in the performance evaluationof military airplane ejection seats. The DRI has been correlated with ejectionseat testing and service experience to provide a level of confidence forthis ejection seat application. However, there are inherent differencesin function, geometry, dynamic pulse exposure, and occupant restraint betweencivil aircraft seats and military ejection seats. The difficulty of selectingthe most representative acceleration measurement point in the occupant/seatsystems makes direct application of the DRI questionable and difficultas a performance criterion for civil aircraft seats.As reported in SAE Paper No. 850851, ``Data for the Development of Criteriafor General Aviation Seat and Restraint System Performance,'' April 1985,and as discussed in paragraph 6(c)(5) of AC 21-22, the pelvic and spinallumbar compression load limitation of 1,500 pounds (6.7 kilo newtons) proposedin the notice is an appropriate limit to assure a low probability of spinalinjury for rotorcraft as well as airplane occupants. The pelvic compressiveload measured in the ATD is direct, easily measured, and requires no additionalanalysis or interpretation to determine compliance with the proposed standard.In addition, seat pan acceleration and an ATD spinal compression load measuredin a test of military helicopter seats indicate an inordinate variationbetween the spinal load and seat pan acceleration. Therefore, seat panaccelerations are not a reliable prediction of spinal compression loads.Localized cabin floor deformation can occur as a result of fuselage deformationin a survivable emergency landing impact. The simulated floor or seat raildisplacement of 10anddegrees; pitch and 10anddegrees; roll will prove the abilityof the seat and its floor or sidewall attachments to tolerate such structuraldeformation or displacement resulting from an impact. Seats integral withthe fuselage or bulkhead-mounted (without tracks) rather than floor-mountedneed not be deformed prior to conducting the dynamic tests. The simulatedfloor deformation specified for the dynamic tests is not intended to bea measure of the floor strength or deformation capability but is intendedto demonstrate the tolerance of the seat and its attachments to acceptfloor deformation common to actual crashes.The new static strength requirements of andSection;andSection; 27.561 (b)(3)and (c) and 29.561 (b)(3) and (c) contain increased static design inertialload factors to provide an improved level of safety for seats and occupantrestraint systems and for items of mass installed both inside the cabinand adjacent to the cabin, as prescribed. These new seat static designinertial load factors will supplement the seat and restraint system dynamictest standards in new andSection;andSection; 27.562 and 29.562. Those itemsof mass outside of and adjacent to the cabin must be designed to an increasedforward inertial load factor. This increased factor reduces the likelihoodof attachment failure and subsequent penetration of the item of mass intothe cabin.The current static design inertial load factors for transport rotorcraftunderfloor fuel tanks are retained in revised andSection; 29.561(d). Revisedfuel tank standards are deferred for further study and development of possiblealternate means of rotorcraft fuel tank protection.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Comments</ITAG>GeneralSixteen commenters from small and large U.S. helicopter manufacturers,foreign airworthiness authorities, foreign helicopter manufacturers, andother groups and individuals responded to the notice. All commenters agreewith the FAA objective to improve occupant safety in an emergency landingimpact, one recommends adoption of standards without lengthy delay, andseveral offer counterproposals and recommendations.A commenter emphasizes that the proposal should not apply to rotorcraftdesigns presently in production or undergoing type certification. The newstandards do not apply to rotorcraft for which application for type certificationis made prior to the effective date or to derivatives of such rotorcraftfor which an application for an amended type certificate is made afterthe effective date of these amendments.Several commenters support the proposal for installation and mandatoryuse of a shoulder harness, also called an upper torso restraint. Threecommenters also recommend installation and mandatory use of an upper torsorestraint for all newly manufactured rotorcraft after a certain date. NationalTransportation Safety Board (NTSB) Recommendation No. A-85-70 recommendsinstallation of a shoulder harness for each seat in rotorcraft manufacturedafter December 31, 1987. The FAA has initiated a separate rulemaking projectwhich will respond to recommendations of the NTSB as well as the commentersrelative to mandating shoulder harnesses in production rotorcraft. Therefore,no change is necessary for this amendment which applies only to whollynew rotorcraft designs for which a type certificate application is receivedafter the effective date of this amendment. A commenter also recommendsinstallation of new design seats with harnesses that meet the dynamic teststandards, whenever the rotorcraft interior is refurbished for older rotorcraft.This recommendation is beyond the scope of this rulemaking activity.A commenter objects to equal dynamic test standards for normal and transportcategory rotorcraft and refers to a public policy of higher or more stringentstandards for transport category rotorcraft than those of normal categoryrotorcraft. The standards, which are equivalent for both categories, havebeen derived from the rotorcraft emergency landing impact and fuselagedeformation characteristics of small and large rotorcraft which are basedon accident and incident information of both categories.The standards do, therefore, consider both categories in relation to size,weight, and other factors and rightfully afford the necessary protectionfor passengers in both cases.The seat design standards reflect the crash impact pulse derived from theaccident information and fuselage impact deformation data. These valuesdo not differ markedly between small and large helicopters. The objective,to significantly improve occupant protection for small and large helicopters,is achieved by adoption of the proposed standards to simulate known impactconditions and to avoid exceeding human injury criteria.It should be noted that the human impact injury criteria set out in AC21-22 does not vary with respect to the category of aircraft.Several commenters contend that the dynamic test standards are too severeand they object to the use of an ATD. They suggest the use of a simplifieddynamic vertical drop test using a mass to simulate the occupant. In addition,they consider static strength substantiation for the longitudinal impactcondition to be sufficient. Other commenters also object to the dynamictest standards because they believe that proving compliance is beyond thetechnical and financial capability of small companies. These and othercommenters object to the proposed static design inertial factors for occupantsand items of mass in the cabin, as well as those items external to thecabin, and recommend alternate factors. These concerns are addressed inthe specific comments.Specific Comments on the ProposalsThe following comments are keyed to like-numbered proposals in Notice No.87-4 and are presented in the same order as the corresponding amendmentsfound in the rules portion of this document.<T3>Proposal 2. </T3>Notice No. 87-4 proposed a revision to the introductorytext of paragraph (b) of andSection; 27.561 to remove the word ``minor''before the words ``crash landing.'' No comments were received on the introductorytext, and it is adopted as proposed.After further FAA review of proposed paragraph (b)(3), the subjects werereordered for emphasis and clarity. This editorial change places ``eachoccupant'' as the first subject and ``each item of mass'' as the secondsubject in this standard. As proposed, paragraph (b)(3) is also changedfor clarity to refer to static load ``factors'' rather than ``forces.''A commenter requests that the phrase ``inside the cabin'' be added afterthe phrase ``items of mass'' in proposed paragraph (b)(3) to define thescope of the standard for these items of mass. The FAA agrees, and thechange has been incorporated to prevent confusion between the scope ofparagraphs (b)(3) and (c). The FAA notes paragraph (c) refers to externalitems of mass or items outside of the crew and passenger compartments.<T3>Comments on Static Load Factors of Proposal No. 2, Paragraph (b).</T3>Comments were received concerning the magnitude of the proposed increasedstatic load factors, and a discussion of the comments follows.A commenter recommends, in conjunction with an alternate guideline to theproposed seat dynamic tests, a static design guideline and an objectivestandard that contain lower inertial load factors than those proposed inNotice No. 87-4. The commenter acknowledges that this static design guidelineis without supporting data but is based on his knowledge and intuitiveconclusions. The same commenter also suggests more appropriate inertialload factors could be derived from a study of comparative static and dynamictests of several seat designs.Two other comments recommend adoption of lower inertial load factors. Onereferred to those proposed during the Rotorcraft Regulatory Review Programpublic meeting in December 1979. Another commenter forwarded a matrix ortable of the inertia factors proposed in the recent rulemaking activityfor rotorcraft and small and transport airplane seats, and states thatthe variation found in the factors for the different aircraft is not justified.The commenter suggests that the rotorcraft inertial factors are too highand should be lower.One commenter proposes requiring structural capability to support and restraina 170-pound pilot (or passenger) with a shoulder harness and safety beltfor an 8g forward inertial load factor, combined with a 4g sideward inertialload factor, to approximate a 9g (combined) factor. The commenter proposesto omit the longitudinal/horizontal deceleration dynamic test proposedin the notice and rely on the noted static test or structural analysisresults. The commenter, however, proposes a simplified dynamic verticaldrop test and the longitudinal static load condition to dramatically improvecrash survivability but permit small manufacturers to conduct meaningfultests and develop new model normal category helicopters. Three other commentersdid not comment on the proposed static inertial load factors (or staticstrength factors), but they did propose an identical, simplified dynamictest for the vertical and longitudinal velocity change or impact conditionand only static strength substantiation for the longitudinal impact condition.See Proposal 3 for further discussion.Two commenters propose no reduction in the load factors proposed in thenotice. One commenter agrees with the inertial factors proposed but suggestsan 18g downward factor when compared to a 12g limit contained in Table39 of Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11. The FAA notes the 12gandplusmin;1g limitis recommended in the report for the design ``stroking factor'' on newdesign rotorcraft seats to limit the occupant spinal loads. However, a25g downward inertia factor is recommended in the report as a design loadfactor after the seat ``strokes.'' One commenter specifically recommendsno reduction in the proposed static and dynamic standards in the notice,contrary to the recommendations from other commenters.FAA Response to Comments of Static Load Factors of Paragraph (b)Many commenters note the expense of compliance but do not propose alternativestandards. The FAA is also concerned about the cost of compliance withthe new standards. A preliminary cost benefit analysis was prepared forthe notice, and a final cost benefit analysis has been prepared for theseamendments. A copy is filed in the docket. See the economic summary inthis preamble for further information.These comments were reviewed in conjunction with available data such asthat contained in Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11. The static inertial factorsare needed to supplement the two seat and occupant ATD dynamic test conditionsin andSection;andSection; 27.562(b) and 29.562(b). The inertial factors inandSection; 27.562(b)(3) are compatible with the dynamic load factors ofandSection;andSection; 27.562(b) and 29.562(b) and are supported by a reviewof rotorcraft accidents reported in Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11.Although the static load factors proposed in Notice 87-4 are greater thanthose recently adopted for transport airplanes, the rotorcraft factorsshould be greater because of the differences in size, configuration, andtypical impact attitudes and conditions between these types of aircraft.These differences result in rotorcraft experiencing greater load factorsduring impact than typical transport airplanes. A recent study reportedby Mr. G. Wittlin highlights the differences as discussed later. Accordingly,higher load factors were proposed in Notice 87-4 for rotorcraft for bothdynamic tests and static tests. Static loading substantiation, by testor analysis, assures that necessary static structural strength of the seatand its attachments to the rotorcraft are provided to support dynamic tstingof the occupant restraint system. The static substantiation is a necessarysupplement to dynamic testing which proves the performance of the seatand occupant restraint system, including secondary impact of the occupant'shead, under rapid loading and load magnification due to dynamics of thesystem during the test. The static factors (i.e., structural strength requirements)are intended to provide sufficient strength for the seat and its attachmentsduring dynamic testing and provide sufficient strength for the fuselagestructure without dynamic testing. The FAA determined it is proper to notonly impose the dynamic test standards but to impose static design standardsto supplement the dynamic standards.A technical paper entitled, ``The Influence of Airplane Size and CrashData Criteria,'' by Mr. G. Wittlin, was presented at the Flight SafetyFoundation, Inc., Conference and Workshop on Occupant Safety, October 31to November 3, 1988, at Arlington, Virginia. A copy of this paper is includedin the docket. Table 8 in that paper contains a range of floor dynamicpulses as a function of four groups of airplane sizes ranging from generalaviation to wide-body airplanes for both the vertical and longitudinaldirection pulse determined from tests or parametric studies. Most presentrotorcraft designs are comparable in size to the general aviation and commutersize airplanes for fuselage design and structural deformation characteristicsand are further related to typical rotorcraft impacts that were includedin Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11. The pertinent information from the technicalpaper is summarized in Table 1. <ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table</T4> 1._<T4>Peak Load Factors for Floor Dynamic Pulses for Small Airplanes</T4><H1> </H1><H1>Vertical direction</H1><H1>Longitudinal direction</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">General Aviation<D>33g peak</D><D>33g peak</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Commuter<D>23g peak</D><D>17g peak</D></ITAG></ITAG>Narrow and wide body transport airplanes have significantly less decelerationforces in the vertical and horizontal direction and are not comparableto rotorcraft designs. For comparison, the rotorcraft standards in theamendments to andSection;andSection; 27.562 and 29.562 require a peak of 30gfor the downward case (vertical with horizontal component) and 18.4g forthe horizontal case (longitudinal with yaw component). These dynamic conditionvalues for rotorcraft standards compare favorably to the floor pulses inthe table above for comparable-sized airplanes.In summary, the static inertial design factors supplement the two dynamictest conditions. The 16g forward static design factor is needed to supplementthe 18.4g dynamic standard and the 20g downward (vertical) static designfactor relates to the 26g vertical component of the dynamic standard forseat strength and for backup or fuselage structural strength. Therefore,the static inertia factors of paragraph (b) are adopted as proposed.<T3>Comments on Proposal 2, Paragraph (c). </T3>Three commenters recommendincreasing the inertial load factors proposed in andSection; 29.561(c) foritems of mass outside the cabin as follows. One commenter states the inertialload factors proposed in paragraph (c) are too low and not consistent withthose higher factors in paragraph (b) for interior items. Another commenterrecommends an inertial load factor of 10g for both forward and downwarddirections as a proper design condition, while yet another commenter recommends12g forward, 6 sideward, 12g downward, and retaining 1.5g upward.The FAA agrees that higher factors will increase safety over those proposedby Notice No. 87-4 and are more compatible with the factors of amendedandSection; 27.561(b). Nevertheless, additional public notice and commentwould be appropriate and necessary for the significant increase in theinertial factors recommended for attachment of external items of mass.Adopting higher inertial factor is beyond the scope of the notice; therefore,the inertial factors are adopted as proposed. However, the FAA will considerincorporating this suggestion into a future rule.<T3>Proposal 3.</T3> New andSection;andSection; 27.562 and 29.562 were proposedto add two dynamic test conditions and pass/fail criteria and to providefor acceptance of an alternate approach in place of the two physical tests.In Notice 87-4 the explanation for Proposal 3 contained justification fornew andSection;andSection; 27.562 and 29.562 being identical.One commenter states public policy dictates a higher standard for transportcategory rotorcraft when compared to the normal category standards andproposes simplified tests for normal category rotorcraft. The FAA notestransport rotorcraft in certain cases comply with higher standards thannormal category rotorcraft, yet many of the standards are identical andapplied in the same manner, such as the current seat structural strengthand design standards in andSection;andSection; 27.561 and 29.561 and andSection;andSection;27.785 and 29.785. The impact conditions for normal and transport rotorcraftare also considered the same. Since andSection;andSection; 27.562 and 29.562concern strength or performance of the seats and occupant restraint systemsduring an emergency landing impact derived from rotorcraft characteristicsand accident information, these objective performance standards recognizeand consider implicitly practical differences in the types of rotorcraftand seats. Additionally, the size, construction, use, and performance ofmany normal and transport category rotorcraft are very similar since thedivision between the two categories is 6,000 pounds gross weight. The informationfrom the technical paper, ``The Influence of Airplane Size on Crash DataCriteria,'' by G. Wittlin, presented in Table 1 earlier, also supportsthe dynamic impact conditions. Since the human impact injury criteria arenot dependent on the type of rotorcraft, the injury criteria of andSection;andSection;27.562 and 29.562 are identical. Further, the rotorcraft accident studycontained in Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11, Table 8, reveals that occupantsin accidents involving small-size helicopters could benefit more than occupantsof larger helicopters from improved occupant standards. Normal categoryrotorcraft also constituted about 86 percent of the total U.S. rotorcraftfleet in 1984 according to the Helicopter Association International. Thispercentage has not changed appreciably.One commenter states that the dynamic tests are impractical and too costly,and several others contend the increase in certification expense and thetechnical expertise required to meet the proposed standards, if adopted,would be an insurmountable obstacle. However, no quantitative economicdata or information was submitted to the docket to support these arguments.The final economic evaluation shows benefits exceed the costs of complianceand also in-service operation for normal category rotorcraft designs. TheFAA notes that technical expertise is available, and seats with strokingcapability are in service in civil rotorcraft.Several other commenters state the added expense will curtail certificationof new part 27 rotorcraft designs. Since estimated benefits exceed thecosts, new designs should not be deterred. One commenter agrees with theproposed standard for transport rotorcraft but not for normal categoryrotorcraft. The benefits expected from the part 27 standards are more significantthan those of the part 29 standards according to the economic evaluation.Editorial changes have been made to paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) for clarityand also to agree with Amendment 25-64 for transport airplanes. The amendment,as adopted, states the occupant ``is exposed to the loads'' rather than``experience ultimate dynamic loads.''A commenter states that only seats occupied for takeoff and landing shouldbe subject to the dynamic tests. The FAA agrees, and paragraph (b) is revisedto apply to ``each seat type design or other seating device approved foroccupancy during takeoff and landing.'' This is similar to recently adoptedandSection; 25.562(b) in Amdt. 25-64 and includes an editorial change toadd ``type design'' to seats. Those seats not complying with these standardsor the standards in andSection;andSection; 27.561, 27.785, 29.561 and 29.785must nevertheless comply with the flight load factors of the aircraft andmust be placarded to prevent use of the seat during takeoff and landing.It is anticipated such ``unique'' seats will seldom be installed in rotorcraft.Two commenters recommend the ATD should represent a nominal rather thana minimum weight of 170 pounds. The FAA agrees since the specificationcited currently specifies the correct weight; therefore, the words ``totalminimum'' to describe weight are removed from paragraph (b). In addition,the standard has been divided into two sentences to be parallel with andSection;25.562(b). The first sentence addresses the seats and an acceptable analysisrather than test alone. The second sentence addresses the previous commentson the ATD and includes the phrase ``sitting in the normal upright position''to properly describe the ATD test position.A commenter agrees with two dynamic seat tests but recommends adoptingthe two test conditions for transport airplanes contained in Notice 86-11and adopted by Amdt. 25-64. These tests for airplanes have increased energy(higher velocity) but significantly decreased deceleration factors. Thetransport airplane standards represent a larger airplane fuselage havingabout 30 inches of structure that could crush and absorb the energy onimpact. The two dynamic tests proposed in paragraph (b) are proper forrotorcraft fuselage characteristics and for the impact attitudes and speedsfor a significant percentage of the accidents. According to the informationin Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11, the proposed velocities represent about92 to 95 percent of the survivable accidents, the range of attitude encompassedin the proposal represents about 77 percent, and the pulse duration representsa fuselage crushing or deformation capability of approximately 9.7 inches.For smaller rotorcraft which do not have 9.7 inches of available fuselagestructure to absorb the impact energy, energy absorption by any fixed landinggear failure is tacitly included in the standard. Therefore, the dynamictests in paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) are adopted with the changes discussed.``Downward'' velocity has been added to paragraph (b)(1) and ``forward''velocity to paragraph (b)(2). The last sentence in each includes the word``floor'' as the correct description for measuring deceleration.Two commenters request a change to paragraph (b) to explicitly providefor the use of analysis supported by test. The FAA agrees since paragraph(d) was intended to allow use of a rational analysis supported by testas an option to the use of test alone. Paragraph (b), as adopted, includesa clause identical to that contained in andSection; 25.562(b) stating dynamictests or rational analysis based on dynamic tests of a similar type seatmay be used. As a result of two comments, paragraph (d) is revised to applyto the entire section rather than to only paragraph (c).A commenter suggests in place of proposed paragraph (b) for dynamic teststo require either: (1) A static design standard which would include mandatoryupper torso restraint, consideration of floor flexibility or distortion,and energy absorbing features as equal to dynamic tests; or (2) simplifieddynamic tests without an ATD. The test would call for measuring the accelerationfactors on the seat pan using a mass simulating a 170-pound occupant forthe test conditions contained in the notice. Specific proposed standardsto accomplish the objectives cited by the commenter were not included.The FAA does not agree that a static test is sufficient to duplicate theoccupant loads and motion occurring during a dynamic impact condition;therefore, the dynamic test standard is retained.Three commenters offer a counterproposal to paragraphs (b) (1) and (2)for normal category rotorcraft. These commenters are concerned with smallrotorcraft equipped with seats integral with the basic structure of thefuselage. Two of the small rotorcraft designs in use today have featureson the flightcrew seats which allow stroking or seat displacement to limitthe vertical loads during an impact. The effectiveness of these featuresfor a specific impact condition is not known. The commenters propose staticstrength substantiation for the longitudinal impact case rather than dynamictest since static strength substantiation is considered sufficient. Theypropose one dynamic test_vertical with horizontal impact velocity for aresultant of 30 fps. An ATD would be replaced with a mass to simulate theoccupant. The deceleration forces or inertial load factor measured on themass would not be allowed to exceed 23g for more than 0.025 seconds total.In addition, their proposal would allow use of the landing gear and fuselagesupport structure and/or seat to absorb the energy and reduce the impactforces to 23g or less on the mass. A commenter states this dynamic testconcentrates on spinal compression loads and further contends the errorlikely to occur in their counterproposal is less than the error from thetests contained in Notice 87-4 when using the ATD because in reality, rotorcraftoccupant weight and size vary significantly from that of the ATD.The FAA notes that the ATD represents a 50-percentile male. One of thethree commenters refers to Report AD-A093784, December 1980, and AMCP 706-210as the basis for the counterproposal. These commenters advocate the counterproposalas a practical means for small manufacturers to develop (and certify) newpart 27 designs while improving occupant protection. One commenter alsoadvocates static test alone rather than a dynamic test for the longitudinalimpact case. Reduced static design inertial load factors are recommendedrather than those contained in Notice 87-4. However, the commenter agreeswith an increase from 9g to 16g forward factor for static strength substantiationif the proposed longitudinal dynamic test is not adopted. This commenterproposes a vertical impact test using an ATD and, in addition, a reducedseverity test which equals that proposed for transport airplanes in Notice86-11 and later adopted. One commenter states adopting dynamic tests andusing an ATD, as proposed, would cause a total redesign and may resultin abandoning current certification activity on a small, four-place helicopter.The FAA notes that the cost benefit analysis shows the benefits derived,especially for smaller rotorcraft, exceed the costs as noted in the economicsummary of this preamble. Two dynamic impact test conditions are necessaryto properly assess the restraint and support of occupants so that the humaninjury impact criteria will not be exceeded. The criteria include the assessmentof any secondary head impact with structure. The first part of this preamblecontains a further description of the objectives and reasons for adoptingthe two dynamic impact test conditions.One commenter supports the FAA analysis and agrees that the study in ReportNo. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11 indicates a need for vertical energy absorption tolimit occupant spinal compression injuries. The third highest hazard reportedwas related to ``vertebral'' compression injuries resulting from high verticalforces commonly found in rotorcraft accidents. Tolerance to compressiveinjuries of the spine decreases as age increases, and civil aircraft occupantsare typically (15 to 20 years) older than military aircraft occupants.The commenter further states most of the present energy absorbing seatand restraint system technology is based on military personnel and militaryaircraft designs or applications. The FAA notes the military rotorcraftcriteria are too stringent for civil rotorcraft, and the FAA has previouslypublished civil aircraft human impact injury criteria in AC 21-22. Thecommenter states that the dynamic tests proposed in Notice No. 87-4 shouldhelp in assuring the seat and occupant restraint system will function properlyunder dynamic (impact) conditions. The commenter further states the twodynamic test conditions proposed are similar to those recommended in ReportNo. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11, Table 39 and Figure 37, except less severe. The commenterrecommends no further reduction from the proposals in Notice No. 87-4 anddisagrees with other commenters who recommend that the FAA reduce the severityof the tests or delete the dynamic tests. The commenter further statesthat the FAA proposals address many of the major hazards that cause seriousand fatal injuries in survivable accidents. The commenter supports thetwo proposed dynamic seat and occupant test standards as proper, well defined,and cost effective, while acknowledging that rotorcraft with integal seatsmay require expanded advisory material. The discussion for paragraph (b)(3)addresses ``integral seat designs.''In summary, the two conditions in paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) are justifiedfor normal and transport category rotorcraft and are based on a reviewof rotorcraft accident data as stated before. The standards in paragraphs(b) (1) and (2) are adopted with the additional description of velocityand floor deceleration noted previously.Some commenters state the proposed standard does not recognize or allowthe use of seats integral with the fuselage structure, which is typicalof many small two or four-seat rotorcraft. The FAA agrees, and paragraph(b)(3) is revised to apply to nonintegral seats or to those seats ``wherefloor rails or floor or sidewall attachment devices are used'' to attachthe seat to the airframe structure. Integral seats and bulkhead-mountedseats without floor or sidewall attachment devices and with continuousattachments such as rows of rivets or screws, etc., are excluded from thespecific misalignment or preload in the test. A commenter recommends clearand specific guidance or advisory material to address integral seats andtheir dynamic tests. Advisory material for andSection;andSection; 27.562 and29.562 was previously drafted and comments invited (52 FR 20947; June 3,1987). No comments were received. The recommended guidance informationwill be included in this advisory material which will be subject to furtherpublic review.In addition, the explanation for the head impact criteria (HIC) equationstated in paragraph (c)(5) is adopted with a change that adds the word``form'' to clarify that an ATD head form is used for the HIC.<T3>Proposal 4.</T3> The notice proposed to revise andSection; 27.785 byadding the static inertial load factors of andSection; 27.561 and the dynamicconditions of andSection; 27.562 to paragraph (a) as requirements to protectoccupants from serious injury; to revise paragraph (b) to require eachoccupant seat, not just crew seats, to be equipped with a shoulder harnessin conjunction with a safety belt (or torso restraint system per TSO C114);to revise paragraph (c) to require that the safety belt and shoulder harnesshave a single-point release; to revise paragraph (f) to use an occupantweight of at least 170 lbs; and to revise paragraph (g) to require a 60-40percent safety belt-shoulder harness load distribution instead of the previous60-60 distribution. The notice further proposed to add a new paragraph(i) defining the seating device system; a new paragraph (j) to allow controlledstructural deformation or crushing of the seating device system to reduceoccupant loads from the proposed emergency landing dynamic test conditions(the deformation or crushing must not interfere with rapid evacuation);and a new paragraph (k) to define a litter and its design and installationstandards. Dynamic test standards were not proposed for litters and berths.Identical revisions were proposed for andSection; 29.785.Several commenters favor the FAA proposal to require a shoulder harnessfor each seat. Accordingly, paragraph (a) is adopted as proposed.A commenter proposes using either the term ``shoulder harnesses'' or theterm ``torso restraint'' exclusively, but not both. ``Shoulder harnesses''is retained because the existing airworthiness and operating standardsuse that term generically; however, for clarification, a sentence is addedto paragraph (b) describing torso restraint and upper torso restraint.One commenter proposes to apply the requirements of paragraph (b) to frontseat or row occupants only and to require other occupants to have onlylap or safety belts. The commenter's proposal is based on the following:(1) Rotorcraft crashes involve high vertical acceleration forces and relativelylow horizontal acceleration forces; (2) passengers in flight do not likethe discomfort and movement restrictions of a shoulder harness; (3) passengersbecome nervous when required to wear a shoulder harness; (4) passengersmay become entangled in a shoulder harness during emergency egress; (5)passengers in normal category commercial operations are unduly restrictedby a shoulder harness; and (6) mandatory retrofit of shoulder harnessesin the existing rotorcraft fleet creates an undue economic burden.Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11 indicates that emergency landing horizontalor longitudinal accelerations, while less than the vertical accelerations,are still significant and require restraint and support of the occupant.The horizontal forces cause the upper body to rotate forward increasingthe potential for secondary impact with structure. This phenomenon wasreported to be a major cause of severe injuries or fatalities which wouldbe significantly reduced with use of a harness. A shoulder harness or uppertorso restraint also maintains proper spinal alignment or support and,thus, greatly reduces the potential for spinal injury during an impactwith significant vertical forces. The docket contains a figure entitled,``Use of Upper Torso Restraint Expands the Onset of the Serious and FatalInjury Envelopes,'' which shows graphically that a shoulder harness andsafety belt significantly improve occupant protection. One commenter alsosubmitted information showing whenever shoulder harnesses are installed,rotorcraft passengers surveyed use them 100 percent of the time. In addition,a single-point release is required for the safety belt and harness; theFAA is not aware of any signficant impediment to evacuation caused by aharness; and the FAA did not propose a ``retrofit'' standard in the notice.For these reasons, the shoulder harness requirement in paragraph (b) withthe exception of an editorial change for clarification is adopted as proposed.Another commenter proposes to remove all references in andSection; 27.785to the dynamic test of andSection; 27.562. The FAA does not agree since removingthe andSection; 27.562 reference in paragraph (b) would create a more restrictiverule by eliminating use of the HIC to accept minor head impact. Anothercommenter proposes to remove the reference andSection; 27.562(c)(5) in paragraph(b). The HIC in andSection; 27.562(c)(5) allow head impact and are acceptableand essential quantitative standards or limitations that can be applieduniformly wherever the head impacts the interior structure associated witha particular installation. AC 21-22 contains further information on theHIC. The reference must be retained; therefore, paragraph (b) is adoptedas proposed.Another commenter proposes removal of the portion of paragraph (c) whichrequires a single-point release for both the lap belt and the shoulderharness. The commenter's concern is that the proposal would require designsthat prevent uncoupling of the shoulder harness from the lap belt and furtherprevent passengers from assuming the ``brace'' position during an emergencylanding. The FAA has determined that upper body movement and/or a secondaryimpact during an emergency landing impact is a primary cause of seriousinjury. The docket contains information previously referenced which showssignificant improvement in occupant protection when a shoulder harnessis used. A properly restrained occupant is, therefore, much less likelyto experience injury than one in the ``brace'' position. The amendment,however, does not preclude safety belt and harness designs that featureuncoupling of the shoulder harness from the lap safety belt provided asingle-point release is employed in the belt-harness design. A shoulderharness provides a significant improvement in occupant protection, as previouslystated, and should be used during takeoff and landing. Therefore, proposedparagraph (c) is adopted without change.A commenter recommends retaining the present 60/60 load distribution betweenthe safety belt and harness in paragraph (g). The proposal to use a 60/40distribution is based on SAE Aerospace standards and also accounts for100 percent of the load. The application of 120 percent of the load isunnecessary and unrealistic in the light of this amendment. Therefore,the 60/40 distribution in paragraph (g) is adopted as proposed.One commenter proposes that andSection; 27.785 should be changed to specificallyrefer to paragraph (b) instead of the entire section. The FAA concurs,and andSection; 27.561(b) is cited in paragraphs (a), (f), (f)(2), (g), and(k) for proper application of the standard.Three other commenters propose to remove paragraph (f)(1) which refersto the pilot effort forces, since design conditions or loads applied byvirtue of amended andSection; 27.561(b) and new andSection; 27.562 are consideredsufficient seat design standards. The FAA does not agree because paragraph(f)(1) provides the minimum aft load design standard for the crew seat;therefore, paragraph (f)(1) is adopted as proposed.A commenter wants to remove proposed paragraphs (i), (j), and (k) basedon a recommended change to andSection; 27.785(b) to remove reference to HIC.Since paragraph (b) is not changed, paragraphs (i) and (j) are necessaryto complement the dynamic test standards and are, therefore, retained.In addition to a recommendation to remove paragraph (k), two commentersstate that proposed paragraph (k) is unclear regarding whether or not berthsand litters making an angle greater than 15anddegrees; with the rotorcraftlongitudinal axis may be approved. The FAA chose 15anddegrees; or less asthe angle for which a padded headboard, etc., is required. Safety beltsor straps without a padded headboard, etc., are acceptable for the remainingdesign conditions. That is, beyond a 15anddegrees; angle the litter or berthmust have the proper number and distribution of safety belts or strapsto carry the specified static design loads for all directions. Berths andletters oriented at any angle with the rotorcraft longitudinal axis maybe approved in accordance with the standards adopted. Paragraph (k) isclarified by dividing one sentence into three sentences that address litterorientation and the appropriate design requirements.<T3>Proposal 6.</T3> The notice proposed a revision to andSection; 29.561that is equivalent to that proposed for andSection; 27.561 except for theunderfloor fuel tank standard in paragraph (d) which is unique to the part29 standards. For general comments and editorial changes related to andSection;29.561, see Proposal 2.In addition to the general comments, a comment was received specificallyfor andSection; 29.561(b) and (c). The commenter recommends adoption of lowerinertial load factors in paragraph (b) such as the factors adopted in Amdt.25-64 for transport airplanes. These airplane inertial factors are 9.0gforward, 6.5g downward, 1.5g rearward, and so forth. The commenter alsoproposes to combine (vectorially) these inertial load factors but wouldlimit the resultant to 9.0g in any direction. The commenter proposes anadditional 1.33 factor for the forces that are imposed on the attachmentsof certain interior items of mass. If these comments are not adopted bythe FAA, the commenter recommends combining (vectorially) whatever designinertial load factors are adopted rather than applying each factor separately.The FAA notes that andSection; 29.561 currently requires application of theload factor separately but the designer may choose to combine these factorsvectorially into a resultant factor for structural substantiation. Thestatic design inertial factors for transport airplanes proposed in NoticeNo. 86-11 consider the emergency landing impact characteristics for transportairplanes and are not appropriate for typical normal and transport categoryrotorcraft impact characteristics. The additional factor, 1.33, used inconjunction with the lower load factors for the attachments of certaininterior items of mass is not necessary with adoption of the higher inertialfactors proposed in the notice; i.e., the adopted criteria exceed thatof the proposed change. In addition, the suggestion to combine (vectorially)the inertial factors but not to exceed 9.0g is, therefore, not adopted.This same commenter also recommends a new paragraph (e) specifically toaddress an alternate approach in achieving an equivalent or greater levelof occupant protection in relation to that contained in the commenter'sproposed paragraph (b) change. The commenter proposes the following changesto paragraph (b): (1) to use the transport airplane inertial factors inNotice No. 86-11; (2) to combine vectorially two inertial factors not toexceed 9g when combined; and (3) to refer to the dynamic tests prescribedin andSection; 29.562. That is, these three factors would replace the dynamictests as a primary means of compliance. Section 21.21(b)(1) already providesa means to accept any alternative to a specific standard provided an equivalentlevel of safety is maintained. The FAA considers the commenter's proposedparagraph (e) unnecessary and, therefore, it is not adopted.Two commenters recommend that static design factors for exterior itemsof mass in paragraph (c) be the same as those in paragraph (b) for interioritems. Collapse of a partition or significant collapse of or penetrationinto the occupied cabin space has not been identified as a significantproblem in survivable rotorcraft accidents according to the informationin Table 26, Report No. DOT/FAA/CT-85/11. Thus, items of mass externalto the crew or passenger cabin may be designed to factors less than thosefor internal items. This recommendation is not adopted. Another commenterstates a partition (or bulkhead, etc.) separating the exterior items ofmass from the transport rotorcraft cabin should be substantiated for theloads imposed by the items of mass attached to the partition. The FAA agreesthat items of mass such as those described in the standard directly attachedto a partition should not become detached. The standards provide for thissubstantiation.One commenter recommends specific higher inertial factors for paragraph(c), that is, 12g forward, 6g sideward, 12g downward, while retaining 1.5gupward to reduce hazardous movement of high mass items that are describedin their proposals. Adopting higher inertial load factors than those proposedis beyond the scope of the notice; therefore, the inertial factors areadopted as proposed.<T3>Proposal 7.</T3> The notice proposed to add to andSection; 29.562 a newdynamic test standard for occupant seats in transport rotorcraft that isidentical andSection; 27.562. The emergency landing impact conditions fortransport rotorcraft are equivalent to normal category rotorcraft conditions.See the comments and FAA response in Proposal 3. Section 29.562 is adoptedwith the same changes as noted in Proposal 3.<T3>Proposal 8.</T3> The notice proposed to amend andSection;andSection; 29.783(d) and (g) by removing the general reference to andSection; 29.561(b)(3).The design factors in that section have been significantly increased butthose factors are not necessary for door designs. Therefore, the specificfactors in present andSection; 29.561(b)(3) are added to paragraph (d), andparagraph (g) refers to paragraph (d) for the design factors. The factorsin the standards are used to evaluate surrounding fuselage structural deformationsand impose design features, where necessary, to minimize the probabilityof jamming external doors and integral stair doors as a result of a minorcrash landing and thereby facilitate passenger egress.One commenter contends that doors and exits should be subject to the samedesign load factors as the occupant restraint system. The FAA does notagree because experience has shown the design standards presently in usehave been satisfactory and should be retained for door designs.Two other commenters question why cargo doors, other than those used asemergency exits, must meet the requirements of andSection; 29.783(d). Typicalrotorcraft doors, whether cargo or exit, are usually qualified as passengerexits and, therefore, must comply. However, the FAA agrees that ``cargoor service doors not suitable for use as an exit in an emergency'' maybe excluded from compliance with the standard. Section 29.783(d), as adopted,adds a clause excluding certain cargo and service doors. This clause forcargo and service doors was extracted, in part, from the transport airplanedoor standard of andSection; 25.783(g).Another commenter proposes a 9g static load factor, in any direction, forandSection;andSection; 29.783 (d) and (g). As noted before, the present designload factors, such as 4g forward, etc., have provided an adequate levelof safety since a significant adverse service history on doors does notexist. Therefore, the amendment is adopted with changes as discussed.<T3>Proposal 9.</T3> The proposals for andSection;andSection; 27.785 and 29.785are identical. For comments and the FAA response related to proposed andSection;29.785, see Proposal 4. The occupant seat, safety belt, shoulder harness,berth or litter standards for transport and normal rotorcraft are standardsnot affected by the size of the rotorcraft. No one objected to the applicationof common standards. Therefore, andSection; 29.785 is adopted with the samechanges as discussed in Proposal 4.<T3>Proposal 10.</T3> The notice proposed to amend andSection; 29.809 byrevising paragraph (e) to add reference to andSection; 29.783(d) for theappropriate ultimate inertial load factors for exits as well as doors oftransport rotorcraft. The current design factors for exits are maintainedby the amendment. See the comments on Proposal 8 for further information.One commenter recommends that paragraph (e) remain unchanged. The FAA disagreesbecause without the reference to andSection; 29.783(d), ``minor crash landing''factors would not be defined, thus creating the potential for nonstandardapplication.A commenter states that the load factors proposed in paragraph (e) areinconsistent with those proposed for occupants in andSection; 29.561(b)(3)which are much higher. The commenter recommends use of the emergency landingimpact load factors in paragraph (e). Service history has shown that theload factors proposed in paragraph (e), such as 4g forward, provide anadequate level of safety to minimize the probability of jamming the emergencyexits as a result of fuselage deformation. Therefore, the standard is adoptedas proposed.<ITAG tagnum="84">Economic Evaluation Summary</ITAG>The FAA proposed to amend parts 27 and 29 of the FAR to require the installationof shoulder harnesses and seats incorporating energy attenuation featureson all newly certificated rotorcraft. The amendments to improve occupantprotection standards are the result of several specific proposals presentedat the Rotorcraft Regulatory Review Conference in 1979, the recommendationsof the NTSB, and the FAA aircraft crash dynamics program.The FAA finds the amendments to andSection;andSection; 27.561(c), 27.785(k),29.561(c), 29.783, 29.785(k), and 29.809 will cause manufacturers to incurnegligible testing costs in demonstrating compliance with these new standards.The FAA finds the remaining amendments will have a cost impact on manufacturersas well as operators.For the purpose of the evaluation, those elements of amended andSection;andSection;27.561, 27.785, and new 27.562 having a cost impact have been examinedas if they were a single amendment. The close interrelation of these amendmentsprecludes clear separation. The amendments to andSection;andSection; 29.561,29.785 and new 29.562 having a cost impact have been evaluated in the samemanner.This evaluation indicates that adoption of the standards is expected tobe cost beneficial. The final rule regarding shoulder harness and energyattenuating seats_the occupant restraint system_is expected to reduce fatalitiesand injuries sustained in otherwise survivable crashes from between 30to 85 percent. The average annual monetary benefits of this final ruleare estimated to be $770,600 while the average annual costs are estimatedto be $411,900. The average annual net benefits of the final rule are expectedto be $358,700 and the present value of these net benefits over 10 yearsis estimated to be $2.20 million.<ITAG tagnum="84">International Trade Impact Analysis</ITAG>The FAA has determined that this rule is not likely to result in a competitivetrade advantage or disadvantage for U.S. manufacturers in domestic or foreignmarkets. Foreign manufacturers are expected to comply with the certificationstandards of their largest export customer, the United States. The FAAbelieves that to remain competitive in overseas markets, foreign vendorswill export a similarly equipped rotorcraft to both the United States andthird world countries. Foreign and U.S. manufacturers are expected to passthe new certification costs on to consumers in their domestic and foreignmarkets.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Determination</ITAG>The FAA has determined that these amendments will not have a significantimpact, positive or negative, on a substantial number of small entities.According to FAA criteria, a small helicopter manufacturer is one thatis independently owned and operated and has fewer than 75 employees. Usingthese criteria, only one U.S. manufacturer is considered small. Therefore,it is not possible for this rule to impact a substanital number of smallentities. <ITAG tagnum="84">Federalism Implications</ITAG>The regulations adopted herein do not have substantial direct effects onthe states, on the relationship between the national government and thestates, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among thevarious levels of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order12612, it is determined that this amendment does not have sufficient federalismimplications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. <ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion</ITAG>For the reasons discussed in the preamble, and based on the findings inthe Regulatory Flexibility Determination and the International Trade ImpactAnalysis, the FAA has determined that these amendments are not major underExecutive Order 12291. In addition, the FAA certifies that these amendmentsdo not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantialnumber of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory FlexibilityAct. These amendments are considered significant under DOT Regulatory Policiesand Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979). A regulatory evaluationof the amendments, including a Regulatory Flexibility Determination andTrade Impact Analysis, has been placed in the docket. A copy may be obtainedby contacting the person identified under <T2>``FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT.''</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects 14 CFR Parts 27 and 29:</ITAG>Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation Safety, Safety, Rotorcraft.<ITAG tagnum="84">Adoption of the Amendment</ITAG>Accordingly, parts 27 and 29 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFRparts 27 and 29) are amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 27_AIRWORTHINESS STANDARDS: NORMAL CATEGORY ROTORCRAFT</ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 27 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1344, 1354(a), 1355, 1421, 1423, 1425, 1428,1429, and 1430; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983).</ITAG>2. By amending andSection; 27.561 by revising paragraphs (b) (introductorytext), (b)(3), and (c) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 27.561</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) The structure must be designed to give each occupant every reasonablechance of escaping serious injury in a crash landing when_<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(3) Each occupant and each item of mass inside the cabin that could injurean occupant is restrained when subjected to the following ultimate inertialload factors relative to the surrounding structure:<ITAG tagnum="16">(i) Upward_4g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(ii) Forward_16g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(iii) Sideward_8g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(iv) Downward_20g, after intended displacement of the seat device.</ITAG>(c) The supporting structure must be designed to restrain, under any ultimateinertial load up to those specified in this paragraph, any item of massabove and/or behind the crew and passenger compartment that could injurean occupant if it came loose in an emergency landing. Items of mass tobe considered include, but are not limited to, rotors, transmissions, andengines. The items of mass must be restrained for the following ultimateinertial load factors:<ITAG tagnum="16">(1) Upward_1.5g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(2) Forward_8g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(3) Sideward_2g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(4) Downward_4g.</ITAG>3. By adding a new andSection; 27.562 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 27.562</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Emergency landing dynamic conditions.</ITAG>(a) The rotorcraft, although it may be damaged in an emergency crash landing,must be designed to reasonably protect each occupant when_(1) The occupant properly uses the seats, safety belts, and shoulder harnessesprovided in the design; and(2) The occupant is exposed to the loads resulting from the conditionsprescribed in this section.(b) Each seat type design or other seating device approved for crew orpassenger occupancy during takeoff and landing must successfully completedynamic tests or be demonstrated by rational analysis based on dynamictests of a similar type seat in accordance with the following criteria.The tests must be conducted with an occupant, simulated by a 170-poundanthropomorphic test dummy (ATD), as defined by 49 CFR 572, subpart B,or its equivalent, sitting in the normal upright position.(1) A change in downward velocity of not less than 30 feet per second whenthe seat or other seating device is oriented in its nominal position withrespect to the rotorcraft's reference system, the rotorcraft's longitudinalaxis is canted upward 60anddegrees; with respect to the impact velocity vector,and the rotorcraft's lateral axis is perpendicular to a vertical planecontaining the impact velocity vector and the rotorcraft's longitudinalaxis. Peak floor deceleration must occur in not more than 0.031 secondsafter impact and must reach a minimum of 30g's.(2) A change in forward velocity of not less than 42 feet per second whenthe seat or other seating device is oriented in its nominal position withrespect to the rotorcraft's reference system, the rotorcraft's longitudinalaxis is yawed 10anddegrees; either right or left of the impact velocity vector(whichever would cause the greatest load on the shoulder harness), therotorcraft's lateral axis is contained in a horizontal plane containingthe impact velocity vector, and the rotorcraft's vertical axis is perpendicularto a horizontal plane containing the impact velocity vector. Peak floordeceleration must occur in not more than 0.071 seconds after impact andmust reach a minimum of 18.4g's.(3) Where floor rails or floor or sidewall attachment devices are usedto attach the seating devices to the airframe structure for the conditionsof this section, the rails or devices must be misaligned with respect toeach other by at least 10anddegrees; vertically (i.e., pitch out of parallel)and by at least a 10anddegrees; lateral roll, with the directions optional,to account for possible floor warp.(c) Compliance with the following must be shown:(1) The seating device system must remain intact although it may experienceseparation intended as part of its design.(2) The attachment between the seating device and the airframe structuremust remain intact, although the structure may have exceeded its limitload.(3) The ATD's shoulder harness strap or straps must remain on or in theimmediate vicinity of the ATD's shoulder during the impact.(4) The safety belt must remain on the ATD's pelvis during the impact.(5) The ATD's head either does not contact any portion of the crew or passengercompartment, or if contact is made, the head impact does not exceed a headinjury criteria (HIC) of 1,000 as determined by this equation.<G/><ITAG tagnum="91">insert illus 416</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="92"/>Where: a(t) is the resultant acceleration at the center of gravity of thehead form expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity) andt<T2>2</T2> ^ t<T2>1</T2> is the time duration, in seconds, of major head impact, notto exceed 0.05 seconds.(6) Loads in individual upper torso harness straps must not exceed 1,750pounds. If dual straps are used for retaining the upper torso, the totalharness strap loads must not exceed 2,000 pounds.(7) The maximum compressive load measured between the pelvis and the lumbarcolumn of the ATD must not exceed 1,500 pounds.(d) An alternate approach that achieves an equivalent or greater levelof occupant protection, as required by this section, must be substantiatedon a rational basis.4. By amending andSection; 27.785 by revising paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (f),and (g) and by adding new paragraphs (i), (j), and (k) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 27.785</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Seats, berths, safety belts, and harnesses.</ITAG>(a) Each seat, safety belt, harness, and adjacent part of the rotorcraftat each station designated for occupancy during takeoff and landing mustbe free of potentially injurious objects, sharp edges, protuberances, andhard surfaces and must be designed so that a person making proper use ofthese facilities will not suffer serious injury in an emergency landingas a result of the static inertial load factors specified in andSection;27.561(b) and dynamic conditions specified in andSection; 27.562.(b) Each occupant must be protected from serious head injury by a safetybelt plus a shoulder harness that will prevent the head from contactingany injurious object except as provided for in andSection; 27.562(c)(5).A shoulder harness (upper torso restraint), in combination with the safetybelt, constitutes a torso restraint system as described in TSO-C114.(c) Each occupant's seat must have a combined safety belt and shoulderharness with a single-point release. Each pilot's combined safety beltand shoulder harness must allow each pilot when seated with safety beltand shoulder harness fastened to perform all functions necessary for flightoperations. There must be a means to secure belts and harnesses, when notin use, to prevent interference with the operation of the rotorcraft andwith rapid egress in an emergency.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) Each seat and its supporting structure must be designed for an occupantweight of at least 170 pounds considering the maximum load factors, inertialforces, and reactions between occupant, seat, and safety belt or harnesscorresponding with the applicable flight and ground load conditions, includingthe emergency landing conditions of andSection; 27.561(b). In addition_(1) Each pilot seat must be designed for the reactions resulting from theapplication of the pilot forces prescribed in andSection; 27.397; and(2) The inertial forces prescribed in andSection; 27.561(b) must be multipliedby a factor of 1.33 in determining the strength of the attachment of_(i) Each seat to the structure; and(ii) Each safety belt or harness to the seat or structure.(g) When the safety belt and shoulder harness are combined, the rated strengthof the safety belt and shoulder harness may not be less than that correspondingto the inertial forces specified in andSection; 27.561(b), considering theoccupant weight of at least 170 pounds, considering the dimensional characteristicsof the restraint system installation, and using a distribution of at leasta 60-percent load to the safety belt and at least a 40-percent load tothe shoulder harness. If the safety belt is capable of being used withoutthe shoulder harness, the inertial forces specified must be met by thesafety belt alone.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(i) Each seating device system includes the device such as the seat, thecushions, the occupant restraint system, and attachment devices.(j) Each seating device system may use design features such as crushingor separation of certain parts of the seats to reduce occupant loads forthe emergency landing dynamic conditions of andSection; 27.562; otherwise,the system must remain intact and must not interfere with rapid evacuationof the rotorcraft.(k) For the purposes of this section, a litter is defined as a device designedto carry a nonambulatory person, primarily in a recumbent position, intoand on the rotorcraft. Each berth or litter must be designed to withstandthe load reaction of an occupant weight of at least 170 pounds when theoccupant is subjected to the forward inertial factors specified in andSection;27.561(b). A berth or litter installed within 15anddegrees; or less of thelongitudinal axis of the rotorcraft must be provided with a padded end-board,cloth diaphram, or equivalent means that can withstand the forward loadreaction. A berth or litter oriented greater than 15anddegrees; with thelongitudinal axis of the rotorcraft must be equipped with appropriate restraints,such as straps or safety belts, to withstand the forward load reaction.In addition_(1) The berth or litter must have a restraint system and must not havecorners or other protuberances likely to cause serious injury to a personoccupying it during emergency landing conditions; and(2) The berth or litter attachment and the occupant restraint system attachmentsto the structure must be designed to withstand the critical loads resultingfrom flight and ground load conditions and from the conditions prescribedin andSection; 27.561(b).<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 29_AIRWORTHINESS STANDARDS: TRANSPORT CATEGORY ROTORCRAFT</ITAG>5. The authority citation for part 29 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1344, 1354(a), 1355, 1421, 1423, 1424, 1425,1428, 1429, and 1430; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January12, 1983).</ITAG>6. By amending andSection; 29.561 by revising paragraphs (b) (introductorytext), (b)(3), (c), and (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 29.561</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) The structure must be designed to give each occupant every reasonablechance of escaping serious injury in a crash landing when_<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(3) Each occupant and each item of mass inside the cabin that could injurean occupant is restrained when subjected to the following ultimate inertialload factors relative to the surrounding structure:<ITAG tagnum="16">(i) Upward_4g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(ii) Forward_16g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(iii) Sideward_8g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(iv) Downward_20g, after the intended displacement of the seat device.</ITAG>(c) The supporting structure must be designed to restrain under any ultimateinertial load factor up to those specified in this paragraph, any itemof mass above and/or behind the crew and passenger compartment that couldinjure an occupant if it came loose in an emergency landing. Items of massto be considered include, but are not limited to, rotors, transmission,and engines. The items of mass must be restrained for the following ultimateinertial load factors:<ITAG tagnum="16">(1) Upward_1.5g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(2) Forward_8g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(3) Sideward_2g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(4) Downward_4g.</ITAG>(d) Any fuselage structure in the area of internal fuel tanks below thepassenger floor level must be designed to resist the following ultimateinertial factors and loads, and to protect the fuel tanks from rupture,if rupture is likely when those loads are applied to that area:<ITAG tagnum="16">(1) Upward_1.5g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(2) Forward_4.0g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(3) Sideward_2.0g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(4) Downward_4.0g.</ITAG>7. By adding a new andSection; 29.562 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 29.562</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Emergency landing dynamic conditions.</ITAG>(a) The rotorcraft, although it may be damaged in a crash landing, mustbe designed to reasonably protect each occupant when_(1) The occupant properly uses the seats, safety belts, and shoulder harnessesprovided in the design; and(2) The occupant is exposed to loads equivalent to those resulting fromthe conditions prescribed in this section.(b) Each seat type design or other seating device approved for crew orpassenger occupancy during takeoff and landing must successfully completedynamic tests or be demonstrated by rational analysis based on dynamictests of a similar type seat in accordance with the following criteria.The tests must be conducted with an occupant simulated by a 170-pound anthropomorphictest dummy (ATD), as defined by 49 CFR 572, Subpart B, or its equivalent,sitting in the normal upright position.(i) A change in downward velocity of not less than 30 feet per second whenthe seat or other seating device is oriented in its nominal position withrespect to the rotorcraft's reference system, the rotorcraft's longitudinalaxis is canted upward 60anddegrees; with respect to the impact velocity vector,and the rotorcraft's lateral axis is perpendicular to a vertical planecontaining the impact velocity vector and the rotorcraft's longitudinalaxis. Peak floor deceleration must occur in not more than 0.031 secondsafter impact and must reach a minimum of 30g's.(2) A change in forward velocity of not less than 42 feet per second whenthe seat or other seating device is oriented in its nominal position withrespect to the rotorcraft's reference system, the rotorcraft's longitudinalaxis is yawed 10anddegrees; either right or left of the impact velocity vector(whichever would cause the greatest load on the shoulder harness), therotorcraft's lateral axis is contained in a horizontal plane containingthe impact velocity vector, and the rotorcraft's vertical axis is perpendicularto a horizontal plane containing the impact velocity vector. Peak floordeceleration must occur in not more than 0.071 seconds after impact andmust reach a minimum of 18.4g's.(3) Where floor rails or floor or sidewall floor attachment devices areused to attach the seating devices to the airframe structure for the conditionsof this section, the rails or devices must be misaligned with respect toeach other by at least 10anddegrees; vertically (i.e., pitch out of parallel)and by at least a 10anddegrees; lateral roll, with the directions optional,to account for possible floor warp.(c) Compliance with the following must be shown:(1) The seating device system must remain intact although it may experienceseparation intended as part of its design.(2) The attachment between the seating device and the airframe structuremust remain intact although the structure may have exceeded its limit load.(3) The ATD's shoulder harness strap or straps must remain on or in theimmediate vicinity of the ATD's shoulder during the impact.(4) The safety belt must remain on the ATD's pelvis during the impact.(5) The ATD's head either does not contact any portion of the crew or passengercompartment or, if contact is made, the head impact does not exceed a headinjury criteria (HIC) of 1,000 as determined by this equation.<G/><ITAG tagnum="91">Insert illus. 423</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="92"/>Where: a(t) is the resultant acceleration at the center of gravity of thehead form expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity) andt<T2>2</T2> ^ t<T2>1</T2> is the time duration, in seconds, of major head impact, notto exceed 0.05 seconds.(6) Loads in individual shoulder harness straps must not exceed 1,750 pounds.If dual straps are used for retaining the upper torso, the total harnessstrap loads must not exceed 2,000 pounds.(7) The maximum compressive load measured between the pelvis and the lumbarcolumn of the ATD must not exceed 1,500 pounds.(d) An alternate approach that achieves an equivalent or greater levelof occupant protection, as required by this section, must be substantiatedon a rational basis.8. By amending andSection; 29.783 by revising paragraphs (d) and (g)(1) toread as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 29.783</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Doors.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) There must be reasonable provisions to prevent the jamming of any externaldoors in a minor crash as a result of fuselage deformation under the followingultimate inertial forces except for cargo or service doors not suitablefor use as an exit in an emergency:<ITAG tagnum="16">(1) Upward_1.5g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(2) Forward_4.0g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(3) Sideward_2.0g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(4) Downward_4.0g.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) * * *(1) The door, integral stair, and operating mechanism have been subjectedto the inertial forces specified in paragraph (d) of this section, actingseparately relative to the surrounding structure.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>9. By amending andSection; 29.785 by revising paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (f),and (g) and by adding new paragraphs (i), (j), and (k) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 29.785</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Seats, berths, safety belts, and harnesses.</ITAG>(a) Each seat, safety belt, harness, and adjacent part of the rotorcraftat each station designated for occupancy during takeoff and landing mustbe free of potentially injurious objects, sharp edges, protuberances, andhard surfaces and must be designed so that a person making proper use ofthese facilities will not suffer serious injury in an emergency landingas a result of the inertial factors specified in andSection; 29.561(b) anddynamic conditions specified in andSection; 29.562.(b) Each occupant must be protected from serious head injury by a safetybelt plus a shoulder harness that will prevent the head from contactingany injurious object, except as provided for in andSection; 29.562(c)(5).A shoulder harness (upper torso restraint), in combination with the safetybelt, constitutes a torso restraint system as described in TSO-C114.(c) Each occupant's seat must have a combined safety belt and shoulderharness with a single-point release. Each pilot's combined safety beltand shoulder harness must allow each pilot when seated with safety beltand shoulder harness fastened to perform all functions necessary for flightoperations. There must be a means to secure belt and harness when not inuse to prevent interference with the operation of the rotorcraft and withrapid egress in an emergency.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) Each seat and its supporting structure must be designed for an occupantweight of at least 170 pounds, considering the maximum load factors, inertialforces, and reactions between the occupant, seat, and safety belt or harnesscorresponding with the applicable flight and ground-load conditions, includingthe emergency landing conditions of andSection; 29.561(b). In addition_(1) Each pilot seat must be designed for the reactions resulting from theapplication of the pilot forces prescribed in andSection; 29.397; and(2) The inertial forces prescribed in andSection; 29.561(b) must be multipliedby a factor of 1.33 in determining the strength of the attachment of_(i) Each seat to the structure; and(ii) Each safety belt or harness to the seat or structure.(g) When the safety belt and shoulder harness are combined, the rated strengthof the safety belt and shoulder harness may not be less than that correspondingto the inertial forces specified in andSection; 29.561(b), considering theoccupant weight of at least 170 pounds, considering the dimensional characteristicsof the restraint system installation, and using a distribution of at leasta 60-percent load to the safety belt and at least a 40-percent load tothe shoulder harness. If the safety belt is capable of being used withoutthe shoulder harness, the inertial forces specified must be met by thesafety belt alone.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(i) Each seating device system includes the device such as the seat, thecushions, the occupant restraint system and attachment devices.(j) Each seating device system may use design features such as crushingor separation of certain parts of the seat in the design to reduce occupantloads for the emergency landing dynamic conditions of andSection; 29.562;otherwise, the system must remain intact and must not interfere with rapidevacuation of the rotorcraft.(k) For purposes of this section, a litter is defined as a device designedto carry a nonambulatory person, primarily in a recumbent position, intoand on the rotorcraft. Each berth or litter must be designed to withstandthe load reaction of an occupant weight of at least 170 pounds when theoccupant is subjected to the forward inertial factors specified in andSection;29.561(b). A berth or litter installed within 15anddegrees; or less of thelongitudinal axis of the rotorcraft must be provided with a padded end-board,cloth diaphragm, or equivalent means that can withstand the forward loadreaction. A berth or litter oriented greater than 15anddegrees; with thelongitudinal axis of the rotorcraft must be equipped with appropriate restraints,such as straps or safety belts, to withstand the forward reaction. In addition_(1) The berth or litter must have a restraint system and must not havecorners or other protuberances likely to cause serious injury to a personoccupying it during emergency landing conditions; and(2) The berth or litter attachment and the occupant restraint system attachmentsto the structure must be designed to withstand the critical loads resultingfrom flight and ground load conditions and from the conditions prescribedin andSection; 29.561(b).10. By amending andSection; 29.809 by revising paragraph (e) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 29.809</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Emergency exit arrangement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e) There must be means to minimize the probability of the jamming of anyemergency exit in a minor crash landing as a result of fuselage deformationunder the ultimate inertial forces in andSection; 29.783(d).<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on November 3, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">James B. Busey,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-26532 Filed 11-9-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>