<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89117-0140 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-17-89.f2.A1139</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 17 / Tuesday, January 17, 1989/ Notices <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Economic Development Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 81250-8250) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Economic Development Assistance Programs as Described in Public Law100-459, Departments of Commerce, Justice, State, the Judiciary, and RelatedAgencies Appropriations, 1989; Availability of Funds </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Economic Development Administration (EDA), Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Economic Development Administration (EDA) announcesits policies and application procedures for funds available in FY 1989to support projects designed to alleviate conditions of substantial andpersistent unemployment and underemployment in economically distressedareas and regions of the Nation and to address economic dislocations resultingfrom sudden, major job losses. The purpose of this announcement is to communicateto potential applicants for EDA funds the policies and procedures thatwill be used to administer the Agency's programs during FY 1989.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. General Policies </ITAG>Because of the existing statutory criteria and a Congressional prohibitionagainst terminating eligibility, areas containing approximately 90 percentof the U.S. population are eligible for EDA assistance, which in FY 1988totaled less than $200 million. Priority consideration for funding willbe given only to those projects having exceptional potential to benefitareas experiencing or threatened with the most severe economic distress.EDA is particularly interested in projects located in (enterprise zones,especially projects in) Federally authorized and designated enterprisezones. Distress may exist in a variety of forms, including exceptionallyhigh unemployment rates, extremely low income levels, abnormally largeconcentrations of low income families, particularly low labor force participationrates, unusually large numbers (or high rates) of business failures orfarm loan foreclosures, high farm credit delinquencies, sudden major layoffsand/or plant closures, and drastically reduced tax bases. Potential applicantsare responsible for demonstrating to EDA, through the provision of statisticsand other appropriate information, the nature and level of the distresstheir efforts are intended to alleviate. In the absence of evidence ofexceptionally high levels of distress, EDA funding is unlikely. In consideringproposals to benefit severely distressed areas, EDA will give special considerationto those that address the needs of rural communities, particularly aiddirected toward the economic diversification of such areas. EDA expects substantial state and local support for proposed projects.Proposals that do not provide evidence of strong state and local leadershipand financing are unlikely to receive EDA aid. In the case of projects involving construction, EDA expects constructionto be initiated and completed in a timely manner. Applicants are expectedto anticipate predictable delays such as those caused by normal weatherconditions, legal complications, community disputes, land acquisition,etc., and account for them in developing project schedules. Projects whichare likely to encounter significant delays will normally not be given favorableconsideration. Projects that experience unreasonable delays following EDAapproval may be terminated and the funds deobligated. These policies areconsistent with EDA's objective of supporting activities that can beginto benefit local economies as soon as possible, thereby meeting the urgentdevelopment needs identified by project applicants. EDA expects those responsiblefor developing and managing projects to maximize the impact of the publicfunds by preparing and implementing projects as thoroughly and expeditiouslyas possible. EDA funding will not be used directly or indirectly to assist employerswho transfer one or more jobs from one area to another. EDA nonrelocationrequirements (13 CFR 309.3) apply to grants involving construction, rehabilitationor repair, and other financial assistance under Titles I, II, IV, IX, andsection 301(f) of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965,as amended, PWEDA (Pub. L. 89-136; 42 U.S.C. 3121-3246h). Applicants whohave delinquent accounts receivable with the Federal Government may notbe considered for future awards until these debts have been paid or arrangementsto pay them have been approved by the agency to whom the debt is owed.Applicants may be subject to a pre-award accounting system survey by theDepartment of Commerce's Office of Inspector General, and fund recipientsmay be subject to audits or other inspections by the same office. Applicants eligible for assistance because of membership in an economicdevelopment district must be members in good standing and active participantsin the district economic development planning process. EDA will evaluate applications for conformance with published statutory,regulatory, and policy requirements. Applications proposed for fundingunder these programs are subject to the requirements of Executive Order12372, ``Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs.'' An invitation to submit a formal application does not assure EDA funding.Unsuccessful applicants will be notified of the status of their applicationswhen all of EDA's funds for the program to which they have applied havebeen awarded. EDA will avoid projects that involve actual or potential conflict-of-interestsituations as covered by the following definition: Any official, employee, architect, attorney, engineer or inspector of orfor the Applicant/Grantee or any Federal, state, or local official or representative,becoming directly or indirectly interested financially in the acquisitionof any materials or equipment, or in any construction for the project,or in the furnishing of any service to or in connection with the project,or any benefit arising therefrom will constitute a conflict of interestwhich may jeopardize an application or result in forfeiture of any grantfunds resulting therefrom. If EDA identifies or suspects a possible conflict-of interest situation,application processing and/or grant award will be suspended and the burdenwill be on the applicant/grantee to take appropriate steps to eliminatethe perception of a conflict of interest before application processingand/or the grant is resumed. The following material describes other policies and procedures associatedwith each of EDA's programs.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Program: Planning Assistance for Economic Development Districts,Indian Tribes, and Redevelopment Areas </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance: 11.302 Economic Development_Supportfor Planning Organizations) </ITAG>Summary Funds under the District, Indian and Area Planning Program are awardedto defray administrative expenses in support of the economic developmentplanning efforts of Economic Development Districts (Districts), RedevelopmentAreas (Areas) and Indian Tribes. This program is authorized under section301(b) of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965, as amended,42 U.S.C. 3151(b). Eligibility Eligible applicants are Economic Development Districts, Redevelopment Areas,organizations representing Redevelopment Areas (or parts of such Areas),Indian Tribes, organizations representing multiple Indian Tribes, commonwealthsand territories under the U. S. flag, the Federated States of Micronesia,and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. Program Objective The primary objective of planning assistance for administrative expensesunder section 301(b) is to support the formulation and implementation ofeconomic development programs designed to create or retain full-time permanentjobs and income, particularly for the unemployed and underemployed in themost distressed areas served by the applicant. Planning activities supportedwith this aid must be part of a continuous process involving significantleadership by public officials and private citizens. Funding Availability Funds in the amount of $18.205 million are available in two categories:Districts/Areas (Category A)_$15.33 million; and Indian Tribes (CategoryB)_$2.875 million. Funding Instrument Grant assistance can be provided for up to 75 percent of project costsfor Category A grants. Under Category A, the applicant will be requiredto provide the remaining share. Category B grant assistance may be providedfor up to 100 percent of project costs. Project Duration Both Category A and Category B assistance will normally be for a periodof twelve months. Selection Criteria Priority consideration will be given to currently funded District and Indiangrantees for proposals which are eligible under section 301(b), 42 U.S.C.3151(b). It is not expected that funds will be available for other purposes.If, however, funds become available, they will  be used for new proposalsfrom other eligible applicants under both Categories A and B and/or forspecial economic development activities that benefit one or more 301(b)grantees and cannot be financed with other resources. Information on applicationprocedures for any funds available for special activity grants will beprovided by EDA's Regional Offices. EDA will consider the following factorsin evaluating proposals: 1. The responsiveness of the proposed work program to the program regulationscontained in 13 CFR 307.22; 2. The economic distress of the area served by the applicant; 3. The currently funded grantees' past performance (including informationin scheduled progress reports); and 4. The local leaders' involvement in applicants' economic development activities.Proposal Submission Procedures Currently funded grantees and other eligible applicants under both CategoriesA and B should submit proposals which include: 1. A letter signed by the chief elected official (Chairman of the Board,Tribal Chairman) or another authorized official of the District, Area orIndian Tribe stating the organization's desire to receive funds to carryout the types of planning and administrative activities eligible underthe 301(b) program. 2. Significant, verifiable information on the level of economic distressin the area, including unemployment and income data. Any major changesin distress levels during the past year should be described. 3. A work program outlining the specific development activities that willbe carried out under the grant and explaining how they relate to the problemsidentified in the area OEDP, annual report, or other documents. New applicantsshould submit proposals to the appropriate EDA Regional Office.Formal Application Procedures EDA Regional Offices will contact currently funded grantees to inform themof the procedures for submitting applications for continuation funding.Except in cases where previous performance has been marginal or unacceptable,work program changes or other factors dictate a different approach, EDAexpects to offer continuation grants to currently funded grantees selectedfor additional assistance. Following review of the proposals submitted by other entities, EDA willinvite those selected for funding consideration to submit formal applications,which will include an SF-424 or similar form as currently approved by theOffice of Management and Budget and other required application materials.Further Information For further information contact the appropriate EDA Regional Office (seesection X of this Notice) or Luis F. Bueso, Director, Planning Division,Economic Development Administration, Room 7023, U.S. Department of Commerce,Washington, DC 20230; telephone, 202-377-2873. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Program: Planning Assistance for States and Urban Areas </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance: 11.305 Economic Development_Stateand Urban Area Economic Development Planning) </ITAG>Summary The Economic Development Administration announces its policies and applicationprocedures for funds available for the State and Urban Planning Programoperated under the authority of section 302(a) of the Public Works andEconomic Development Act of 1965, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 3151a. Eligibility Eligible applicants under this program are states, territories, citiesand urban counties. Program Objective The primary objective of planning assistance under section 302(a) is tostrengthen the economic development planning and policy-making capabilitiesof states, territories, cities and urban counties to ensure a more effectiveuse of available resources in addressing economic problems, particularlythose resulting in high unemployment and low incomes. Planning activitiesconducted under this assistance must be part of a continuous process involvingsignificant local leadership from public officials and private citizens.Funding Availability Funds in the amount of $4.790 million are available for providing grantassistance under this program. Funding Instrument Grant assistance may be provided for up to 75 percent of project costs.Applicants will be required to provide the remaining share. Grant amountsunder this program have not exceeded $200,000 in the past three years.EDA will consider proposals for smaller grants to support appropriate activities.Project Duration Assistance under this program will normally not exceed a period of twelvemonths. Selection Criteria The content of the proposal and the economic distress of the area willbe the principal factors considered in evaluating proposals from eligibleentities. In assessing the distress factor, priority consideration willbe given to proposals from urban areas and states experiencing substantialeconomic distress. In the case of urban areas, high priority will be givento those with unemployment rates two or more percentage points higher thanthe U.S. average and per capita income levels 80 percent or less of theU.S. average. For states, high priority will be given to those that meetboth of the above criteria, as well as those that meet one of the abovecriteria and have distress equal to or greater than the national averagewith regard to the other criterion. The most recent per capita and 12-monthunemployment data available will be used to measure economic distress.Proposals from states or urban areas which do not exhibit significant distresson the basis of unemployment or income data will not be considered unlessother acceptable evidence of substantial distress is provided by the applicant(e.g., large numbers of agricultural and business failures, large numbersof low income families, drastically reduced tax bases, etc.). Proposalsfrom states or urban areas which are both below the U.S. average in unemploymentand above the U.S. average per capita income level are unlikely to be funded.Proposals will be judged on the basis of: 1. Appropriateness of the work program to the section 302(a) program objectives;2. The economic distress of the area served by the applicant; 3. Extent to which the proposed planning activities are expected to impactupon the service area's economic development needs, and the extent to whichthe proposal addresses the problems of the unemployed and underemployedof the area, including the farm families, minorities, workers displacedby plant closings, etc.; 4. Past performance of currently or formerly funded grantees, if applicable.Proposal Submission Procedures Potential applicants should submit proposals that include: 1. A letter signed by the head of the applicant organization indicatinga desire to receive funds to carry out the planning activities outlinein the proposal; where the funded planning program will be placed in theorganization, to include the name and title of the person to be responsiblefor program implementation; the amount and for what period funding is beingrequested; and the anticipated funding arrangement if the planning activityis to continue beyond the period of EDA support. 2. Significant, verifiable information on the level of economic distressin the area, including unemployment and income data. Any major changesin distress levels during the past year should be described. 3. Information indicating the commitment of high level government officialsto the proposed work program as demonstrated by amount of local funding,degree of interest displayed by the chief executive, etc. 4. A work program of no more than 10 pages which outlines the specificplanning activities that will be carried out under the grant and specifieswhether it will be handled by in-house staff, consultants, etc. The workprogram should also explain the need for the proposed activities, expectedimpacts and their timing, target population(s), and involvement of theprivate sector in the proposed activities. An original and one copy of the proposal are to be submitted to the appropriateEDA Regional Office. One copy of the proposal is to be sent to the appropriateEconomic Development Representative. The EDA Regional Office will providethe name, address and telephone number of the Economic Development Representativefor the applicant's area (see section X of this Notice). Proposals postmarkedafter March 15, 1989, may not be considered. Formal Application Procedures EDA will evaluate proposals using the selection criteria cited above. Followingthe review of proposals, EDA will invite those whose proposals are selectedfor funding consideration to submit formal applications, which will includean SF-424 or similar form as currently approved by the Office of Managementand Budget and other application materials. Further Information For futher information contact the appropriate Economic Development Representative,EDA Regional Office (see section X of this Notice), or Luis F. Bueso, Director,Planning Division, Economic Development Administration, Room 7023, U.S.Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230; telephone 202-377-2873.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Program: Technical Assistance </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance: 11.303 Economic Development_TechnicalAssistance) </ITAG>Summary Funds under the Technical Assistance Program are awarded to eligible applicantsto provide a wide range of assistance. The assistance is intended to assurethe successful initiation and implementation of area, state, regional,and national development efforts designed to alleviate economic distress.This program is authorized under the authority of section 301(a) of thePublic Works and Economic Development Act of 1965, as amended, 42 U.S.C.3151(a). Eligibility Eligible applicants for technical assistance grants or cooperative agreementsinclude public or private nonprofit national, state, area, district, orlocal organizations; public and private colleges and universities; Indiantribes, local governments, and state agencies. Other eligible applicantsare private individuals, partnerships, firms, and corporations. Program Objective The Technical Assistance Program is designed to provide technical assistanceuseful in alleviating or preventing conditions of excessive unemploymentor underemployment and problems of economically distressed populationsin rural and urban areas. Funding Availability Funds in the amount of $1.916 million are available for the Technical AssistanceProgram. Congress has directed that $.4 million of this total will be awardedto specific organizations without the benefit of competitive evaluation.Approval of these projects will reduce the discretionary amount of fundsallocated for the regions in which they are located. It is expected thatthe majority of the remaining funds will be made available for projectsserving specific local or substate areas and the balance for projects whoseimpacts will cross EDA regional office boundaries. Funding Instrument EDA will provide grants and cooperative agreements not to exceed 75 percentof proposed project costs. Applicants are expected to provide the remainingshare. In cases when EDA issues a Solicitation of Applications, an applicant'sshare may not be required. Project Duration Assistance will be for the period of time required to complete the scopeof the work. Generally, this will not exceed twelve months. Selection Criteria Preference will be given to those technical assistance proposals which:1. Produce strong evidence that the proposed project will lead to the near-term(between one and five years) generation and/or retention of private sectorjobs. 2. Do not depend upon further EDA or other Federal funding assistance toachieve results. 3. Strengthen the capability of state and local organizations and institutions,including nonprofit development groups, to undertake and promote effectiveeconomic development programs targeted to people and areas in distress.4. Stimulate significant private and nonfederal public investment for economicdevelopment purposes, including funds from commercial lenders, public andprivate pension funds and other nontraditional sources. 5. Benefit severely distressed areas, particularly rural counties and communities.6. Diversify distressed rural economies by means of enterprise zones andother strategies. 7. Demonstrate innovative approaches to stimulating economic developmentin depressed areas. 8. Establish links between the unemployed and underemployed and economicopportunities offered by new and expanding businesses, facilities and services.9. Promote technology transfer and increased productivity to improve thecompetitiveness of firms/industries located in distressed areas. 10. Further the role of educational and training institutions in promotingeconomic development. 11. Are consistent with the EDA approved Overall Economic Development Program(OEDP) for the area in which the projects are located and have been recommendedby the OEDP Committee (if appropriate to the nature of the project). 12. Present an appropriate and clear project design. 13. Are proposed by organizations or individuals with the capacity, qualificationsand staff necessary to undertake the intended activities. 14. Present a reasonable, itemized budget for the proposed activities.15. Involve a significant (preferably cash) contribution in excess of minimumrequired from applicant or other nonfederal sources. Pre-Application Procedures Parties seeking support for local technical assistance projects_those thatwill primarily benefit a substate or intra-regional area_must contact theEconomic Development Representative (EDR) for the area for a proposal package.This package may contain additional information on procedures and selectioncriteria. The EDA Regional Office will provide the name, address and telephonenumber of the EDR for the applicant's area (see section X of this notice).EDA will evaluate all proposals and invite applications for those whichbest satisfy the selection criteria. Potential applicants should submit one original and two (2) copies of abrief and concise proposal which should not exceed 20 pages. Vita and capabilityinformation may be appended. Each proposal should include (1) a cover pagegiving a short descriptive project title, the name and address of the performingorganization, the name and telephone number of the project director, theproject duration, the amount of EDA funds requested, and the program (TechnicalAssistance) that would provide the funds; (2) a brief scope-and-objectivessection indicating why the project is needed, giving its objectives, andproviding a capsule description of the project; (3) a more detailed descriptionof the project and its methodology; (4) a work plan showing different phasesof the project and their timing; (5) a detailed budget showing cost breakdowns,with EDA-funded and non-EDA-funded costs presented in separate columnsand with the EDA-funded costs adding to the total shown on the cover page;(6) reandCx.174;1sumeandCx.174;1s for the project director and principal staff;and (7) a corporate or institutional capability statement, where appropriate.Parties seeking support for local technical assistance should submit proposalsto the EDR who supplied the proposal package. Parties seeking support for projects whose impacts will cross EDA regionalboundaries should submit proposals to David H. Geddes, Director, TechnicalAssistance and Research Division, Economic Development Administration,Room 7319, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Individualsor organizations located outside the Washington, DC metropolitan area shouldsubmit a copy of the letter transmitting their proposal to Washington tothe EDR for the area in which they are located. Formal Application Procedures The appropriate EDA Office will invite entities whose proposals for technicalassistance projects are selected for further consideration to completeformal application packages. Eligibility for Specific Solicitations EDA may during the course of the year identify specific economic developmenttechnical assistance activities it wishes to have conducted. Organizationsand individuals interested in being invited to respond to Solicitationsof Applications (SOAs) to conduct such work should submit information ontheir capabilities and experience to David H. Geddes, Director, TechnicalAssistance and Research Division, Economic Development Administration,Room 7319, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Further Information For further information about local technical assistance projects_thosethat will benefit substate or intra-regional areas_contact the appropriateEDR (whose name, address, and telephone number may be obtained from theEDA Regional Office) or the appropriate EDA Regional Office (see sectionX of this notice). For further information about submitting projects whoseimpact will cross EDA Regional Office boundaries, contact Richard E. Hage,telephone (202) 377-2127. <ITAG tagnum="84">V. Program: University Center Projects </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance: 11.303 Economic Development_TechnicalAssistance) </ITAG>Summary Funds for basic university center projects are used as seed money to helpselected colleges and universities mobilize their own and other resourcesto assist in the economic development of distressed areas. The effortsof university centers should focus on helping public bodies, nonprofitorganizations and businesses plan and implement activities designed togenerate jobs and income. In addition, funds may be used for projects whichpromote the goals of the University Center Program in other ways. Supportfor these types of projects is authorized under section 301(a) of the PublicWorks and Economic Development Act of 1965, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 3151(a).Eligibility Eligible applicants for university center grants and cooperative agreementsare public and private colleges and universities, associations representingsuch institutions, and other organizations with expertise in UniversityCenter Program issues.Program ObjectiveThe objective of these projects is to enable colleges and universitiesto contribute to overall economic development by using their resourcesto provide technical assistance that will alleviate or prevent conditionsof excessive unemployment or underemployment and problems of distressedpopulations in individual states or substate areas.Funding AvailabilityFunds in the amount of $4.79 million are available for university centerprojects. Congress has directed that a total of $.375 million will be awardedto specific universities without the benefit of competitive evaluation.Approval of these projects will reduce the discretionary amount of fundsallocated for the regions in which they are located. Most FY 1989 fundswill be used for continuation grants to existing centers.Funding InstrumentUniversity center project funds will be awarded through grants and cooperativeagreements to cover a portion of project costs. The amount covered willnot exceed 75 percent of proposed project costs. In the case of universitycenter basic grants, the following policies regarding local share apply:1. As announced in November 1985, university centers initially funded priorto FY 1986 (October 1, 1985) which continue to receive EDA support mustgradually increase their share to match the EDA grant dollar-for-dollarby FY 1990. At least half of the local share must be in cash. For FY 1989the minimum share for these centers is $50,000. Centers which do not demonstrateprogress in this regard may not continue to receive EDA funding.2. University centers initially funded in or after FY 1986 which continueto receive EDA support must provide a minimum of $33,334 in the first year,$45,000 in the second year, $60,000 in the third year, $80,000 in the fourthyear, $100,000 in the fifth year, $125,000 in the sixth year and $140,000in the seventh and final year. At least half of the local share must bein cash.Project DurationGrants and cooperative agreements will be for the period of time requiredto complete the scope of work. Generally this will not exceed twelve months.Selection CriteriaIn judging proposals from existing and potential university centers forbasic grants, EDA will consider whether the proposed center programs:1. Serve areas of significant economic distress;2. Address the development needs of the service area;3. Complement the activities of other organizations in the proposed servicearea that are engaged in economic and business development. Where applicable,the proposal must identify how it differs from the services provided bya local Small Business Development Center (SBDC), Trade Adjustment AssistanceCenter (TAAC) or a Minority Business Development Center (MBDC);4. Possess the commitment, as evidenced by financial support and otherresources, of the university leadership at the highest levels to the missionand purpose of the university center;5. Possess the capacity to provide the proposed technical and other typesof assistance to jurisdictions and organizations within the service area;and6. Complement and support the local, regional or state economic developmentstrategies in the service area. EDA will also consider the following factorsin evaluating proposals for basic grants from potential centers:a. The extent to which the center proposes to serve the economic developmentneeds of economically distressed jurisdictions and community-based organizations.b. The presence of another EDA-funded center in the state.c. The presence of an SBDC, MBDC or a TAAC in the service area.Proposals will also be judged on the quality of the proposed work programand the qualifications of the applicant to carry out that work program.Proposals for other projects that meet the goals of the University CenterProgram will be judged on similar factors. These include the potentialimpact of the project on distressed areas, the quality of the proposedwork program, and the qualifications of the applicant to carry it out.Depending on the availability of funds, EDA may hold a periodic competitionfor short-term (one to three year) incentive grants. This competition willbe open to all currently and previously funded centers, except those whichreceived initial funding in the previous year and those whose funding wasdiscontinued because of poor performance.Funding PolicyFor centers judged to be performing satisfactorily and if funds are madeavailable by Congress, EDA's policy as announced in the<T4>Federal Register</T4>on February 11, 1987, is to provide basic supportof $100,000, annually, for five years and $50,000, annually, for the sixthand seventh years. No basic funds are provided after the seventh year ofEDA support. The above policy applies to all centers which were initiallyfunded in or after FY 1986. Centers funded prior to FY 1986 (October 1,1985) will be eligible for FY's 1989, 1990 and 1991 funding as specifiedin their FY 1988 grant amendment. Centers initially funded in FY's 1982,1983, 1984 or 1985 will be eligible for maximum grants of $75,000 in theirsixth year and a final $50,000 in their seventh year.EDA will continue to exempt, at least for FY 1989, the centers at HistoricallyBlack Colleges and Universities from the seven-year time limit on participationin the University Center Program. Other exceptions to these policies maybe made in unusual circumstances, such as when no other qualified institutionexists to provide services to an area with extreme economic distress.Proposal Submission Procedures<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Basic Grants for Existing University Centers</ITAG>Existing centers that have been selected to receive consideration for continuedbasic funding will be notified of all application procedures by the EDARegional Offices. Any existing centers not selected to receive considerationfor continued support will be so notified.<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Basic Grants for New Centers</ITAG>1.<T3>Letters of Interest.</T3>Colleges and universities interested in participatingin the University Center Program should submit letters of interest, signedby the president to the appropriate EDA Regional Office with a copy tothe EDA Economic Development Representative (EDR). The letter must describethe center's proposed service area; the economic distress of that area;the relationship of the center's program to state, regional and local economicdevelopment strategies, as appropriate; and the activities to be undertakenwith the EDA assistance. In addition, the letter must indicate that thecollege or university leadership understands that EDA's policy is to (a)provide funds for the basic university center operations for a maximumof seven years, if funds continue to be available to EDA for the UniversityCenter Program; and (b) require increasing financial support by the collegeor university over the seven years as described in item 2 under<T3>Funding Instrument.</T3>2.<T3>Deadlines.</T3>Letters postmarked after March 15, 1989 may not be considered.3.<T3>Proposals.</T3>Colleges and universities selected by EDA for considerationas new centers will be invited to submit detailed proposals. The appropriateRegional Office will provide instructions for preparing such a proposal.EDA will use the previously described selection criteria to evaluate theseproposals. Those submitting unsuccessful proposa1s will be notified assoon as possible.Formal Application ProceduresThe appropriate EDA Regional Office will ask entities whose proposals fornew basic university center grants are selected for further considerationto complete formal application packages.Further InformationFor further information, contact the appropriate EDA Regional Office (seesection X of this Notice), the appropriate EDR (whose name, address, andtelephone number may be obtained from the EDA Regional Office), or TonyMeyer, Technical Assistance and Research Division, Economic DevelopmentAdministration, Room 7319, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC20230; telephone, 202-377-2127.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Program: Research and Evaluation Projects</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance: 11.312 Economic Development_Researchand Evaluation Program)</ITAG>SummaryResearch and evaluation funds are used to support studies that will increaseknowledge about the causes of economic distress and approaches to alleviatingsuch problems. This program is authorized under section 301(c) of the PublicWorks and Economic Development Act of 1965, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 3151(c).Eligible ApplicantsPrivate individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations, collegesand universities, and other suitable organizations.Program ObjectiveThe objectives of section 301(c) grants and cooperative agreements arethe following:1. To determine the causes of unemployment, underemployment, underdevelopment,and chronic depression in various areas and regions of the Nation.2. To assist in the formulation and implementation of national, state,and local programs that will raise employment and income levels and otherwiseproduce solutions to problems resulting from the above conditions.3. To evaluate the effectiveness of programs, projects, and techniquesused to (a) alleviate economic distress; and (b) promote economic development.Funding AvailabilityFunds in the amount of $1.210 million are available for this program. Fundswill be used for projects selected through the application procedures describedbelow and for EDA-initiated solicitations.Funding InstrumentEDA will provide grants and cooperative agreement awards covering up to100 percent of project costs.Project DurationAssistance under this program will normally be for a period of up to 15months.Selection CriteriaEDA will use the following criteria to evaluate research and evaluationproposals:1. Suitability of the subject.2. Potential usefulness of the research to state and local economic developmentspecialists.3. General quality and clarity of the proposal. 4. Soundness and completeness of the research methodology. 5. Qualifications of principal investigator(s) and, where appropriate,performing organization(s). 6. Previous performance of principal investigator and/or performing organizationon EDA-funded projects. 7. Cost and value of product in relation to cost. EDA is interested inreceiving proposals dealing with_ 1. Employment and unemployment; 2. Income and poverty; 3. Rural and other nonmetropolitan economic development; 4. Regional and local growth; 5. Industrial location; 6. Job creation methods; 7. State and local economic development efforts; 8. Private sector economic development efforts; 9. Developmental effects of public works and other infrastructure; 10. Capital markets and development finance, particularly nonfederal sourcesof economic development financing; 11. Industrial competitiveness; 12. Minority business and minority jobs; 13. Productivity and technology; and 14. Nonfederally funded financing proposals for economic development. Requested grants and awards should be for specific, well-defined, onetimeresearch projects. EDA research grants are not intended for support ofcontinuing programs (permanent research programs, publication and informationprograms, periodic forecasts, etc.) or for non-research activities. Someresearch proposals deal with or involve samples drawn from only one partof the United States. EDA normally prefers research of broad geographicscope, that at least covers a large multistate region, as opposed to researchcovering (in declining order of preference) a small region, a state, amulticounty area, or a single city or county. EDA strongly prefers cause-and-effectresearch and descriptive analyses, and funding for such will receive muchhigher priority and likelihood of approval as compared to theoretical studies,modeling (other than for hypothesis testing), and the like. Economic developmentplanning and technical assistance for specific places will not be fundedunder the Research and Evaluation Program; the Planning and Technical AssistancePrograms are for those purposes. Proposal Submission Procedures Potential applicants should submit one original and two (2) copies of abrief and concise proposal which should not exceed 20 pages. Vita and capabilityinformation may be appended. Proposals should avoid long background discussionsand literature surveys, but should be reasonably detailed, particularlyin explaining methodology. Each proposal should include (1) a cover pagegiving a short descriptive project title, the name and address of the performingorganization, the names and telephone numbers of the project director andprincipal investigators, the project duration, the amount of EDA fundsrequested, and the program (Research and Evaluation) that would providethe funds; (2) a brief scope-and-objectives section indicating why theproject is needed, giving its objectives, and providing a capsule descriptionof the project; (3) a more detailed description of the project and itsmethodology; (4) a work plan showing different phases of the project andtheir timing; (5) a detailed budget showing cost breakdowns, with EDA-fundedand any non-EDA-funded costs presented in separate columns and with theEDA-funded costs adding to the total shown on the cover page; (6) resumesfor the project director and principal investigators; and (7) a corporateor institutional capability statement, where appropriate.The cover letter accompanying the proposal should inform EDA of whetherany other organization(s) or Federal agency(ies) is or will be consideringthe proposal. Any non-EDA contributions to the project, whether by theperforming organization or third parties, should be identified.Proposals should be submitted to David H. Geddes, Director, Technical Assistanceand Research Division, Economic Development Administration, Room 7319,U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Proposals postmarkedafter February 28, 1989, may not be considered.Formal Application ProceduresEDA will evaluate the proposals using the selection criteria describedabove. Organizations and individuals whose proposals are selected for furtherconsideration will be invited to submit additional materials required forformal application.Eligibility for Specific SolicitationsIn addition to using research and evaluation funds to support proposalssubmitted under the procedures described above, EDA may during the fiscalyear identify other studies, including program evaluations, for fundingconsideration. Organizations and individuals interested in being invitedto respond to Solicitations of Applications (SOAs) to conduct such studiesshould submit information on their capabilities and experience to the addresslisted above. This information will be used to determine eligibility tocompete for projects under specific SOAs.Further InformationFor further information, contact David H. Geddes, at the above address;telephone, 202-377-4085.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Program: Economic Adjustment Assistance (Title IX)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance No: 11.307 Special EconomicDevelopment and Adjustment Assistance Program_Long-Term Economic Deterioration(LTED) and Sudden and Severe Economic Dislocation (SSED))</ITAG>SummaryFunds under the Economic Adjustment Program are used to assist areas experiencinglong-term economic deterioration (LTED) and areas threatened or impactedby sudden and severe economic dislocation (SSED). This program is authorizedunder Title IX of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965,as amended, 42 U.S.C. 3241-3245.Program ObjectiveThe LTED Program assists eligible applicants to develop and/or implementstrategies designed to halt and reverse the long-term decline of theireconomies. The most common type of activity funded under the LTED Programare Revolving Loan Funds (RLFs), although other types of eligible TitleIX activities may be funded.The SSED Program assists eligible applicants to respond to actual or threatenedmajor job losses (dislocations) and other severe economic adjustment problems.It is designed to help communities prevent a sudden, major job loss; toreestablish employment opportunities as quickly as possible after one occurs;or to meet special needs resulting from severe changes in economic conditions.SSED assistance is intended to respond to permanent rather than temporaryjob losses. Assistance may be in the form of a grant to develop a strategyto respond to the dislocation (Strategy Grant) or a grant to implementan EDA approved strategy (Implementation Grant).In light of the current high level of economic distress in rural areas,EDA is particularly interested in Title IX projects designed to mitigateserious rural economic adjustment problems. EDA is also interested in proposalsto help severely distressed areas with large minority populations.Funding AvailabilityFunds in the amount of $24.657 million are available for the Economic AdjustmentProgram in FY 1989. Of the amount, $12.454 million will be available forthe SSED Program and $12.203 million will be available for the LTED Program.Congress has directed that $1.7 million of these funds will be awardedto specific grantees, without the benefit of competitive evaluation. Approvalof these projects will reduce the discretionary amount of funds allocatedfor the regions in which these projects are located.Funding Instrument Title IX funds are awarded through grants not to exceed 75 percent ofthe project cost. Acceptable sources of the local share include, but arenot limited to, local government general revenue funds; Community DevelopmentBlock Grant (CDBG) entitlement funds or balance of state awards; and otherpublic and private donations. The full amount of the local share need notbe in hand at the time of application; however, the applicant must havea firm commitment from identified source(s), and the funds must be readilyavailable. The local share and any loan repayments must not be encumberedin any way that would preclude their use as required by the grant agreement.The local share for the RLF Program must be in cash. The local share forthe SSED Program may be cash and/or in-kind. Priority consideration willbe given to proposals with a cash matching share.Eligible ApplicantsEligible applicants within areas meeting the EDA eligibility criteria describedbelow include a redevelopment area or economic development district establishedunder Title IV of this Act, 42 U.S.C. 3161; an Indian tribe; a state; acity or other political subdivision of a state, or a consortium of suchpolitical subdivisions; a Community Development Corporation defined inthe Community Economic Development Act, 42 U.S.C. 9801; a nonprofit organizationdetermined by EDA to be the representative of a redevelopment area; theFederated States of Micronesia; and the Republic of the Marshall Islands.Eligible Areas <ITAG tagnum="81">A. LTED </ITAG>In order to receive priority consideration for funding under the LTED/RLFProgram, an area must be experiencing at least one of three economic problems:very high unemployment; low per capita income; or chronic distress (i.e.,failure to keep pace with national economic growth trends over the lastfive years). Eligibility is determined statistically. Further informationis available from EDA's Regional Offices. <ITAG tagnum="81">B. SSED </ITAG>In order to receive priority consideration for funding under the SSED Program,an area must show actual or threatened permanent job losses that exceedthe following threshold criteria, unless otherwise determined by the AssistantSecretary: 1. For areas not in Metropolitan Statistical Areas: a. If the unemployment rate of the Labor Market Area exceeds the nationalaverage, the dislocation must amount to the lesser of two (2.0) percentof the employed population, or 500 direct jobs. b. If the unemployment rate of the Labor Market Area is equal to or lessthan the national average, the dislocation must amount to the lesser offour (4.0) percent of the employed population, or 1,000 direct jobs. 2. For areas within Metropolitan Statistical Areas: a. If the unemployment rate of the Metropolitan Statistical Area exceedsthe national average, the dislocation must amount to the lesser of one-half(0.5) percent of the employed population, or 4,000 direct jobs. b. If the unemployment rate of the Metropolitan Statistical Area is equalto or less than the national average, the dislocation must amount to thelesser of one (1.0) percent of the employed population, or 8,000 directjobs. In addition, fifty (50) percent of the job loss threshold must result fromthe action of a single employer, or eighty (80) percent of the job lossthreshold must occur in a single industry classification (i.e., two digitSIC code). In the case of a Presidentially declared natural disaster, thearea eligibility criteria are waived. In other similarly exceptional circumstances,the criteria may be partially waived at the discretion of the AssistantSecretary. Actual dislocations must have occurred within one year and threatened dislocationsmust be anticipated to occur within two years of the date EDA is contacted.Selection Criteria Proposals will be evaluated based on conformance with statutory and regulatoryrequirements, the economic adjustment needs of the area, the merits ofthe proposed project in addressing those needs and the potential applicant'sability to manage the grant effectively. <ITAG tagnum="81">A. LTED/RLF Selection Criteria </ITAG>Key factors in EDA's selection of proposed LTED/RLF projects include: 1. <T3>Economic and Financial Needs of the Project Area. </T3>a. Areas withthe highest levels of economic distress (high unemployment, low per capitaincome, vacant plants, deteriorating infrastructure, and declining farmeconomy, etc.) will receive priority consideration. b. Need for RLF financing will be evaluated based on the local capitalmarket and the applicant's analysis of it, and how clearly this analysisdefines the financial problems to be addressed by the RLF project. c. Applicant's need for grant funds to carry out the project will be basedon an assessment of its financial resources. 2. <T3>Objectives and Benefits of Proposed Projects. </T3>Priority will begiven to projects which can: a. Stimulate private sector employment. Thenumber and types of jobs to be created/retained will be key factors inproject selection along with the job/cost ratio established for the RLFportfolio as a whole.b. Target assistance to meet program objectives and to support specificeconomic adjustment activities planned or underway in the area, particularlythose identified in the OEDP, Title IX strategy, or other plans developedto deal with specific economic adjustment problems affecting the area.This may include target areas, industries, types of employers or othercriteria that maximize the impact of assistance on specific needs withinthe area. c. Leverage higher ratios of private investment than the required minimumratio of two private sector investment dollars to one RLF dollar. (Note:the local share or other funds provided by the RLF to finance loans cannotbe counted as leveraged dollars.) d. Direct new job opportunities to the long-term unemployed and underemployed.e. Assist minorities, women and members of other economically disadvantagedgroups in obtaining RLF loans. f. Provide technical and management assistance for RLF borrowers, in additionto loan funds. g. Use creative financing techniques to overcome specific gaps in the localcapital market. h. Make loans on a timely basis. The implementation schedule for RLF projectswill normally require that RLF loans in the initial round be closed (andall EDA funds disbursed) within three years of grant approval with no lessthan 50 percent disbursed within eighteen months and 80 percent withintwo years. i. Include a larger matching share than the required 25 percent or securecommitments for future funding from other private or non-Federal publicsources. j. Coordinate activities with other economic development organizations,loan programs, employment training programs and private lenders in thearea. 3. <T3>Effective Management of the RLF. </T3>EDA will also evaluate proposedprojects to determine that the RLF will be properly managed. Key factorsinclude: a. A strong and effective Loan Administrative Board with broad communityrepresentation, including appropriate public, private sector, minorityand women representation. b. Staff capacity in program and policy development, finance, law, marketing,credit analysis, loan packaging, processing and servicing. c. Efficient procedures for loan selection, approval, and servicing whichemphasize the economic development potential of loans as well as soundmanagement and financing practices. d. A strategy for relending loan repayments which will ensure that theRLF revolves continuously and thus fulfills its purpose of creating jobsand stimulating economic activity on an ongoing basis. e. Adequate resources to cover administrative costs of the RLF. f. The potential applicant's experience and capacity for administeringeconomic and business loan programs. If the potential applicant has designatedanother organization to administer the project, EDA will evaluate the experienceand capacity of that organization, rather than the potential applicant.Nongovernmental (excluding Economic Development Districts) organizationsseeking funds must be sponsored by the local or state government havingjurisdiction over the project area, and the sponsor must be willing toassume responsibility for operating the RLF should the nongovernmentalentity no longer be able to administer the project. <ITAG tagnum="81">B. SSED Evaluation Criteria </ITAG>Key factors in EDA's selection of proposed SSED projects include: 1. The severity of the dislocation as measured by, but not limited to,the following factors: a. The degree to which the number of dislocated workers exceeds the eligibilitythreshold. b. The proportion of the total job loss represented by a single employer.c. The proportion of employment in a single industry classification representedby the firm(s) closing. d. The applicant's need for grant funds to carry out the project basedon an assessment of its financial resources. 2. The objectives and benefits of proposed activities as measured by theextent to which: a. <T3>For Implementation Grants. </T3>(1) Job creation or retention in thenear term is emphasized versus more long-term, general economic development.Projects likely to encounter delays, particularly in initiating or completingconstruction, will normally not be given favorable consideration. (2) The jobs to be created and/or retained are permanent, will directlybenefit the dislocated workers, and are new employment opportunities andnot transferred from one area of the United States to another. (3) The response to the problem is timely. (4) EDA assistance will be complemented by, or will complement, appropriatestate and local efforts; for example, training and job placement services,other Federal investments, and private sector support.(5) The adjustment strategy and implementation activities proposed demonstratean appropriately creative approach to addressing the dislocation. (6) The cost per job created or retained is minimized. (7) In the case of a Revolving Loan Fund, the recycled loan proceeds generateeconomic development benefits. (8) The local share exceeds the required 25 percent. b. <T3>For Strategy Grants. </T3>(1) The applicant has demonstrated the capacityto manage the planning process and subsequent implementation activities.(2) The proposed scope of work is responsive to the problem. (3) The focus of the planning effort is on the generation of practicaland implementable solutions. (4) The local share exceeds the required 25 percent. Construction Project Implementation As indicated in the first section of this Notice, EDA expects constructionprojects to be initiated and completed in a timely manner in accordancewith the schedule agreed upon in the grant documentation. The recipientwill be responsible for promptly notifying EDA of any events that preventadherence to the approved schedule. The grantee must also provide an explanationof why the events were beyond its ability to predict or control and obtainEDA approval of changes in the schedule prior to proceeding with projectimplementation. EDA expects grantees to anticipate predictable delays (such as those causedby land acquisition problems, local financing requirements, acquisitionof state permits and approvals, normal weather conditions in area, andpublic objections to the project), and take them into account in preparingthe project schedule. Grantees who fail to comply with project schedulesmay be subject to grant suspension and/or termination. EDA will not provide additional funds to finance overruns that occur duringproject implementation. Proposal Submission Procedures Interested parties should contact the Economic Development Representativefor the area or the appropriate EDA Regional Office (see section X of thisNotice) for a proposal package. Project proposals, submitted by eligibleentities, will be evaluated by EDA staff on the basis of: 1. Conformance with the evaluation criteria mentioned above and statutory,regulatory and policy requirements. 2. The availability of funds. Formal Application Procedures Following a review of project proposals, EDA will invite those projectsselected for funding consideration to submit formal applications. Further Information For further information about this program, contact the appropriate EDARegional Office or Paul J. Dempsey, Director, Economic Adjustment Division,Economic Development Administration, Room 7327, U.S. Department of Commerce,Washington, DC 20230; telephone, 202-377-2659.<ITAG tagnum="85">VIII. Program: Public Works and Development Facilities Assistance</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance: 11.300 Economic DevelopmentGrants and Loans for Public Works and Development Facilities. 11.304 EconomicDevelopment Public Works Impact Program (PWIP))</ITAG>SummaryFunds available under the Public Works Program are used to finance publicworks and development facilities that contribute to the economic developmentof depressed areas. EDA's public works expenditures are authorized by TitlesI and IV of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965, as amended(PWEDA), 42 U.S.C. 3131 and 42 U.S.C. 3171(a)(3).EligibilityEligible applicants under this program include any state, or politicalsubdivision thereof, Indian tribe, the Federated States of Micronesia,the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and commonwealths and territoriesof the U.S. Flag, or private or public nonprofit organization or associationrepresenting any redevelopment area or part thereof, if the project islocated within an EDA-designated redevelopment area. Redevelopment areas,other than those designated under the Public Works Impact Program, musthave a current EDA-approved Overall Economic Development Program (OEDP).Political entities claiming eligibility under OEDPs developed by multicountyeconomic development organizations are expected to continue to participateactively in the organization. Further information on areas eligible forthis program is available from EDA's Regional Offices. Nonprofit applicantsare urged to seek the cooperation and support of units of local governmentand, when deemed appropriate by EDA to have the local government serveas co-applicant for EDA assistance. This serves the purpose of ensuringthe financial stability and continuity of the project after its constructionand during its useful life, in the event the nonprofit entity finds itselfin a position of not having the financial resources to properly and efficientlyadminister, operate and maintain the EDA-assisted facility consistent withthe provisions of 13 CFR 314_Property Management Standards.Program ObjectiveThe purpose of the Public Works Grant Program is to assist communitieswith the funding of public works and development facilities that contributeto the creation or retention of private sector jobs and to the alleviationof unemployment and underemployment. Such assistance is designed to helpcommunities achieve lasting improvement by stabilizing and diversifyinglocal economies, and improving local living conditions and the economicenvironment of the area. EDA emphasizes the alleviation of unemploymentand underemployment among residents of the project area as a primary focusof this program. In view of the current rural distress, applications fromrural communities will be reviewed with particular interest.Funding AvailabilityFunds in the amount of $126.462 million are available for this program.Congress has directed that $13.75 million of this total will be awardedto specific grantees without the benefit of competitive evaluation. Approvalof these projects will reduce the discretionary amount of funds allocatedfor the regions in which they are located.Funding InstrumentEDA may provide grants with maximum EDA participation of 80 percent ofproject costs. On an average, EDA grants cover 50 percent of project costs.Applicants will be required to provide the local share from acceptablesources including, but not limited to, local government general revenuefunds; Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) entitlement funds or balanceof state awards; Farmers Home Administration loans; and other public andprivate donations.The local share need not be in hand at the time of application; however,the applicant must have a firm commitment from identified sources, andthe funds must be readily available.The local share must not be encumbered in any way that would preclude itsuse consistent with the requirements of the grant agreement. Priority willbe given to applications which maximize the local share's percentage ofthe project cost. Supplementary grant assistance to finance more than 50percent of project costs will only be approved by EDA for projects in areasof high distress. Decisions on such assistance will be based on the natureof the project, the amount of fair user charges or other revenues the projectmay reasonably be expected to generate and the relative needs of the project(see 13 CFR 305.5).Selection CriteriaFor both regular Public Works projects and Public Works Impact Program(PWIP) projects, priority consideration will be given to those which arethe most competitive based upon the project selection criteria set forthbelow, that best meet the needs of eligible areas, and that are locatedin areas of severe economic distress.<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Public Works Projects</ITAG>Factors that will be taken into account in considering projects eligibleunder section 101(a)(1) (A)-(C) of PWEDA, 42 U.S.C. 3131(a)(1) (A)-(C),include whether and to what extent the project:1. Improves opportunities for the successful establishment or expansionof industrial or commercial plants or facilities in the area where suchproject will be located;2. Assists in creating or retaining private sector jobs in the near termand assists in the creation of additional long-term employment opportunities,provided the jobs are not transferred from any other area of the UnitedStates, and will result in a low cost per job in relation to total EDAcost;3. Benefits the long-term unemployed and members of low-income familieswho are residents of the area to be served by the project;4. Fulfills a pressing need of the area, or part thereof, in which it willbe located;5. Is consistent with the EDA approved Overall Economic Development Program(OEDP) for the area in which it is, or will be, located, and has broadcommunity support;6. Is supported by significant private sector investment;7. Has adequate local share of funds with evidence of firm commitment andavailability;8. Supports developments taking place in designated enterprise zones, particularlyin rural areas;9. Demonstrates that necessary permits, land acquisitions, or options onland and rights-of-way have been obtained and that all other legal requirementsof the application process have been satisfied;10. Includes a larger local share than the minimum required; and .11. Gives evidence of the ability to begin and complete construction ina timely manner in accordance with a schedule to be agreed upon by EDAand the applicant and included in the grant award. EDA discourages thestart of construction prior to grant award and cautions that financialhardship may be experienced by applicants whose projects are not ultimatelyapproved because of compliance deficiencies or lack of competitivenesswith other proposals. EDA will require all applicants that request approvalto proceed with construction prior to grant award to acknowledge that theyare proceeding at their own risk without recourse to EDA should the grantnot be awarded and/or EDA requirements not be complied with. Furthermore,EDA may view the start of construction prior to grant award as an indicationthat the grant funds are not essential for the successful development ofthe project.<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Public Works Impact Program</ITAG>Factors that will be taken into account in considering projects under thePublic Works Impact Program (PWIP) authorized by section 101(a)(1)(D) ofPWEDA, 42 U.S.C. 3131(a)(1)(D), include whether and to what extent theproject:1. Directly assists in creating immediate useful work (i.e., constructionjobs) for the unemployed and underemployed residents in the project area;2. Improves the economic or community environment in areas of severe economicdistress;3. Includes a specific plan (i.e., PWIP Employment Strategy) for hiringthe unemployed and underemployed persons in the project area to work onthe construction of the project; EDA will evaluate all plans to ensurethat they contain a logical explanation of how the employment objectiveswill be met;4. Assists in creating long-term employment opportunities or other economicbenefits for the unemployed and underemployed in the project area;5. Primarily benefits low-income families by providing essential services,or satisfying a pressing public need;6. In addition to the requirement for regular public works projects, ascontained in paragraph A.11, can begin construction quickly (normally within120 days after acceptance of the grant by the applicant); and7. Has substantial labor intensity, where labor intensity is the proportionof labor costs to the total project costs.<ITAG tagnum="81">C. Industrial Park Projects</ITAG>Projects which will primarily serve an industrial park or site will beevaluated on such additional factors as:1. A detailed analysis of existing industrial park capacity and utilization;occupancy rates for existing developed industrial acres currently availablewithin a 25-mile radius of the project site. For cities with populationsover 50,000, the prescribed area may be determined by an analysis of industrialsites within an established industrial area, which may be less than a 25-mileradius. Contact the Economic Development Representative for the area orthe appropriate EDA Regional Office for guidance.2. Commitments in writing from identified tenants to locate in the industrialpark or site. Commitments must include description of the industry, thenumber of jobs created or saved, and an implementation schedule.3. The existence of a concrete marketing strategy and demonstrated financialability to market space in the industrial park or site. Strong emphasiswill be placed upon this requirement.<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Favorable Consideration Is Not Likely for Projects Which</ITAG>1. Are in areas with unemployment rates below the national average, unlessit can be demonstrated to EDA's satisfaction by other more appropriatemeasures that the area is suffering substantial distress and economic hardship;2. Are in pockets of poverty surrounded by economically affluent areas,unless the pocket of poverty meets EDA's PWIP or SIA designation criteria;3. Are in Economic Development Centers that have stable economies withlittle distress, unless the application includes an Employment Strategythat contains a logical explanation of how new job opportunities will becreated for and filled by residents of nearby highly distressed redevelopmentareas;I114. Do not benefit the long-term unemployed or members of low-incomefamilies or otherwise substantially further the objectives of the EconomicOpportunity Act of 1964;I115. Cannot be implemented within a reasonableperiod of time;I116. Involve substantial land purchase, or land purchasesinvolving exorbitant costs; EDA prefers not being involved with land purchases;I117.Do not have the applicant's share of project funding readily available;I118.Support tourism or recreational activities, unless it can be demonstratedto EDA's satisfaction that tourism is the major industry in the area orthat the project will assist in creating a significant number of jobs,in which case, the project must directly assist in providing job opportunitiesfor unemployed and underemployed persons of the area and otherwise supportthe long-term growth of the area;I119. Involve industrial parks where thereis evidence of excessive vacancies in existing developed industrial parksor sites in close proximity to the proposed project, unless there is evidencethe proposed project is targeted to types of firms not readily accommodatedor served by the existing industrial parks and firm commitments to locatein the industrial park exist;I1110. Involve vocational-technical schoolsunless a direct link has been established between the training curriculumand the needs of existing local employers or those committed to locatein the labor market area;I1111. Require a mortgage to be placed on thereal property or the facility to be constructed/improved with EDA funds;I1112.Request additional financial assistance from EDA to finance cost overruns.I81E.Prohibited ProjectsI11No support will be provided for proposals such as:I111.Nonindustrial street/road construction or repair that is normally the responsibilityof local government, county, or Federal highway programs;I112. Public buildingsincluding, but not limited to judicial buildings, courthouses, jails, firestations, hospitals, medical clinics, social service buildings, civic auditoriums,convention centers, museums, and theaters;I113. Parking garages and pedestrianwalkways (elevated or ground level malls);I114. Land reclamation includingsubsurface demolition and site cleanup activities; orI115. Beautificationprojects.I83Construction Project ImplementationI11As indicated in the firstsection of this Notice, EDA expects construction projects to be initiatedand completed in a timely manner in accordance with the schedule agreedupon in the grant documentation. The recipient will be responsible forpromptly notifying EDA of any events that prevent adherence to the approvedschedule. The recipient must also provide an explanation of why the eventswere beyond its ability to predict or control and obtain EDA's approvalof changes in the schedule prior to proceeding with project implementation.EDA expects recipients to anticipate predictable delays (such as thosecaused by land acquisition problems, local financing requirements, normalweather conditions in the area, acquisition of state permits and approvals,and public objections to the project), and to take them into account inpreparing the project schedule. Recipients who fail to comply with projectschedules may be subject to grant suspension and/or termination.I11Undermost circumstances, EDA will not provide additional funds to finance overrunsthat occur during project implementation.Proposal Submission ProceduresTo establish the merits of project proposals, interested parties shouldfirst contact the Economic Development Representative for the area. TheEDA Regional Office can provide the name, address and telephone numberof the Economic Development Representative for the area who will providea preapplication form and arrange for conferences to discuss the proposal.EDA will screen proposals before inviting the submission of a formal application.Proposals will be evaluated based upon:1. Conformance with statutory and other legal requirements and with theselection criteria mentioned above;2. The merits of the proposal in addressing the relative economic developmentneeds of the eligible area; and3. The availability of funds as allocated to the Regional Offices.Processing time for project proposals will depend on the completeness ofinformation provided in the preapplication form and supporting documentsat the time of submission. Project proposals that require additional informationfrom applicants or other sources will be returned to correct deficienciesand the official application receipt dates will be adjusted accordingly.Formal Application ProceduresFollowing a review of project proposals, EDA will invite entities whoseprojects are selected for consideration to submit formal applications.Previous ApplicationsProject applications invited, but not funded in FY 1988, remain eligiblefor funding consideration. Those applications which were received by September30, 1988, will be processed and evaluated in accordance with the projectselection criteria published for FY 1988 and current legal requirements.Those applications not received by EDA by September 30, 1988, must be consistentwith the project selection criteria and requirements published in thisNotice. Applicants whose projects were invited but not submitted to EDAin FY 1988 should contact the appropriate EDA Regional Office regardingforms to be used for FY 1989.Further InformationFor further information contact the appropriate EDA Regional Office (seesection X of this Notice).<ITAG tagnum="84">IX. Program: Guaranteed Loans</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance: 11.301 Economic Development_BusinessDevelopment Assistance)</ITAG>SummaryPursuant to Pub. L. 89-136 (42 U.S.C. 3142-3246(h)) (Act), EDA is preparedto guarantee up to eighty percent (80%) of the principal and interest ofloans to be made to private borrowers for the purchase of fixed assetsand/or for working capital purposes for projects located in areas eligiblefor EDA assistance. EDA loan guarantees are made available to help businessesexpand, establish, or maintain operations in both urban and rural eligibleareas throughout the Nation. Guarantees offered under this program aremade at the discretion of the Assistant Secretary for Economic Developmentbased upon data from the borrower and lender current at the time the guaranteeis offered.Preapplication ProceduresApplicants should contact the appropriate EDA Regional Office BusinessLoans Division to discuss their proposals. EDA staff will screen proposalsbefore inviting a formal application. Proposals will be evaluated basedupon conformance with the following:1. Statutory requirements contained in the Act;2. Regulatory requirements contained in 13 CFR Part 306 and 309; and restatedin this Notice; and3. Provisions of Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Revised CircularA-70, dated August 24, 1984 (A-70).OMB Circular A-70 (Revised) RequirementsAll loan guarantees must conform to the requirements of A-70, without exception.The most significant requirements of A-70 are as follows:1. Loans must be secured by first priority, unsubordinated liens on collateralhaving value in excess of the full amount of the loan.2. A guarantee fee will be charged.3. Not more than eighty percent (80%) of the principal and the intereston a loan may be guaranteed.4. The lender must bear a significant portion of the risk of loss on theloan. No other security, guarantees, or any other arrangement that wouldnot inure ratably to EDA for that portion of the loan not guaranteed byEDA will be permitted.5. No loan directly involved with tax-exempt obligations, such as industrialrevenue bonds, will be guaranteed.Supplementary Information<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Amount of Funding Available</ITAG>EDA is authorized to commit up to $150 million to guarantee contingentliability for loan principal in FY 1989, which ends September 30, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="81">B. Type of Financial Assistance</ITAG>EDA staff will consider proposals for the guarantee of loans made by privatelending institutions to private borrowers to finance the costs of fixedassets or for working capital purposes. EDA staff will not accept applicationsfor projects which involve real estate development for either investmentor speculation, or for the refinancing of current debt.<ITAG tagnum="81">C. Who May Apply</ITAG>Formal applications will be invited by EDA staff only after review andacceptance of satisfactory project proposals. Applications will be acceptedonly from private lending institutions (the applicant) for the guaranteeof loans to private business enterprises. EDA's relationship is essentiallywith the lender applicant, not the borrower.<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Long-Term Employment</ITAG>EDA staff will seek to assist in the creation or retention of permanentprivate-sector jobs in EDA eligible areas. Accordingly, the project forwhich the applicant seeks financial assistance must be reasonably calculatedto provide more than a temporary alleviation of unemployment or underemploymentwithin the eligible area where the project is or will be located.<ITAG tagnum="81">E. Repayment Ability</ITAG>The private lender and EDA must find that there is reasonable assuranceof repayment of the guaranteed loan.<ITAG tagnum="81">F. EDA Guarantee Required</ITAG>No loan will be guaranteed by EDA unless the application is supported byevidence that the financial assistance applied for is not otherwise availableto the prospective borrower from either private lenders without a guaranteeor from other Federal agencies on terms which, in the opinion of EDA, willpermit accomplishing the project. In the event the borrower is a largecorporation which would normally have funds available to finance the project,such corporation must certify that it would not locate the proposed projectwithin the EDA-designated area without the benefits of EDA's financialassistance.<ITAG tagnum="81">G. Relocation</ITAG>Nonrelocation requirements apply to guaranteed loans under Section 202,Title II of PWEDA. EDA's regulations at 13 CFR 309.3 prohibit transferringjobs from one commuting area to another. Certificates of nonrelocationwill be required.General Conditions of Assistance<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Term of Loan</ITAG>The term of a guaranteed fixed asset loan cannot exceed the weighted averageestimated useful economic life of the project fixed assets, but in no eventcan the term of such a loan exceed twenty-five (25) years. The term ofa guaranteed working capital loan ordinarily may not exceed five (5) years,and the loan should be fully amortized during its term. EDA will not ordinarilyguarantee revolving-type or open-end working capital loans.B. Guarantee Percentage and Interest RatePursuant to A-70, EDA may guarantee up to eighty percent (80%) of the facevalue of a loan. However, applicants requesting an eighty percent (80%)guarantee will be required to justify why a lesser guarantee percentagewould not be acceptable. As a general rule, EDA will not offer to guaranteea loan in excess of the following percentages and interest rates:1. 80% guarantee_Lender prime rate plus 1.50%;2. 75% guarantee_Lender prime rate plus 1.75%;3. 70% guarantee_Lender prime rate plus 2.0%;4. 65% guarantee_Lender prime rate plus 2.5%.<ITAG tagnum="81">C. Guarantee Fee</ITAG>Pursuant to A-70, EDA will charge the lender a guarantee fee.<ITAG tagnum="81">D. Application Fee</ITAG>EDA may charge an application processing fee to cover the costs of applicationprocessing and review.<ITAG tagnum="81">E. Lender's Risk</ITAG>That portion of the loan not guaranteed by EDA must be at risk to the recipientthroughout the term of the loan. This precludes the recipient from obtainingany additional security, guarantee, or compensating balances to separatelysecure the unguaranteed portion of the loan. This does not preclude normalloan participation arrangements by the lender, provided that any such participationis acceptable to EDA. EDA staff will be obligated to deal only with therecipient, and all participants must be eligible as recipients.<ITAG tagnum="81">F. Other Lender-Borrower Relationships</ITAG>When recipient has other creditor/debtor relationships with the prospectiveborrower, EDA staff will seek assurances that these relationships willnot create conflicts with EDA's interest in the recipient's servicing ofthe loan for which a guarantee is sought. Ordinarily, EDA staff will notaccept an application from an applicant who has existing short-term revolvingworking capital financing extended to the borrower.<ITAG tagnum="81">G. EDA Investment Per Job</ITAG>EDA staff will consider only those projects that have an EDA investmentexposure of $20,000 or less per permanent job to be created or saved.<ITAG tagnum="81">H. Repayment Ability</ITAG>Only projects that demonstrate reasonable assurance of repayment are eligibleto receive EDA financial assistance. The applicant must demonstrate whyit is reasonably certain the borrower will be able to repay the loan. Asa minimum, the application must include:1. Applicant's normal detailed credit analysis, including a narrative discussionof company history, management, product, production capability, marketconditions, finances, collateral, and repayment ability (with ratio analysescompared to industry standards);2. Three (3) years' financial statements, audited and certified by a publicaccountant, if available, or certified by a responsible officer of theprospective borrower; if in operation less than three years, financialstatements since inception;3. Financial statements of the prospective borrower, current within ninety(90) days of the date of the application;4. Pro forma balance sheets, income and cash flow statements of the prospectiveborrower on a month-by-month basis for the first year after the loan ismade and on a quarterly basis for the next two (2) years; and5. One copy of the proposed note and loan agreement between the applicantand the prospective borrower with attachments.<ITAG tagnum="81">I. Adequate Collateral</ITAG>The lender must maintain perfected liens against and security interestsin collateral adequate to permit full recovery of the loan in the caseof default by the borrower. Collateral must be of such nature that repaymentof the loan is reasonably assured when considered along with the integrityand ability of project management, soundness of the project and borrower'sprospective earnings. The applicant must document why it is reasonablycertain that adequate collateral coverage exists. Only projects that demonstratethat the full amount of the loan is covered exclusively by an unsubordinatedfirst priority security interest on collateral offered by the borrowerwill be considered. There will be no exceptions to this requirement. Proofand documentation of collateral coverage shall include but not be limitedto current appraisals as to the fair market and liquidation value of thecollateral that will support the loan. If the purchase of new machineryand equipment constitutes all or part of the prospective project cost,current cost data for such assets may be submitted in lieu of an appraisal.Where real property is to be pledged as collateral, a description and evidenceof ownership must be included with appraisals acceptable to EDA.<ITAG tagnum="81">J. Guarantees</ITAG>Unconditional personal/corporate guarantees (of full and timely paymentand performance by the borrower) will be required from all persons or entitieswhich hold or control ten percent or more of the ownership interests ina borrower unless:1. The borrower has a profitable historical performance of no less thanthree out of the most recent five years, abundant collateral, adequatecash flow, and meets key industry standards (i.e., Robert Morris Associates);2. Borrower's stock is so widely held that no one individual/family/entitycan exercise control;3. Borrower's parent, subsidiary, or affiliate that is required to guaranteeis legally restricted from guaranteeing, or such guarantee would conflictwith other existing contractual obligations of the prospective guarantor.Cross guarantees may also be required from related corporate entities.EDA staff will require current (not over ninety days old at the time theapplication is filed) personal or corporate financial statements signedby the prospective guarantor, and, where appropriate and necessary to supportthe guarantee, by the guarantor's spouse, and disclosing community andindividual assets and indebtedness when applicable.<ITAG tagnum="81">K. Equity Requirements</ITAG>All applications for EDA financial assistance shall be supported by adequateexisting and/or proposed equity so as to enhance the success of the proposedproject and lessen EDA's potential exposure. The following minimum equitywill be required:1. For guaranteed working capital loans, the prospective borrower musthave existing, or must provide, net working capital equal to not less thanfifteen percent (15%) of its total working capital needs.2. For guaranteed fixed asset loans, the prospective borrower must providean equity investment in the loan project of at least fifteen percent (15%)of the aggregate loan project cost.3. The prospective borrower must provide twenty-five percent (25%) of theaggregate loan project cost for:a. New businesses with no operating history;b. Loans without full personal and/or corporate guarantee of stockholdersowning ten percent (10%) or more of the borrower;c. Energy-related businesses;d. Ventures which EDA determines to have above-average risk. <ITAG tagnum="81">L. Feasibility Report</ITAG>An independent technical, financial, and economic feasibility report bya firm acceptable to EDA will be required for all applications for newventures involving a total project cost of $1 million or more and for projectsinvolving tourism or recreational facilities. Such a report must be relatedto the pro forma operating statements associated with the application.Independent feasibility studies may also be required for other applications,as deemed necessary by EDA. <ITAG tagnum="81">M. Tax-Exempt Obligations</ITAG>The EDA project cannot share collateral with or include elements financedwith tax-exempt obligations, such as industrial revenue bonds. <ITAG tagnum="81">N. Other Requirements</ITAG>1. Hazard insurance with a standard mortgage clause naming the lender asbeneficiary will be required in an amount at least equal to the lesserof the depreciated replacement value of the property being insured or theamount of the loan.2. Keyman life insurance, which may be decreasing term insurance, normallywill be required for principals and key employees of the borrower, pledgedor assigned to the lender. Applicant Servicing ResponsibilitiesA. Upon approval of a guaranteed loan, the applicant's responsibilitiesshall include, but are not limited to, executing such care and diligencein the disbursement, servicing, collection, and liquidation of the guaranteedloan as would be exercised by a reasonable and prudent commercial lenderin dealing with a loan of its funds without the EDA guarantee.B. In the event of subsequent default on the loan, unless EDA elects otherwise,the applicant will have full responsibility for servicing and liquidatingthe loan prior to making demand on EDA for payment under the EDA guarantee.EDA shall be obligated to pay that portion of the loan guaranteed afterthe deduction of all proceeds of the liquidation less reasonable expensesdirectly attributable to the liquidation. Failure to perform these responsibilitiessatisfactorily may preclude EDA from honoring its guarantee. EDA staffwill examine the applicant's records before honoring any guarantee.Application Requirements A. The application shall include the following: 1. A signed statement by the borrower assuring that it will not use theEDA financial assistance to relocate jobs from one area to another or toclose facilities involved in the EDA-guaranteed project; 2. Approval of the application by the appropriate agency or instrumentalityof the state or political subdivision in which the project is located,together with a signed statement by that local authority that the projectis consistent with an Overall Economic Development Program approved byEDA; 3. Full disclosure of the amount and nature of all fees charged to theborrower by the lender, attorneys, agents or other persons to expeditethe application. Appropriate fees and charges may include services suchas accounting, legal, engineering and appraisals. Packaging and lobbyingexpenses are not allowable project costs and no proceeds of the loan maybe used directly or indirectly for attorneys' or consultants' fees in connectionwith securing EDA's guarantee. EDA may permit reasonable fees and chargesas allowable project costs. EDA will not permit any fees or charges thatare contingent upon project approval; 4. An agreement that neither the borrower nor the applicant will employor retain for professional services of any person who on behalf of EDAoccupied a position or engaged in activities which EDA determines involvesdiscretion with respect to the granting of the assistance under the Act.This agreement shall remain in effect for two years after EDA grants assistanceto the applicant; 5. An application for character/integrity investigation (Name Check FormCD-346) for each officer, the chief financial manager, and for each individualowning or controlling at least twenty percent (20%) of the borrower; 6. Documentation satisfactory to EDA to substantiate that the guaranteedloan will not create unfair competition within the meaning of Section 702of the Act. Section 702 unfair competition results if the project wouldincrease the production of goods, materials, or commodities, or the availabilityof services or facilities, when there is not sufficient demand for suchgoods, materials, commodities, services, or facilities to employ the efficientcapacity of existing competitive commercial or industrial enterprises.Applicants are encouraged to submit borrower's data for this requirementprior to or within thirty (30) days of receiving authorization to applyfor EDA financial assistance to expedite processing of the loan guarantee.Applicants and borrowers should understand that expenses incurred priorto formal offering of a loan guarantee are made solely at the applicant'sor borrower's expense. 7. A description of state or local government assistance to the project;and 8. <T3>A signed statement by the borrower assuring that (a) real estate providedas collateral is not under notice of environmental violations from local,state or Federal agencies, (b) the real property is not the subject ofan environmental impact study, and (c) there are no known violations ofFederal, state or local environmental laws or requirements, including,but not limited to, 42 U.S.C. 9601-9657. </T3>B. Loan guarantees are also subject to the following statutes: 1. Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251-1376;2. Davis-Bacon Act, as amended, 40 U.S.C. 276a-276a-5; 13 CFR 309.6; 3. The Architectural Barriers Act of 1954, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 4151-4157;13 CFR 309.14; 4. The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended, 42 U.S.C.4321-4370; CFR 309.18; 5. The National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 16 U.S.C. 470-470W-6;6. The Wild and Scenic River Act, as amended, 16 U.S.C. 1271-1287;7. The Clean Air Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 7401-7626;8. The Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128;and9. The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and LiabilityAct of 1980, 42 U.S.C. 9001-9687.Application SubmissionProposals should be submitted to the appropriate EDA Regional Office atthe earliest possible date, but in no event later than May 30, 1989. Proposalsreceived after this date may not be considered during FY 1989. Completedapplications for authorized projects should be submitted no later thanJune 30, 1989. Incomplete applications or applications that do not conformto program requirements will be rejected by EDA.The EDA Headquarters will review all loans recommended for approval bya Regional Office. Headquarters review will encompass credit as well asprogram objectives, priorities and interest. All guarantees require approvalby the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Economic Development.For Further Information ContactThree of the EDA Regional Offices have been designated to administer theLoan Guaranty Program and accept Loan Guaranty applications. For furtherinformation on that program, contact the Chief of the Business Loan Divisionat either the Austin, Philadelphia or Seattle Regional Offices (see sectionX of this Notice).<ITAG tagnum="84">X. EDA Regional Offices</ITAG>The EDA Regional Offices and the States they cover are: Philadelphia RegionalOffice, Liberty Square Building, 105 South 7th Street, First Floor, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania 19106, telephone: (215) 597-4603; serving Connecticut, Delaware,District of Columbia, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, NewJersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia,Virgin Islands, and West Virginia.Atlanta Regional Office, Suite 750, 1365 Peachtree Street, NE, Atlanta,Georgia 30309, telephone: (404) 347-7401; serving Alabama, Florida, Georgia,Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee.Denver Regional Office, 1244 Speer Boulevard, Room 670, Denver, Colorado80204, telephone: (303) 844-4714; serving Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri,Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming.Chicago Regional Office, Suite A-1630, 175 West Jackson Boulevard, Chicago,Illinois 60604, telephone: (312) 353-7706; serving Illinois, Indiana, Michigan,Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin.Seattle Regional. Office, Suite 1856, Jackson Federal Building, 915 SecondAvenue, Seattle, Washington 98174, telephone: (206) 442-0596; serving Alaska,American Samoa, Arizona, California, the Commonwealth of the Northern MarianaIslands, Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, the FederatedStates of Micronesia, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands.Austin Regional Office, Suite 201, Grant Building, 611 East Sixth Street,Austin, Texas 78701, telephone: (512) 482-5461; serving Arkansas, Louisiana,New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: January 10, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Orson G. Swindle, III,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Economic Development.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-862 Filed 1-13-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-24-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>