<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89621-0010 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-21-89.f2.A1009</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR Part 52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Region II Docket No. 97; FRL-3602-4]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plans; Revision to theState of New York Implementation Plan for Ozone</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>EPA is approving the State Implementation Plan (SIP)revision submitted by the State of New York. These revisions will reduceemissions of volatile organic compounds from gasoline by limiting the ReidVapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline sold between June 30 and September 15in 1989 and between May 1 and September 15 of each year thereafter to 9pounds per square inch. EPA is also finding that the New York RVP regulationsare ``necessary to achieve'' the national ambient air quality standard(NAAQS) for ozone and are therefore excepted from preemption under section211 of the Clean Air Act. The intended effect of this action is to makenecessary progress towards attainment of the ozone standard as expeditiouslyas practicable as required under the Clean Air Act.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>This action will be effective June 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Copies of the State submittal are available at thefollowing addresses for inspection during normal business hours:<ITAG tagnum="15">Environmental Protection Agency, Region II Office, Air Programs Branch,26 Federal Plaza, Room 1005, New York, New York 10278.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Environmental Protection Agency, Public Information Reference Unit,401 M Street SW, Washington, DC 20460.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, Divisionof Air Resources, 50 Wolf Road, Albany, New York 12233.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mr. William S. Baker, Chief, AirPrograms Branch, Environmental Protection Agency, 26 Federal Plaza, Room1005, New York, New York 10278, (212) 264-2517.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Introduction</ITAG>This notice describes EPA's decision to approve revisions to the New YorkSIP which limit the volatility of gasoline from June 30 to September 15in 1989 and from May 1 to September 15 every year thereafter. The remainderof this preamble is divided into four sections. The first provides thebackground for this action, with respect to both chronology and the broadissues involved. The second section presents today's action and EPA's rationale.The third section summarizes the comments received on the proposed actionand EPA's responses to them. The final section discusses the enforceabilityof New York's regulation with regard to the test methods as discussed inEPA's proposed rulemaking notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>On November 12, 1987, the Commissioners of the Northeast States for CoordinatedAir Use Management (NESCAUM) signed a Memorandum of Understanding expressingtheir intention to reduce the Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline to10 pounds per square inch (psi) starting in the summer of 1988 and to 9psi in the summer of 1989 and continuing every ozone season thereafter.Since there were delays in adopting necessary regulations, the 1988 limitof 10 psi was eliminated and New York passed a regulation limiting theRVP of gasoline to 9 psi from May 1 to September 15 starting in 1989 andcontinuing each year thereafter. On January 31, 1989, New York submitteda SIP revision to EPA for approval to implement this provision.On March 22, 1989, EPA published a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice (54 FR 11868) taking final action on nationalregulation of RVP, to take effect this summer. The maximum allowed summertimeRVP in New York under the federal regulation is 10.5 psi. Under section211(c)(4)(A) of the Clean Air Act (the Act), EPA's final action preemptedinconsistent state control of RVP, except in California. In its final action,EPA noted that states could be exempted from preemption only if EPA findsit is ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS as provided in section 211(c)(4)(C)of the Act. Section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act states: ``A state may prescribeand enforce, for purposes of motor vehicle emission control, a controlor prohibition respecting the use of a fuel or fuel additive in a motorvehicle or motor vehicle engine if an applicable implementation plan forsuch State under section 110 so provides. The Administrator may approvesuch provision in an implementation plan, or promulgate an implementationplan containing such a provision, only if he finds that the State controlor prohibition is necessary to achieve the national primary or secondaryambient air quality standard which the plan implements.'' In its March22, 1989 notice, EPA made specific note of the NESCAUM states' initiativesand the conditions for EPA approval of state RVP regulations.On March 28, 1989, EPA published a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice (54 FR 12656) proposing approval of theNew York SIP revision. EPA also proposed to find that these revisions were``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS for ozone within the meaning of section211(c)(4)(C) of the Act and, thus, meet the requirements for an exceptionto Federal preemption.<ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Today's Action</ITAG>EPA today approves revisions to the New York SEP which limit gasoline volatilityto 9 psi between June 30 and September 15 in 1989 and between May 1 andSeptember 15 in each year thereafter. The New York program includes authorityfor the State to issue waivers to invididual suppliers if necessary toavoid supply dislocations. EPA is approving the program as a whole, includingany waivers the State might issue under this authority. This aspect ofEPA's approval is discussed in full under section 9 of the next portionof this notice describing EPA's response to comments.EPA is also explicitly finding that the New York revisions are ``necessaryto achieve'' the NAAQS within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C) of theAct. This means that New York's RVP regulations are not preempted by theFederal RVP regulations promulgated on March 22, 1989.EPA's rationale for this action and its effective date are presented below.In this context many issues raised by commenters on the proposal will beaddressed. The remaining comments will be discussed in the next portionof this notice.In approving the New York RVP SIP revisions, EPA must consider requirementsimposed by two different sections of the Clean Air Act. As with all SIPrevisions, section 110 provides the requirements for approval into theSIP. In this case, since EPA has promulgated Federal RVP regulations, section211(c)(4)(A) preempts inconsistent State control. However, section 211(c)(4)(C)provides that the Administrator may except a State RVP control programfrom preemption if he finds it is ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS. Thus,the New York revisions must satisfy both section 110 and section 211 requirementsto gain approval.EPA has concluded that the New York RVP regulations are ``necessary'' toachieve the ozone NAAQS. In reaching this conclusion EPA has followed thetest first articulated in approving the Maricopa County, Arizona SIP (53FR 17413 (May 19, 1988) and 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988)) and later presentedin the proposed approval of the New York revisions. EPA stated that if,after accounting for the possible reductions from all other reasonablecontrol measures, New York could demonstrate that RVP controls are stillrequired to achieve the standard, then RVP controls are necessary withinthe meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C). EPA will not interpret that provisionto require a State to impose more drastic measures such as driving prohibitionsor source shutdowns before it can adopt its own fuel control program.As discused in the notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR), the record indicatesthat the New York City Metropolitan Area (NYCMA) needs VOC emission reductionson the order of at least 33.8 percent from 1987 inventory levels to achievethe standard. The State reviewed approximately 25 measures suggested byEPA as reasonable in addition to RVP control to 9 psi and found they couldtogether potentially achieve an 11.7 percent reduction from 1987 levelsin the NYCMA. Enhancements to the State's vehicle inspection and maintenance(I/M) program could produce an additional 2.4 percent reduction. As indicatedat proposal, while EPA's regulation of gasoline to 10.5 psi reduces theemission reduction attributable to the State regulation, it does not affectthe bottom line, a shortfall will still exist. EPA's technical review ofthe data presented in the State submission and by the commenters affirmsthe conclusion that a shortfall will exist even with all reasonable Stateand Federal measures.EPA continues to believe that the fact that the State RVP regulation mightnot by itself fill the shortfall and hence by itself achieve the standarddoes not mean the rule is not ``necessary to achieve'' the NAAQS. It issimple logic that ``necessary'' is not the same as ``sufficient''. EPAbelieves that the ``necessary to achieve'' standard must be interpretedto apply to measures which are needed to reduce ambient levels when noother measures that EPA or the State has found reasonable are availableto achieve this reduction. Beyond such identified ``reasonable'' measures,EPA need look at other measures before RVP control, only if it has clearevidence that RVP control would have greater adverse impacts than thosealternatives. EPA has no such evidence here. Therefore, EPA can defer toNew York's apparent view that RVP control is the next less costly (or isitself a reasonable) measure. Thus, EPA concludes that New York's RVP regulationsare ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Public Comments and EPA's Responses</ITAG>The major issues discussed in the comments are: (1) What constitutes afinding of ``necessary to achieve'' the standard under section 211(c)(4)(C);(2) whether there has been an adequate technical demonstration that controllingRVP to 9 psi is ``necessary'' (i.e., whether the threshold for exemptionfrom preemption has been crossed); (3) the scope of EPA's discretion assuminga finding that State RVP controls are necessary to achieve the standard;(4) what effect the 9 RVP limit in New York will have on the cost and supplyof gasoline in the State and the Northeast; (5) driveability and safetyconcerns; (6) whether there is an ozone problem in New York; (7) whetherthe State has an adequate enforcement program or sufficient resources toimplement the State regulations; (8) whether the State provided ``reasonableopportunity'' for public comment; (9) what exemptions or waivers from theState regulations should be allowed; (10) the appropriate timing for makingthe State regulation effective; and (11) whether EPA should withdraw orrepropose this action or reopen the public comment period in light of EPA'srecent promulgation of Federal RVP regulations and other alleged deficienciesin EPA's proposed action. Each issue is explored in detail below.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. What constitutes a finding of ``necessary to achieve'' the standardunder section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act?  </ITAG>a. Making the ``Necessary''Finding Without a Demonstration of Attainment  <T3>Comments.</T3> One group of comments questioned EPA's ability to makea finding that New York's RVP regulation is necessary to attain the ozonestandard without going through the complete planning process involved inapproving a state's response to EPA's finding that the current SIP is substantiallyinadequate to achieve the standard (the ``SIP call''). Several commentsstated that EPA cannot approve New York's RVP regulation as a SIP revisionwithout finding that the SIP as a whole achieves attainment of the NAAQSfor ozone. Related comments questioned EPA's ability to determine whetherNew York's RVP controls are necessary without a new updated inventory ofVOC sources which EPA will require from the states with ozone nonattainmentareas as part of their response to the SIP calls.  <T3>Response.</T3> Through its SIP calls, EPA has imposed on states likeNew York an obligation to revise their ozone SIPs and demonstrate attainmentof the standard. The thrust of these comments is that EPA cannot make afinding of necessity without the state first having gone through the newplanning process and developing a new demonstration of attainment. EPAdoes not interpret section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a complete demonstrationof attainment in order to approve a measure which will contribute to attainment. Forcing a state to demonstrate attainment before allowing it to adopt stricterfuel controls would yield perverse results. Areas with the worst ozonenonattainment problems, which have the most difficulty assembling a demonstrationof attainment, would be disabled for perhaps several years from adoptingclearly necessary, stricter than the national, RVP controls. Several commentersnoted that New York so far has not been able to identify any combinationof control measures which would bring the State into attainment. It isprecisely in areas like New York, with an especially difficult nonattainmentproblem, where the expeditious implementation of new controls, and hencethe finding of necessity under section 211(c)(4)(C), is most appropriate. Beyond that, it is reasonable for EPA to use the best information it nowhas available to determine whether New York's RVP program will be necessaryto achieve the standard without having to wait for New York to completeits planning response to the SIP call, including its updated inventory.As explained below, the VOC inventory and reduction figures New York submittedto EPA was based on reasonably reliable models EPA has used in the past.Such figures are always capable of refinement, but in the Agency's judgmentthe expenditure of time required to do so is not worth the marginally improvedaccuracy. <T3>See Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power v. N.R.D.C., </T3>435 U.S. 519, 544-555(1978).  EPA has not yet set a date certain by which New York must attain the ozonestandard. Congress may address the widespread nonattainment problem inthe amendments to the Act now being considered. In the meantime EPA hasalso proposed its own policy for how to deal with SIP planning for nonattainmentareas in the post-1987 period (52 FR 45104, November 24, 1987). The airquality analysis New York submitted made it clear that RVP control beyondthe federal requirements will be necessary to any attainment plan, whetherthe attainment date that Congress or EPA selects is imminent or long-term.Moreover, there is widespread agreement among EPA and the States in theNortheast that major VOC reductions, probably exceeding the 33.8 percentestimated by EPA in this case, will be required to get close to attainingthe ozone standard. Nothing in the air quality data from the summer of1988, which have become available in quality-assured form since publicationof the proposal, indicates that the reduction requirement projected bythe New York analysis overstates the reduction necessary to achieve thestandard. Beyond that, the history of ozone planning over the last decademakes it clear that reduction targets are seldom overestimated.  Furthermore, EPA's approval of this revision now is consistent with section110(a)(2)(A) of the Act, which requires attainment ``as expeditiously aspracticable.'' Interpreting section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a completeattainment demonstration before EPA can approve (and a state can implement)a fuel control that the state has determined to be practicable and thatwould advance the attainment date would effectively put section 211(c)(4)(C)in conflict with section 110(a)(2)(A). It is doubtful that Congress intendedEPA to choose an interpretation that would create such a conflict.  b. Upstate Nonattainment Areas  <T3>Comments.</T3> Several comments were received on the propriety of EPA'ssection 211(c)(4)(C) finding for upstate areas of New York which are innonattainment, and EPA's finding that the application of the program statewideis necessary to achieve the ozone standard as expeditiously as practicablein all of the upstate and downstate nonattainment areas. One commenterstated that EPA has not issued a SIP call for the upstate areas pendinganalysis of the 1988 ozone data, therefore New York is not required totake action in the upstate areas. Another commenter suggested that it isimpossible for EPA to evaluate the reductions claimed for the upstate areassince there is no inventory for this part of the State.<T3>Response.</T3> The SIP call issued in May 1988 was based on air qualitydata through 1987 which indicated that the only upstate area in nonattainmentwas Jefferson County. During 1988, ozone violations indicating actual nonattainmentwere recorded in Erie, Niagara, Dutchess, Albany, Essex, Schenectady, Rensselaer,Saratoga, and Washington Counties. At the moment, EPA is quality-assuringthis data. Once this process is complete, EPA anticipates that the Statewill be asked to revise its SIP accordingly to provide for mitigation strategiesin these areas. It seems clear that the upstate areas are experiencingviolations of the ozone standard, and thus must put in place such measuresas are necessary to bring the areas into attainment of the standard. AsEPA explained in its proposal, New York has indicated that no measuresother than the RVP program could be implemented in the upstate areas rapidlyenough to provide any emission reductions during the 1989 ozone season,and that available measures which would produce emission reductions ofthe magnitude of the RVP program could not be in place for several years.Moreover, the emissions reductions that the RVP program would achieve areso large that the program could very well produce attainment of the ozonestandard during the 1989 ozone season in those areas. By this logic, andassuming, as New York has, that the RVP program is practicable, the programappears to be necessary to produce attainment in the upstate areas, ``asexpeditiously as practicable,'' as required by the Act. None of the commentssubmitted on this issue disputes these findings. Beyond that, two of the comments supported EPA's proposed approval forthe upstate areas in part because of the benefits that would result byreducing emissions transport to other downwind nonattainment areas. EPAis currently working with the Northeast States on a Regional Oxidant Modelingstudy on the Northeast transport (ROMNET) problem. As part of the study,the Agency hopes to quantify the extent to which transport from each Statein the Northeast affects the air quality in the Northeast region. Whilethis study is not yet complete, EPA and the Northeast States agree thattransport is a special problem in the Northeast, and that New York Stateis one of the key states involved. In fact, what is known generally aboutozone formation suggests that emissions from upstate New York may contributeto ozone formation in western New England, an area that has experiencedozone standard violations. This suggests that controlling upstate New Yorkemissions may well be necessary for timely attainment in parts of New England.Thus, the commenters' claims on transport tend to confirm the appropriatenessof EPA's proposed finding that the New York RVP program is necessary fortimely attainment of the ozone standard. For these reasons, EPA concludes that the RVP program is necessary to providefor timely attainment. It is therefore appropriate for the Agency to makea section 211(c)(4)(C) finding for the upstate areas. As to the validity of the reductions claimed for the upstate areas, itis true that the State has not yet been required to develop and submitemission inventories as part of the SIP for the upstate areas. However,it should be noted that both New York and EPA maintain statewide emissioninventory databases (respectively entitled the Source Management Systemand the National Emissions Data System) which are adequate to evaluatethe reductions claimed for the upstate areas. Finally, EPA noted a proposal that New York had made the RVP program effectiveon a statewide basis in order to ensure compliance with the program inall of the upstate and downstate nonattainment areas. None of the commentssubmitted disputed the necessity of this program coverage. New York didgrant, a waiver to the western half of the state based on supply considerations.This waiver is discussed in more detail in sections 9 and 11 below.c. The Standard EPA Has Applied To Determine Whether Fuel Controls AreNecessary Compared With Other Controls <T3>Comments.</T3> Several commenters maintained that EPA had not adequatelyanalyzed whether there are other control strategies reasonably availablewhich New York should implement before resorting to RVP controls inconsistentwith the federal regulation. EPA will address these comments in section2c below. Other comments concerned the standard that EPA should use todetermine whether RVP controls are necessary compared to other controls.<T3>Response.</T3> In the proposal for this action, EPA used the approachit first announced when approving the Maricopa County, Arizona SIP (53FR 17413 (May 19, 1988); 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988)) to determine whetherRVP controls beyond the federal program are necessary to attain the ozonestandard in New York. Under that approach, if after accounting for thepossible reductions from all other reasonable control measures, New Yorkcould demonstrate that RVP controls are still required to achieve the standard,then RVP controls are necessary within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C).For the reasons stated in the Arizona action and the New York proposal,EPA will not interpret section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a state to imposemore drastic measures such as driving prohibitions or source shutdownsbefore it can adopt its own fuel control program.New York has demonstrated to EPA that implementing all the control measureswhich EPA now believes to be reasonably available to New York for VOC control(including measures that the State has already adopted and is now beginningto implement) would not achieve compliance with the ozone standard. Theroster of control measures New York examined corresponds to the list ofcontrols EPA has identified for states to implement in response to theozone SIP calls, and represents EPA's best judgment as to the controlswhich could now be reasonably implemented. See EPA's proposed post-1987ozone policy (52 FR 45104, appendix C, November 24, 1987). After examiningall controls EPA has determined to be reasonable, a state is free to makeits own determination as to what control measures should next be employed.One commenter maintained that EPA's method for determining what is necessaryis too vague because it would allow EPA to approve state fuel controls``simply because alternative measures are more inconvenient, unpopular,or costly.'' As discussed in section 2c below, EPA examined reasonablealternative controls which New York could implement and determined theywould not achieve enough reduction to achieve the standard. EPA also hasdetermined that remaining controls such as gas rationing, driving reductions,and source shutdowns are so drastic that the State may resort to fuel controlsfirst. This judgment concerning what is too drastic is a complicated policydetermination requiring the Administrator to weigh precisely those factorswhich the commenter would exclude from his consideration_whether the remainingalternatives are costly or unpopular. In <T3>Amoco Oil Co. </T3>v. <T3>Environmental Protection Agency, </T3>501 F.2d 722, 740-741 the courtdistinguished between the factual foundation which EPA must provide inits administrative decisions and policy judgments which are an integralpart of the findings Congress requires the Administrator to make underthe Act:<ITAG tagnum="21">Where by contrast, the regulations turn on choices of policy, on anassessment of risks, or on predictions dealing with matters on the frontiersof scientific knowledge, we will demand adequate reasons and explanations,but not `findings' of the sort familiar from the world of adjudication.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Id.</T3> at 741. EPA's and New York's analysis of reasonably availablecontrols is based on a factual record supported by the best analyticaltools the agencies had available to them at the time. EPA's judgment thatState fuel regulation is a less drastic course than gas rationing and otherunpopular controls so far not implemented in any SIP is clearly a matteron the frontier of air pollution control planning, and therefore cannot(and need not) be supported by the same technical record as, for example,EPA's determination that New York needs at least a 33.8 percent reductionfrom its 1987 inventory to attain the standard.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Have New York and EPA made an adequate technical demonstrationthat controlling RVP to 9 psi is ``necessary'' to atain the NAAQS?</ITAG>a.Adequacy of Emission Inventory<T3>Comments.</T3> Three petroleum industry commenters argued that theemission inventory used in the technical demonstration is inadequate. Theypointed out that EPA has already requested that New York prepare a newinventory as part of its response to the SIP call. Therefore it is arguedthat New York's reliance on the old inventory is inappropriate.<T3>Response. </T3>As described in EPA's Technical Support Document, theemission inventory used by New York and reviewed by EPA is based on EPA's``Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors'', known by its documentnumber ``AP-42.'' This document and its updates are EPA's longstandingguidance for determining emissions for inventory purposes and has servedas the basis for ozone SIP inventories since the mid-1970s. Mobile sourceemissions were estimated using the then current version of EPA's mobilesource emissions model, MOBILE 3, consistent with standard EPA guidance.While EPA has called for many states, including New York, to update theirinventories for post-1987 SIP planning purposes, the Agency has continuedto use existing inventories in evaluating current control proposals. EPAexpects the new New York inventory, not due until late 1989, to show higheremissions than the current inventory since it is expected to include moresources and improved quality assurance. Thus, if the current inventoryis lacking, it understates current emissions and errs such that the likelypercentage reduction needed to attain the standard is also understated.As stated in the NPR, EPA believes that if there is an error in quantifyingthe emission reductions resulting from control to 9 psi, those reductionsare understated. If the newly released mobile source emission model, MOBILE4,which includes the effects of running losses, were used, one would expectthe reduction in tons of VOCs to increase significantly. Furthermore, contraryto the commenters' belief, the estimated emission reduction is based onreductions achieved during only the four and one-half months each yearthe regulation is effective. This approach may understate the reductionsince 9 psi fuel may be in the distribution system up to two additionalmonths on each end of the regulatory season.Also contrary to the commenters' claim, EPA's Technical Support Document(TSD) does contain an estimate of the emission reduction achieved by goingfrom EPA's 10.5 psi limit to New York's 9 psi limit. EPA estimated a 1.8percent reduction from the 1987 inventory. This estimate does account fornonlinearity in emissions with decreasing RVP limits.b. Appropriateness of the Modeling Demonstration <T3>Comments.</T3> While some commenters agreed that modeling was necessaryto evaluate the air quality benefit of the RVP reduction, they objectedto EPA's reliance on the Regional Oxidant Model (ROM). The commenters alsoraised concerns about the appropriate hydrocarbon to nitrogen-oxides (NO<T2>x</T2>) ratios to be used in such modeling. A third modeling issueconcerns New York's and EPA's inability to associate a quantified incrementof improved air quality with the control of RVP to 9 psi.<T3>Response.</T3> The claim that the ROM does not provide the spatialresolution needed for accurate prediction in individual urban areas losessight of the fact that we are evaluating a statewide program. The UrbanAirshed Model suggested by these commenters is appropriate for large urbanareas but would have to be run over at least two different geographic domainsto cover the entire State. Caught between the two available model scales,it is EPA's technical judgment that the ROM is an appropriate tool to usein evaluating future reductions needed for New York.EPA understands the concern that past strategies have focused almost exclusivelyon controlling VOCs instead of NO<T2>x</T2>. As indicated in EPA's proposed post-1987 ozone strategy, futurecontrol scenarios are likely to include NO<T2>x</T2>. However, it is highly unlikely that NO<T2>x</T2> control alone will suffice. The best technical information availableto EPA at this time concerning the Northeast ozone problem points to theneed for substantial VOC reductions and at least modest NO<T2>x</T2> reductions in the future to attain the ozone standard.The last modeling issue concerned New York's and EPA's inability to associatea quantified increment of improved air quality with the control of RVPto 9 psi. While such a modeling exercise would be ideal it is unlikelythat one would have much confidence in the outcome of such a sensitivitytest. The atmosphere's response to emission reductions of ozone precursorsis highly nonlinear such that small increments of reduction may show littleor no effect on their own. However, when the reductions from the State'smany strategies are aggregated, the total impact becomes quantifiable.Thus, even though New York and EPA cannot pinpoint where the air qualitywill improve by what amount on what day, we are confident that there willbe a net improvement in ozone levels if New York were to decrease VOC emissionsby 1.8 percent.c. Consideration of Other Alternatives<T3>Comments.</T3> Commenters expressed concern that New York and EPA havefailed to consider other significant alternative control measures thatcould lead to attainment, including Stage II vapor recovery systems, sourcecategories that are listed in EPA's post-1987 strategy, more stringentmotor vehicle standards, and a host of transportation control measures(TCMs).<T3>Response.</T3> EPA believes that sufficient alternatives were considered.EPA and the State have considered the emission reduction potential of 23different point and area source categories corresponding to those suggestedby EPA in its proposed post-1987 ozone policy (52 FR 45104, Appendix C,November 24, 1987). Not surprisingly, some of the source categories arenot relevant because there are no major sources in those categories inNew York or because the State has already adopted controls for those categories.As noted in the proposal, most of the relevent categories have potentialreductions that are very small and, when combined, total less than 1.5percent of the 1987 inventory. Other strategies that the State committedto in its previous SIP but have yet fully implemented (including such extraordinarymeasures as architectural coatings, consumer/commercial solvents and autorefinishing) would produce emission reduction on the order of 10.2 percent,for a total reduction of 11.7 percent. This would still leave a shortfallof 22.1 percent.Two commenters noted that the proposal did not account for the emissionsreductions that are attributable to Stage II vapor recovery systems. Whilereductions due to Stage II were not mentioned in the NPR, the TSD did notethat the reductions from RVP control (9,000 TPY) would be second only toStage II controls (10,800 TPY). Since New York has already adopted andbegun to implement Stage II controls, the shortfall discussed in the NPRwas calculated above and beyond those reductions attributable to StageII controls.With respect to TCMs, the commenters failed to take account of the factthat the existing New York SIP (40 CFR 52.1670(c)(61)) contains provisionsfor the implementation of public transportation improvements in the NYCMA.It is true that New York has not implemented the types of TCMs suggestedby EPA in its proposed post-1987 ozone strategy. However, based on EPA'sexperience with the implementation of these measures in other areas, weexpect that New York would only achieve an additional two percent reductionby adopting similar strategies. New York would still have an estimatedshortfall of approximately 20 percent.While EPA recognizes that other TCMs may be needed in New York, the remainderare difficult to quantify, yield small reductions individually, and, asevidenced by the public reaction to the EPA-promulgated implementationplans containing such measures in the 1970's (see H.R. Rep. No. 95-294,95 Cong. 1st Sess, reprinted in 4 Legislative History of the Clean AirAct Amendments of 1977, at 2748-55 (1978)), generally can be expected tohave more significant adverse effects on the public as a whole than RVPcontrols would. To be sure, if there were sufficient evidence for EPA toconclude that the State's RVP controls would result in significantly moresevere impacts than other measures that neither EPA nor the State has yetidentified as ``reasonable'' for the State to implement, then it mightwell be appropriate for the Agency to account for the emission reductionsthat those other measures would achieve before determining the shortfallagainst which to judge the RVP controls. The Agency does not believe, however,that the State's RVP control would produce significantly more severe effectsthan such alternatives (e.g., than a trip reduction ordinance of the typethat Arizona found reasonable for application in Phoenix and Tucson).In sum, New York and EPA have indeed examined a broad range of potentialemission reduction strategies and have still identified a significant shortfallin the level of emission reductions likely to be needed to achieve theozone standard. As discussed above, in light of this significant shortfallEPA may approve the RVP program as necessary to achieve the standard withoutfirst requiring New York to implement other measures that EPA has not yetfound reasonable for implementation, such as more stringent state motorvehicle standards.  <ITAG tagnum="81">3. What is the scope of EPA's discretion assuming a finding that StateRVP controls are necessary to achieve the standard?  </ITAG>a. PermissibleBases for EPA's Decision To Approve State RVP Controls  <T3>Comments.</T3> Several comments asserted that even where EPA has determinedthat State fuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard, EPA maynevertheless disapprove those controls if EPA determines that the economicor fuel supply impacts of the State's regulation are unreasonable. Thesecommenters suggested that EPA may give significant consideration to costsbecause section 211(c)(4)(C) provides that the Administrator ``may'' approvea SIP revision imposing state fuel controls once he makes the finding ofnecessity. Conversely, other commenters maintained that EPA may not disapprovethe New York SIP revision based on economic grounds, once EPA has madethe finding of necessity.  <T3>Response.</T3> EPA believes that it must consider cost to some limitedextent whenever the Administrator decides whether to make a finding undersection 211(c)(4)(C) that a fuel measure is ``necessary'' for attainment.As discussed above, to determine whether state fuel controls are necessary,EPA must look first at whether other measures that it determines are reasonable(and, perhaps, other measures the state has adopted) will by themselvesachieve timely attainment). Arguably, an alternative measure is ``reasonable''only if its effects are less drastic than the effects of the fuel controls.Clearly the cost and supply impact of the state fuel controls will be afactor in any such judgment.  EPA does not interpret the use of ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) to givethe Administrator unfettered discretion to disapprove the SIP revisionon economic grounds once he has made the finding that state fuel controlsare necessary to achieve the standard. Section 211(c)(4)(C) must be readin the context of the preemption created in section 211(c)(4)(A), whichprohibits states from adopting inconsistent fuel controls in their SIPs,or anywhere else, for air pollution control purposes. In the face of thisprohibition, the sole effect of the ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) isto authorize the Administrator to overcome a provision (section 211(c)(4)(A))that would otherwise bar him from approving the SIP revision. The use of``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) does not eliminate the obligation thatsection 110(a)(3)(A) places on the Administrator to approve the SIP revision,provided it meets the requirements of section 110(a)(2). <T3>See Train </T3>v.<T3> Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,</T3> 421 U.S. 60, 98 (1975).Section 110(a)(2) requires the Administrator to approve a SIP revisionif, among other things, it may be necessary to insure attainment and maintenanceof the standard. EPA may not consider the economic impact of a necessarySIP revision under section 110(a)(2); under that provision, it is for thestate to determine what economic costs are appropriate to achieve the standards.<T3>Union Electric Co. </T3>v.<T3> E.P.A.,</T3> 427 U.S. 246, 256-258 (1976). Beyond that, it would beincongruous for Congress to give EPA more discretion to reject a SIP revisionfor reasons unrelated to the goal of achieving the standard as quicklyas possible precisely where EPA has determined that a SIP revision is necessaryto achieve the standard. Therefore, once EPA makes the finding that statefuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard, a finding which includesa determination that such fuel controls are more reasonable than otheravailable measures, EPA may not reject a state's SIP proposal simply foreconomic reasons.  One commenter cited <T3>Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Assocation </T3>v.<T3> E.P.A.</T3>, 768 F.2d 385, 389-390 (DC Cir. 1985), for the propositionthat the use of ``may'' under section 211 commits the decision to the discretionof the Administrator. In <T3>MVMA</T3> the court was examining EPA's decision to grant a waiverunder section 211(f)(4) of the Act for the use of fuel additives not substantiallysimilar to those in the fuel EPA uses to certify the emissions from automobiles.The court was not examining section 211(c)(4)(C), which allows EPA, uponmaking a particular finding not mentioned in section 211(f)(4), to acton a SIP revision submitted by a state after full hearing at the statelevel and subject to the requirements of sections 110(a)(2) and (3)(A). b. Intent of Federal Preemption Under Section 211  <T3>Comments.</T3> Several comments insisted that EPA should disapproveNew York's RVP controls because Congress intended to avoid a patchworkof different state fuel controls in favor of a uniformly regulated nationalmarket for fuels. These commenters expressed concern that the exceptionin section 211(c)(4)(C) to the rule of preemption under section 211(c)(4)(A)would eventually swallow the rule. Several comments urged EPA not to actinconsistently with its decision not to limit gasoline to 9 psi in 1989in the federal RVP control program.  On the other hand, several comments urged EPA to support the regional approachto RVP control that the NESCAUM States are undertaking. One commenter pointedout that where Congress has not acted to address the ozone nonattainmentproblem, it is reasonable to let the States do all they can to attain. <T3>Response.</T3> It is clear that section 211(c)(4)(A) indicates thatCongress desired to maintain a nationally regulated market for fuels. Itis equally clear that section 211(c)(4)(C) indicates Congress recognizedthat there will be states where the air quality problem is so severe thatthe interest in a nationally regulated market must bow to the need foradditional state controls on fuel content. EPA has not been able to findany legislative history which illuminates with any detail beyond the languageof the Act how EPA should strike this balance.It is reasonable to infer that Congress was aware that the air qualityneeds of particular States might create varying fuel content requirements,and that Congress accepted that risk in favor of protecting the publichealth. Several commenters cited <T3>Exxon Corp. </T3>v. <T3>City of New York, </T3>548 F.2d 1088 (2d Cir. 1977), as precedent thata uniformly regulated fuel market is the overriding purpose behind section211(c)(4). In <T3>Exxon </T3>the court, however, was not faced with a claim for an exceptionto preemption under section 211(c)(4)(C), and specifically left it to EPAto determine whether such an exception is appropriate:<ITAG tagnum="21">The Act sensibly provides for an exception from its comprehensivepreemption of local regulation of motor vehicle fuels only when such regulationis a provision in a State implementation plan approved by the Administratorwho has the competence to make the needed professional engineering andenergy conservation decisions.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Id. </T3>at 1096. Once EPA has made a finding of necessity under section211(c)(4)(C), it is reasonable for EPA to interpret the Act to place paramountimportance on protecting public health and achieving the standard.EPA believes that the oil industry's concern that the exception will swallowthe rule is overstated. As described above, EPA will approve inconsistentstate fuel controls only where the state can demonstrate that exhaustingall other reasonable alternatives will not achieve the standard, takingcosts into account in determining reasonableness. This demonstration isnot a trivial hurdle, and it is highly unlikely that every state with anozone nonattainment area could make such a showing. Furthermore, a Stateis unlikely to burden its citizens with the potentially higher cost oflower RVP fuel unless the air quality needs are compelling. Finally, regionalinitiatives such as NESCAUM's help avoid a wide variety among State controls.In this case, the New York RVP program is virtually identical to the RVPprograms already approved for Massachussets, Rhode Island, and Connecticut,and thus, provides consistent supply requirements over a group of contiguousStates.EPA also believes that its decision not to impose a limit of 9 psi by 1989in EPA's RVP control program does not preclude EPA from approving New York'sSIP revision. When developing its federal RVP control program, EPA imposedcontrols across the nation, and had to determine the level of RVP controlwhich supply sources for the entire continental United States could reasonablymeet. Further, although EPA was able to make this determination as to particularregions within the country, EPA did not intend to account for the particularair quality needs of each state.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. What effect will the 9 RVP limit in New York have on the cost andsupply of gasoline?</ITAG><T3>Comments. </T3>Several commenters stated that if the 9 psi standardtook effect in 1989 the distribution system would be strained and thatthere could be some significant supply dislocation and cost increases.Several other commenters were concerned about possible supply problems.Several stated that even if refiners had the capacity to produce 9 psigasoline, there would be logistical problems requiring the need for additionalstorage tanks for the gasoline and excess butane. Other comments suggestedthat foreign imports at 9 psi might not be available. Most of the oil companycommenters stated that there will be some need for capital improvementsat refineries to meet the 9 psi standard. Several commenters stated thatthere will likely be a cost impact to the New York standard and other commentersstated that they were worried about the increased cost. One other commentstated that the estimates of increased cost do not reflect the extra costincrease that could accompany a significant supply disruption.Proponents cited two studies as support for the position that supply isnot a problem.<T3>Response. </T3>The potential supply problems arise out of two factors.First, decreasing the volatility of gasoline requires increased refinerycapacity. It is certain that implementation of 9 psi volatility in theNESCAUM States will create a refining capacity reduction in the amountof gasoline capable of being produced at each refinery. This is true ofboth domestic and foreign suppliers. Second, the problem may be furtherexacerbated by the expected increased demand for gasoline in the summermonths.Various studies have been conducted to determine how much refining capacitywill be lost from implementation of 9 psi volatility in the NESCAUM states,how much demand for gasoline is likely to increase in the summer of 1989,and what effect these factors will have on gasoline supply capabilities.The two studies done for NESCAUM and the one done for EPA are inconclusive.There appear to be numerous factors which make precise prediction of theseeffects impossible. However, under the EPA study (Sobotka study), estimatesindicate that the volatility standard may be feasible without serious supplyproblems.The Sobotka study cites the Department of Energy (DOE) as predicting thatdemand for gasoline should increase only in the range of 1 to 1.5 percentthis summer. This estimate is also supported by other studies includingone reported at a National Petroleum Refiners Association conference. Thestudy also estimates that approximately a five percent refining capacityshortfall will occur at domestic refineries because of the NESCAUM volatilityregulations. The study estimates that with a 1.2 percent increase in demandfor gasoline in the summer, U.S. refineries would be able to make up fora five percent domestic shortfall, and a ten percent import shortfall,without construction of new facilities or installation of additional equipment.Although various factors make it impossible to accurately predict the refiningshortfall of imported gasoline, there is no strong evidence indicatingthat it will exceed ten percent. Thus, the Sobotka study suggests thatit is likely that the resulting refinery capacity shortfalls from a 9 psistandard in 1989 should not result in supply shortfalls.In the unlikely event of unforeseen supply disruptions, the State of NewYork has the authority to take immediate steps to provide needed waiversor exceptions to the program. In fact, the State has already exercisedthis authority by exempting several western counties from the 9 psi rulefor 1989. It should be noted that the State based this decision solelyon the potential for supply problems and not on any lack of air qualityproblems in these areas. The State has committed to carefully monitor thesupply situation this year and take other appropriate actions, as may benecessary, to ensure that supply problems do not occur as a result of itsState RVP control program. See also the response to section 9 later inthis notice for more discussion of State waivers or exceptions.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. What effect will 9 RVP gasoline have on driveability in cold weatherand on vehicle safety?</ITAG><T3>Comments. </T3>Several commenters expressed concern that the 9 RVPfuel would cause hard starting, hesitation, and stalling in automobilesand farm equipment during the early spring and late fall. They stated thatgasoline will have to enter the distribution system in March and will notbe out until October in order to comply with the regulation. Other comments,including several from automobile manufacturers, indicated that there shouldbe no adverse effect from the use of 9 RVP fuel.<T3>Response. </T3>We believe that the nature of the gasoline distributionsystem makes it very unlikely that 9 RVP fuel will be available to consumersin March or early April, even if the blending-down process by that timehas begun to reduce RVP. Continued availability of low-RVP fuel is evenless likely by late October because the blending-up process will occurrapidly at the close of the control period. Nevertheless, the experienceof California, which has required 9 RVP fuel for many years, appears todemonstrate that widespread driveability or fuel safety problems will notoccur in the Northeast. We know of no evidence of extensive problems inCalifornia, despite significant operation at cool temperatures and highelevations.As further evidence of this conclusion, one can compare the true vaporpressure (TVP) experienced in fuel tanks at different times during theyear. For example, when corrected for elevation, gasoline in Billings,Montana at its January 1988 average RVP of 13.6 psi and at the historiclow January temperature of ^30 degrees Fahrenheit would result in a truevapor pressure of 1.0 psi. Similarly, for New York, the analogous RVP andtemperature of 10.0 psi RVP and ^12 degrees F. would also result in a TVPof 1.0 psi. In contrast, 8.5 psi RVP fuel at an analogous New York temperatureof 18 degrees F. would result in a TVP of 1.8 psi, 80 percent higher thanthe winter figure. We conclude from this that if low-volatility fuel wereto reach consumers during very low temperature weather, any degradationin driveability would be no greater (and would likely be less) than thatexperienced currently during the winter.Conversely, low volatility fuel should improve vehicle driveability invery hot weather by reducing the occurrence of such conditions as vaporlock and fuel foaming.<ITAG tagnum="81">6. Is there really a severe ozone problem in New York or the Northeast?</ITAG><T3>Comments. </T3>A number of industry commenters, in urging EPA to disapprovethe SIP revision, claimed that the air is really becoming cleaner and cleanerover time and that the ozone standard is being met more than 99% of theyear. Environmental groups countered these claims with data from 1987 and1988 which show a worsening of the ozone problem since 1986. They notedthat 1988 was one of the worst ozone seasons on record across the Northeast.<T3>Response. </T3>EPA is firmly convinced that there is a serious ozoneproblem in the Northeast. EPA's conviction was evidenced by last year'sSIP calls to New York and most other Northeast states. This SIP call wasbased on 1985-1987 ozone monitoring data which ranked New York among theworst ozone nonattainment areas in the country. EPA's concern is furtherheightened by the 1988 ozone season. The ozone standard was exceeded morefrequently, at more sites, and at higher levels in 1988 than in 1987.<ITAG tagnum="81">7. Has New York demonstrated that it has an adequate enforcement programor adequate resources to implement the RVP regulation, as required by section110 of the Act?</ITAG><T3>Comments. </T3>One commenter questioned whether New York has developedan adequate program for enforcement of the regulation.<T3>Response. </T3>EPA believes that the State has developed an adequateenforcement program for its RVP regulation. The State has trained enoughpersonnel (with the help of NESCAUM and the State of California) to allowfour teams to perform field inspections. Given that New York will be testingonly at the primary distribution level and will be relying to some extenton examination of distributor records, EPA believes that the State hasadequate personnel to carry out the RVP program as required by section110(a)(2)(F) of the Act. In addition, the State has indicated that it willeventually tie in RVP sampling with Stage I inspections that the Statehas been regularly performing for several years at terminals and on gasolinetank trucks. Finally, it should be noted that retail outlets, which arenot subject to enforcement under the State's rule, will be subject to EPA'snational enforcement program. If gasoline that does not comply with NewYork's 9 psi limit is found at retailers in the State by EPA, we will surelyshare such evidence with the State.EPA notes that in the comparable arena of enforcement through Delayed ComplianceOrders (DCOs), courts have held that EPA may not second guess the state'schoice of enforcement mechanisms so long as the chosen system is a reasonableone. <T3>See Bethlehem Steel Corp. </T3>v. <T3>U.S. E.P.A., </T3>638 F.2d 994, 1005-1006 (7th Cir. 1980); appealed,<T3>Bethlehem Steel </T3>v. <T3>Gorsuch, </T3>726 F.2d 356 (7th Cir. 1984), reh. den., en banc, vacatedon reh., 732 F.2d 97 (7th Cir. 1984), withdrawn and appealed, 742 F.2nd1028 (7th Cir. 1984).Furthermore, even if the New York rule's enforcement scheme were inadequateto support a finding, ultimately, that the state's eventually completeozone SIP update meets all of the requirements in section 110(a)(2), EPAcould still approve the rule under section 110(a)(3). That is because,even with an inadequate enforcement program, the rule would still strengthenthe pre-existing SIP and hence, under the rationale in <T3>Michigan </T3>v. <T3>Thomas, </T3>805 F.2d 176, 186 (6th Cir. 1986), be approvable for thatlimited purpose. <ITAG tagnum="81">8. Has New York satisfied the Act's public notice and hearing requirements?</ITAG><T3>Comments. </T3>Several commenters questioned whether the New York SIPrevision was adopted after ``reasonable notice and public hearing.'' Whileacknowledging that public hearings were held, they alleged that the decisionto limit RVP to 9 psi was actually made by NESCAUM some time before publichearings on the New York RVP regulation, and that therefore any hearingnominally provided was substantively inadequate. On the other hand, NESCAUMcommented that ozone pollution problems, especially in the Northeast, areclearly regional problems and must therefore be dealt with through consistentregulations. Other commenters questioned whether notice and hearing was provided onthe SIP revision or just a State regulation. They believe that it was unclearfrom the public notices and materials available before the hearing thatthe RVP rule was actually intended to be submitted as a revision to theSIP. <T3>Response. </T3>As to the first claim, EPA's TSD provides the date thatthe public notice was published and contains an itemization of the datesthe public hearings were held. Although there is no summary statement thatthe public participation requirements for hearing and notice were met,the record does speak to that effect. EPA finds concerns that the public hearings were largely meaningless andthus not ``reasonable'' to be misplaced. EPA is not convinced that NewYork and the other NESCAUM States had predetermined the outcome of thehearings beforehand and without regard to the hearings held in August 1988.EPA acknowledges that New York did initiate rulemaking on RVP control pursuantto an agreement with the other northeastern states. However, having initiatedthe rulemaking on that basis, the State then proceeded to promulgate theregulations through its full administrative process, giving adequate noticeand opportunity for public hearing on the proposed regulations. As a policy matter EPA agrees that the ozone problem in the Northeast isa problem of regional magnitude and has held several meetings with topEPA and State environmental officials in EPA Regions I, II, and III todetermine what concerted efforts the States could take on their own todeal with issues of regional, but not necessarily national, scope. ThereforeEPA believes that it is appropriate for the northeastern states to regulateozone precursors in a consistent fashion. However, each state must providefor adequate public participation in the promulgation of individual regulations,including assessing and responding to all submitted comments, as New Yorkhas done in connection with its RVP regulations. As discussed more fullybelow, EPA reviewed New York's public participation procedure and determinedthat the State provided adequate opportunity for public input in connectionwith development of the RVP rule. The commenters argued specifically that New York's hearing procedure wasnot adequate to comply with section 110 of the Act or EPA's hearing regulationsat 40 CFR section 51.102. The operative language in both the statute andthe regulation is ``reasonable notice and public hearing.'' The commentersasserted that New York had predetermined its final decision on RVP regulationand thus the hearing provided was not reasonable. However, EPA interprets the language of both the statute and the implementingregulations as requiring the state to provide, first, reasonable noticeof a public hearing, and second, a public hearing. EPA does not believethat the law requires the Agency to review the hearing record and determinewhether the hearing provided was itself ``reasonable.'' EPA's interpretation of the hearing requirement is clearly reflected inthe regulations at 40 CFR 51.102. The regulations go into substantial detailon the manner in which states must provide notice of a hearing in orderfor that notice to be considered reasonable. See 40 CFR 51.102(d); seealso 40 CFR 51.102(g)(2). However, the regulations make absolutely no mentionof specific requirements for conduct of public hearings. The state needonly certify that it in fact held a public hearing, which New York clearlydid, and need not provide any detailed information on the conduct of thehearing. This is appropriate because the reasonableness of public notice can beassessed objectively by reviewing the amount and variety of notice methodsused. Assessing the reasonableness of a hearing on the other hand wouldbe a highly subjective determination done restrospectively that would unnecessarilyinfringe on the State's discretion in conducting its hearings. Of course,if EPA received concrete evidence that the hearing did not provide adequateopportunity for public participation, it could find that the hearing didnot meet the intent of EPA's regulation. One commenter claimed that NewYork failed to provide prior public hearing on the waiver provisions ofits RVP program, and thus that the hearing did not in fact provide adequateopportunity for public participation. It is true that the August 1988 hearingdid not cover the waiver provisions. However, New York held a separatehearing on the waiver provisions in particular on March 2, 1989. This hearingprovided the required opportunity for public participation on the RVP programas a whole, including the waiver provisions. The commenters further claimed that a state must specifically identifya proposed regulation as a future SIP revision prior to scheduling a publichearing on the regulation. However, neither the statute nor EPA's regulationscontain any such explicit requirement. The purpose of a public hearingis to receive public input on the substance of proposed regulations, noton whether the state may or may not submit the regulations as a SIP revision.For years EPA has approved SIP revisions with no analysis of whether thestate had publicly announced it intent to eventually submit a proposedregulation as a SIP revision at the state public hearing stage. Generally it should be totally irrelevant to public commenters whethera regulation with which they will be required to comply as a matter ofstate law might also become an aspect of federal law. At the time New Yorkheld its public hearing on the RVP rule, prior to federal preemption, commentersshould similarly have had no concern as to whether the proposed State rulewould eventually become federal law as well. Only where a state regulationwould otherwise be preempted by existing federal law and therefore unenforceablewould the public have a need to know that the state intended to seek federalapproval of the regulation for purposes of preemption waiver in preparingcomments at the state hearing level. This was not the case at the timeof the State hearing on New York's RVP rule. Moreover, given EPA's thenoutstanding proposal to regulate RVP and thus preempt state RVP regulation,it should have been apparent to commenters at the time of the public hearingthat New York would submit the rule as a SIP revision to insure enforceabilityin the event of EPA final RVP regulation and preemption. <ITAG tagnum="81">9. Should waivers or exemptions from the State regulations be grantedto suppliers who cannot provide 9 RVP gasoline, and for alcohol blendsof gasoline?   </ITAG><T3>Comments. </T3>Several commenters expressed concern over the State'sissuance of a waiver for western New York for 1989 since it introducesuncertainties about whether the volatility regulations will be appliedfairly and equitably to all gasoline suppliers. They indicated that theuse of supplier-specific waiver provisions could diminish the calculatedbenefits of the rule by allowing higher RVP gasoline into the system, andfinancially disadvantage those companies which are able to comply. In addition,commenters noted that the SIP revision submitted to EPA by the State, andEPA's subsequent <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice, failed to consider the State's decisionto exempt western New York. With specific regard to alcohol fuel exemptions, one commenter noted thatthe inconsistency between New York's and EPA's volatility programs appears``counterproductive,'' because, for example, ethanol blending increasesvolatility and therefore evaporative emissions increase. The commenternoted that in EPA's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for a national RVP regulation(52 FR 31293, August 19, 1987), EPA concluded that gasohol usage resultsin a greater contribution to ozone formation than the gasoline which itreplaces. The commenters concluded that if waivers or exemptions are to be used,they must apply to all suppliers and significant penalties should be attached.In addition, one commenter noted that EPA has to consider how it will respondto supplier-specific waiver requests; and EPA ``is urged to adopt a policyon waivers which is consistent with its own RVP regulatory program.'' <T3>Response. </T3>EPA is aware that New York has granted a waiver forthe western portion of the State and also intends to grant waivers to individualsuppliers, if necessary, to avoid serious supply dislocations during theinitial stages of the RVP program. Although EPA did not focus on this aspectof the program in its NPR, it is safe to conclude that commenters werealso aware of the State's actions and intentions since the issue was fullyaired in the public comments. EPA is approving the New York RVP programas a whole, which includes the ability of the State to issue waivers asappropriate. EPA is approving the waiver already issued for western NewYork and is in essence pre-approving any additional waivers that New Yorkmight grant as part of the overall RVP program being approved into theNew York SIP today. New York will not be required to submit each waiverto EPA as a SIP revision before it may take effect. EPA is currently able to pre-approve any waivers that New York may grantbecause the RVP program is a discretionary program that the State has submittedto generate additional emission reductions and move the State closer toattainment of the ozone NAAQS. EPA is not pre-approving waivers from afederally required program or a program to which EPA has already assignedspecific emission reduction credits as part of an overall attainment demonstration.EPA could not pre-approve waivers in such situations because they wouldconstitute SIP relaxations. Here, whatever emission reductions New Yorkobtains from the RVP program, even after any waivers have been granted,will tighten the existing SIP and improve air quality. EPA notes that its pre-approval of any waivers New York may grant underthe RVP program differs dramatically from approval of a generic permittingprogram such as a new source review or bubble program. In those cases,EPA authorizes States to approve relaxations of otherwise applicable SIPrequirements provided that the State follows SIP approved procedures calculatedto insure that all such waivers are accounted for in the SIP attainmentdemonstration and are issued using replicable evaluation techniques. Here,since EPA is not currently relying on the New York RVP program for anydefined emission reduction credit toward an approved attaintment demonstration,EPA need not now analyze the criteria by which New York will issue anywaivers. New York is free to issue waivers on the basis of its own Statecriteria, consistent with any requirements of its State administrativeprocedure act. Several commenters questioned the line New York drew in exempting the westernhalf of the State, and argued that some inequities would result for suppliersdoing business at the demarcation line. These are concerns to be addressedto the State since EPA is not at this time addressing the substance ofNew York's waiver criteria. When New York does submit its completed post-1987 attainment demonstration,EPA will assign specific emission reduction credits to the RVP program,taking account of any supplier-specific waivers the State may have issuedby that time. Once EPA has approved the New York post-1987 SIP, it willtake whatever rulemaking action is necessary to ensure that any furtherwaivers under the RVP program, which at that point would be consideredSIP relaxations, would be submitted to EPA for approval as individual SIPrevisions. Finally, EPA notes that any suppliers who receive waivers from New Yorkmust still comply with the Federal RVP limit of 10.5 psi. In its fuel volatility regulation, New York has included provisions whichallow the Commissioner to grant an exception to suppliers of fuels whichare composed of a blend of gasoline and simple alcohols upon showing thatgasoline is not available that, when blended, would meet the 9 psi standard.With regard to this provision, it must be noted that: alcohol blends representa small fraction of the State's fuel market; that such exemptions wouldhelp to avoid any impediments to the development of alternative fuels;and that these alcohol blends are not excluded from complying with therequirements for alcohol blends of gasoline set forth by EPA in its <T4>Federal Register </T4>Notice of March 22, 1989 (54 FR 11868) limitingthe RVP of gasoline during the summer months to 10.5 psi (beginning 1989).The Federal rule requires that methanol blends meet the same RVP requirementsof gasoline and that ethanol blends meet a RVP not more than 1 psi abovethe allowable RVP for gasoline. Thus there will be no loss in emissionreductions relative to the Federal program, which is the only alternativeto the New York program. EPA has no authority to disapprove the State'srule just because the additional ``necessary'' emission reductions thatit would achieve are not as large as those that might be achieved througha rule tailored differently. Furthermore, EPA believes that concerns aboutalcohol blends in New York may be of little practical importance becausefield testing of gasoline by EPA throughout the summer of 1988 found virtuallyno alcohol in gasoline. <ITAG tagnum="81">10. How soon after the date of final approval of the New York revisionsshould the RVP regulations be made effective? </ITAG><T3>Comments. </T3>A great deal of the comments received pertained to thetiming of EPA's final action. Those favoring EPA approval of the SIP revisiongenerally favored EPA acting quickly to take the regulations effectiveby their May 1 starting date or as close to that as possible. These commentersnote that the Colonial Pipeline, which supplies 20 percent of the Northeast'sgasoline, has been shipping 9 RVP fuel to the Northeast since March 1,1989. They also pointed out that those suppliers who have made a good faitheffort to comply with the May 1st date would be at a competitive disadvantagerelative to those with cheaper, higher volatility gasoline if the dateis extended. Those opposing EPA approval of the SIP revision generally asked that ifwe did approve it we must provide the petroleum industry with realisticand sufficient leadtime to enable 9 psi gasoline to be distributed throughoutthe distribution system. These commenters cited EPA's allowing 70 and 100days for the recently promulgated national regulations to become effectiveat the terminal and retail level respectively as precedent for such a decision.A third path, suggested by one commenter, would be for EPA to make itsfinal approval conditional on the State's deferral of the compliance datefor its regulation.   <T3>Response. </T3>The timing issue is one of the most difficult ones posedby this action. Since EPA has had control of the timing of the final federalRVP action, the decision on the previously granted Massachusetts, RhodeIsland, Connecticut, and New Jersey RVP SIP revisions, and the decisionon the New York RVP revision, it is important that we ensure that boththe federal and state programs start with a maximum likelihood of successand a minimum possibility of supply disruption.EPA must consider several issues in deciding when to make the rule effective.The first issue is when the industry was put on notice that it would haveto supply 9 psi gasoline to New York. Since the New York rule was passedin 1988, the industry was on notice since then of the State's intentionto control RVP to 9 psi. However, the New York rule was preempted on March22, 1989 by the promulgation of the federal volatility requirements.Another issue to consider is the lead-time that would be necessary to enable9 psi gasoline to get through the distribution system. The record indicatesthat the industry thought that it would take from 60 to 70 days to achievecompliance at the terminals in New York. The record also indicates thatthe Colonial Pipeline, which supplies at least 20 percent of the gasolinein the Northeast, has been shipping 9 psi gasoline since March 1, 1989.The final issue involves the air quality consequences of delaying the effectivedate. EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a manner aswould thwart the State's intent in requesting the SIP revision. New York'ssubmittal of the RVP SIP revision in January was clearly aimed at gettingits regulatory program in place for the 1989 ozone season. Thus, it isimportant to have the effective date as early as possible in order to maximizethe air quality benefits of the program of 1989.In deciding to make this action effective on June 30, 1989, EPA has attemptedto balance these competing interests. EPA believes the June 30 date willboth minimize possible difficulties the industry might encounter with ashorter lead-time and provide citizens in the Northeast as much reliefas is practical during most of the 1989 ozone season. Although some suppliersmay have made a good faith effort to comply with the May 1 effective datespecified in the New York proposal, they were under no obligation to doso once EPA preempted the New York requirement by promulgating federalRVP controls on March 22, 1989. The Agency cannot, therefore, select anearlier effective date for all suppliers based on the voluntary actionof a few, especially considering that the time between the March 22 federalrulemaking and today's publication is critical to the refiner/supplierplanning and implementation process regarding fuel delivery for the comingsummer.However, because refiners have already begun to prepare for the sale of9 RVP fuel as a result of EPA's approval of the Massachusetts, Rhode Island,Connecticut, and New Jersey RVP SIPs and in light of the fact that thesestates share many links in the gasoline distribution network, the Agencydoes not believe that an additional 60 to 70 days lead-time is warranted.This starting date in New York, therefore, mirrors the starting date inMassachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and New Jersey.<ITAG tagnum="81">11. Should EPA reopen the comment period or withdrawal and reproposethis SIP revision in light of EPA's final action on the national RVP regulation,the court challenge to the rule and other alleged defects in the Marchproposal?</ITAG><T3>Comments.</T3> EPA received divergent comments on the appropriate processfor and timing of a final action on New York's SIP revision. Several commentersargued that EPA should take final action as soon as possible. On the otherhand, other commenters felt that because of numerous allegedly unresolvedissues raised in their substantive comments, potential air quality implicationsof the waiver New York provided for the western portion of the State, andthe pending American Petroleum Institute court challenge to the rule, EPAshould at a minimum repropose action on the revision to deal with theseissues before proceeding to final action.<T3>Response. </T3>EPA concludes that given its interpretation of the relevantlaw and the seasonal nature of the New York revisions, the Agency shouldproceed expeditiously to final action based on the record currently beforeit. EPA is unpersuaded by the claim that circumstances have so changedsince the proposed approval of the New York revisions that we should reopenthe comment period or withdraw and repropose this action. EPA's NPR forthe New York RVP program explicitly discussed EPA's final action on thenational RVP program relevant to final action on the State program. EPAclearly presented the path which EPA proposed to follow and the conclusionswhich we proposed to reach in light of the final promulgation of federalRVP regulations. Furthermore, in the final <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice on the national RVP program EPA explicitlydiscussed consideration of different state RVP control programs.In this case EPA concludes that it is not necessary to issue a reproposalprior to taking final action. EPA believes that it has adequately respondedto all of the substantive comments raised by commenters in the substantivediscussions presented above. Obviously, additional analysis on such technicalissues could always be conducted. However, administrative agencies generallyhave the discretion to determine when issues have been aired sufficientlyand to close the record and proceed to final action, consistent of coursewith the need to act in a reasoned, non-arbitrary fashion (<T3>Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power</T3> v. <T3>N.R.D.C.</T3>, 435 U.S. 519, 554-555 (1978)).Commenters argued that the waiver granted by New York for the western portionof the State may have such significant air quality implications for therest of the State that EPA should delay action while new air quality analysesare done to recalculate the emission reduction benefits of the RVP rulein the eastern portions of the State. However, New York's analyses werebased on the effects of the RVP rule in each nonattainment area, such thatapplication of the rule in only certain portions of the State will notaffect the overall emission reductions to be achieved in any one area.EPA did indicate in its proposal that it believed New York had made theRVP rule effective on a statewide basis in order to ensure compliance inall of the relevant nonattainment areas in light of their scattered geographicaldistribution and the existing gasoline distribution system. New York infact exempted the western portion of the State based upon supply problemsparticular to that region. New York believes that the separate distributionsystem that serves the eastern half of the State will have no problem supplyingadequate quantities of 9 RVP fuel, and that application of the RVP rulethroughout his area is necessary to ensure compliance. Given these factsEPA concludes that the waiver for the western half of the State does notrequire reproposal.Further, EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a mannerthat would thwart the State's intent in requesting the SIP revision. Inthis case, New York has submitted a seasonal requirement that since currentlypreempted must be approved in a timely fashion in order to effectuate thestate's intent that the regulations provide emission reduction benefitsin the upcoming summer ozone season. Therefore, EPA should make best effortsto act on the information available to it now to the extent that it isadequate or else the agency would thwart the State's intent with regardto the 1989 ozone season. Since EPA has concluded that the existing recordis sufficient, EPA can proceed to final action at this time based on thatrecord.Finally, EPA finds no reason to delay its final action on this SIP revisiondue to the pending court challenge to the RVP program. The lawsuit is merelypending, and until such time, if any, as the court acts to overturn theprogram EPA believes it is appropriate to proceed with action on the programas with any SIP revision requested by a state.<ITAG tagnum="84">Enforcement</ITAG>EPA's proposal of the New York SIP revision indicated that there was aproblem with the test method section. The regulation required that fuelsampling and testing shall be ``by methods acceptable to the Commissioner.''EPA stated that such methods must include the EPA recognized methods containedin EPA's national volatility rule. On April 27, 1989, EPA received commentsfrom the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation whichclarified the State's test method section. In these comments, the Stateidentified the methods acceptable to the Commissioner as being identicalto the EPA recognized methods and, in addition, committed to incorporatingthese specific methods into its SIP at a future date. EPA finds that itsconcerns related to the test methods were addressed sufficiently by theState and that the test methods section is approvable.<ITAG tagnum="84">Final Action </ITAG>EPA is approving this revision to the New York Ozone State ImplementationPlan to control gasoline volatility, including any waivers New York maygrant under the program. EPA has also made the finding that the New YorkSIP revision meets the requirements of section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Actfor an exception to federal preemption. The Office of Management and Budget has exempted this rule from the requirementsof Section 3 of Executive Order 12291. Under section 307(b)(1) of the Act, petitions for judicial review of thisaction must be filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the appropriatecircuit within 60 days of publication. This action may not be challengedlater in proceedings to enforce its requirements [See section 307(b)(2)].<ITAG tagnum="84">Effective Date </ITAG>The Administrator has determined that there is good cause, within the meaningof 5 U.S.C. section 553(d)(3), to make this action effective less than30 days after publication. The industry has been on notice since the Administratorapproved the Massachusetts RVP SIP (54 FR 19173; May 3, 1989) that theAdministrator was inclined to approve inconsistent state RVP rules to theextent necessary to provide for attainment. Making this action effectiveon the same date as the Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island and NewJersey RVP rules provides the industry with a uniform effective date forall of the state rules limiting RVP to 9.0 psi in the Northeast. In addition,postponing the effective date beyond June 30 would undermine the State'sability to achieve the reductions in 1989 summer ozone concentrations forwhich the RVP program was intended. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52 </ITAG>Air pollution control, Hydrocarbons, Ozone, and Incorporation by reference.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note._</T4> Incorporation by reference of the State ImplementationPlan for the State of New York was approved by the Director of the FederalRegister on July 1, 1982.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 42 U.S.C. 7401-7642.</ITAG>EPA is today approving the New York SIP revision pertaining to its Stategasoline volatility program.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: June 9, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William K. Reilly, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG>For the reasons set forth in the preamble, Part 52 of Chapter I, Title40 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 52_[AMENDED] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart HH_New York </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 52 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 42 U.S.C. 7401-7642.</ITAG>2. Section 52.1670 is amended by adding paragraph (c)(79) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.1670 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of plan. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) * * * <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(79) Revisions to the New York State Implementation Plan (SIP) for ozonesubmitted on January 31, 1989 and March 13, 1989 by the New York StateDepartment of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) for its state gasolinevolatility control program, including any waivers under the program thatNew York may grant. In 1989, the control period will begin on June 30.(i) <T3>Incorporation by reference:</T3> Subpart 225-3 of Title 6 of the OfficialCompilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York entitled``Fuel Composition and Use_Volatile Motor Fuels,'' adopted on December5, 1988, and effective on January 4, 1989. (ii) <T3>Additional material:</T3> April 27, 1989 letter from Thomas Jorling,NYSDEC, to William Muszynski, EPA Region II. 3. The table in andSection; 52.1679 is amended by adding a new entry Subpart225-3 in numerical order to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.1679 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">EPA_approved New York State regulations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>4,L1,tp0,i1,s100,12,r100,xs80</C>  <H1>New York State regulation </H1><H1>State effective date </H1><H1>Latest EPA approved date </H1><H1>Comments</H1> <ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*                  *                  *                  *                 *                  *                  *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Subpart 225-3, ``Fuel Composition and Use_Volatile Motor Fuels.'' <D>1/4/89 </D><D>FR date and citation of this document </D><D>Effective date 6/30/89. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*                  *                  *                  *                 *                  *                  *</ITAG></ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14396 Filed 6-20-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>