<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89108-0019 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-08-89.f2.A1018</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 5 / Monday, January 9, 1989 /Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing_Federal Housing Commissioner</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">24 CFR Parts 840 and 841</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. N-89-1903; FR 2581]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Supportive Housing Demonstration Program</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing_FederalHousing Commissioner, HUD.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of changes to final rule and notice of funds availability.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Title IV, Subtitle C, of the Stewart B. McKinney HomelessAssistance Act (Pub. L. 100-77, approved July 22, 1987) (McKinney Act)authorizes the Supportive Housing Demonstration program. The program makesassistance available for projects providing housing and supportive servicesfor homeless persons in the forms of transitional housing to facilitatethe movement of the homeless to independent living and permanent housingto assist handicapped homeless persons to live more independent lives.On June 24, 1988, HUD published the final rule governing the SupportiveHousing Demonstration program (53 FR 23898). The Stewart B. McKinney HomelessAssistance Amendments Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-628, approved November 7,1988) (1988 Amendments Act) made several amendments to the program. ThisNotice announces the changes to the program as a result of the 1988 AmendmentsAct and solicits public comments on the changes. The June 24, 1988 finalrule, as amended by this Notice, will govern the program until a revisedfinal rule is published. This Notice also announces the availability of$89.6 million in funds for transitional housing assistance and $15 millionin funds for permanent housing assistance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2><T3>Effective Date: </T3>January 7, 1989.<T3>Comments Due: </T3>March 27, 1989. Applications due by March 30, 1989(transitional housing) and April 27, 1989 (permanent housing).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Interested persons are invited to submit comments regardingthe changes to the regulations announced in this Notice to the Rules DocketClerk, Office of the General Counsel, Room 10276, Department of Housingand Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410. Communicationsshould refer to the above docket number and title. A copy of each communicationsubmitted will be available for public inspection during regular businesshours at the above address. Copies of the final rule described in the Summaryare available at the above address upon request.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Morris Bourne, Director, TransitionalHousing Development Staff, Room 9140, Department of Housing and Urban Development,451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410, telephone (202) 755-9075.Hearing or speech-impaired individuals may call HUD's TDD number (202)755-6490. (These phone numbers are not toll-free.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act Statement</ITAG>The information collection requirements for the Supportive Housing DemonstrationProgram were submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) forreview under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 and were approved on July1, 1988 and assigned OMB control number 2502-0361. As a result of changesto the program made by the 1988 Amendments Act, revised information collectionrequirements, which are described in this Notice, were submitted to OMBfor review and approved on December 30, 1988 under the same control number.Public reporting burden for each of these collections of information isestimated to include the time for reviewing the instructions, searchingexisting data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completingand reviewing the collection of information. Information on the estimatedpublic reporting burden is provided under the heading <T3>Other Matters. </T3>Send comments regarding this burden estimate orany other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestionsfor reducing this burden, to the Department of Housing and Urban Development,Rules Docket Clerk, Room 10276, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC20410, and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Officeof Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>The McKinney Act authorized the Supportive Housing Demonstration program.The program is designed to develop innovative approaches to providing housingand supportive services to the homeless. It consists of two components:(1) Transitional housing to facilitate the movement of homeless personsto independent living (transitional housing) and (2) permanent housingto assist handicapped homeless persons to live more independent lives (permanenthousing).HUD published a final rule governing the two components on June 24, 1988(53 FR 23898) (24 CFR Part 840 (transitional housing) and Part 841 (permanenthousing)). The 1988 Amendments Act made several changes in both programs,and directed HUD (1) to publish a Notice within 60 days of enactment toestablish the requirements necessary to implement those changes for immediateeffect, and (2) to adopt a final rule within 12 months of enactment.Parts III and IV of this Notice describe the changes in the two programsas a result of the 1988 Amendments Act. These changes will be effectiveimmediately for the funding round announced in this Notice. The June 24,1988 final rule, as modified by this Notice, constitutes the requirementsfor the programs until a final rule governing them takes effect. HUD invitesthe public to comment on the changes contained in this Notice to form abasis for amending the final rule.This Notice also announces the availability of $89.6 million in funds fortransitional housing and $15 million in funds for permanent housing, andsolicits the submission of applications for the programs. Application deadlinedates are March 30, 1989 for transitional housing, and April 27, 1989 forpermanent housing. Applicants for projects to be located in Federally-designatedenterprise zones are encouraged to apply. (See 53 FR 30944 (Aug. 16, 1988)and 53 FR 48638 (Dec. 2, 1988). Sections V and VI of this Notice containinformation on the submission of applications.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Comprehensive Homeless Assistance Plan</ITAG>Under both the transitional housing program and the permanent housing program,assistance may not be provided to or within the jurisdiction of a Stateor an ESG formula city or county (defined in 24 CFR 840.5 and 841.5), unlessthe jurisdiction (or jurisdictions, where necessary) has a HUD-approvedComprehensive Homeless Assistance Plan (CHAP). In addition, supportivehousing applications must contain a certification from the appropriateCHAP jurisdiction that the proposed project is consistent with the CHAP.(See andSection;andSection; 840.150, 840.210(b)(4)(v)(B), 841.150, and 841.210(b)(4)(v)(B).)On December 28, 1988, HUD published a <T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice announcing the current requirements forHUD approval of a CHAP as a result of the 1988 Amendments Act (53 FR 52600).Applicants are encouraged to familiarize themselves with the CHAP requirements.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Changes in the Transitional Housing Program </ITAG>The 1988 Amendments Act made the following changes in the transitionalhousing program (24 CFR Part 840): 1. <T3>Definition of Project.</T3> Section 441(a) of the 1988 Amendments Actredefines the term ``project'' to include those structures or portionsof structures used for transitional housing that receive operating costsassistance or technical assistance only. This amendment does not requirea change in the final rule. The definition of ``project'' in andSection;840.5is not limited to transitional housing programs that receive operatingcosts assistance or technical assistance in connection with acquisitionor rehabilitation assistance. In addition, under andSection;840.100(b), applicants may receive operatingcosts assistance independent of acquisition or rehabilitation assistance.Technical assistance is only available in connection with another formof transitional housing assistance, but it is not tied to acquisition orrehabilitation activities, since it may be used with operating costs assistancealone. Thus, operating costs will continue to be eligible for funding in theirown right. As provided in the final rule, technical assistance will beavailable, but only in connection with another form of transitional housingassistance. 2. <T3>Availability of Operating Costs Assistance and Technical Assistancefor New Structures.</T3> Sections 441 (b) and (c) provide that operatingcosts assistance and certain types of technical assistance may be madeavailable for transitional housing, without regard to whether the housingis an existing structure. This change will allow a project with a structurenot yet completed to receive operating costs assistance and technical assistancewithout also receiving acquisition or rehabilitation assistance. However,no assistance may be provided for the construction of structures, withthe limited exception discussed in III.3.In addition to compliance with the criteria set out in andSection;840.115on funding for annual operating costs, an applicant for operating costsassistance for a transitional housing project involving a structure notyet completed must provide reasonable assurance that construction willbe completed within nine months following notification of an award of agrant for operating costs. (``Notification'' of an award means the dateof the letter from HUD to the applicant notifying the applicant that itsapplication for assistance has been approved.) Reasonable assurance maybe satisfied by submission of the following: (a) Plans and specifications for the purposed structure; (b) Evidence that construction financing has been obtained; and (c) A copy of the construction contract for the proposed structure containingthe terms and conditions with regard to cost and date of completion. HUD may deobligate an award for operating costs and technical assistanceif the construction has not been completed within nine months followingnotification of the award.For transitional housing projects in structures not yet completed, technicalassistance will be offered only in connection with an award of operatingcosts assistance. Under section 441(c), technical assistance for a structurenot yet completed may be available in <T3>operating</T3> transitional housing and <T3>providing supportive services</T3> to the residents of transitionalhousing. Technical assistance in <T3>establishing</T3> transitional housing is available only in connectionwith existing structures. A description of technical assistance offeredto recipients is contained in andSection;840.120. Since technical assistancedoes not involve a grant of funds, HUD will continue to provide technicalassistance only through HUD offices. As a conforming change, the languagein andSection;840.5 limiting a transitional housing ``project'' to ``existing''structures will be deleted. 3. <T3>Availability of Grant for Limited New Construction.</T3> Section 449(b)authorizes an advance for new construction in limited circumstances. UnderandSection; 840.125(d), assistance for transitional housing may not be usedfor new construction of housing. Section 449(b) will allow an advance fornew construction only if the Secretary finds that the project: (a) Involves the cooperation of a city and a State university; (b) Has the land donated by a State university; (c) Proposes a supportive housing structure of at least 10,000 square feet;and (d) Proposes a model supportive housing project with a comprehensive supportsystem, including health services, job counseling, mental health services,and housing assistance and advocacy. Where the proposed site for a new construction advance is located in awetland, the procedures required by Executive Order 11990, Protection ofWetlands, must be undertaken before any decision is made on the environmentalacceptability of the project site for assistance. These procedures areidentical to the procedures under Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management(see III.14). If a proposed new construction site is in a floorplain anda wetland, a single procedure will be carried out under both ExecutiveOrders.4. <T3>Maximum Period of Residence.</T3> Section 443 provides for the movementof residents of transitional housing to independent living within 24 months,or for a longer period determined by the Secretary as necessary to facilitatethe transition. The definition of transitional housing in andSection;840.5,which specifies that the maximum period of residency is not to exceed 18months for any individual, will be amended to comport with section 443.This change affects only the maximum period of residency; the requirementsof andSection;840.325 with regard to resident discharge are not affected.This amendment provides recipients more flexibility for assistance programs,which is sometimes necessary given the broad range of homeless populationsthat are served by transitional housing projects. HUD will make determinationsto exceed the 24-month period on a project-by-project basis. Recipientsmust apply to HUD at least 90 days before the 24-month residency periodexpires for a waiver of the 24-month residency requirement, explainingthe circumstances that necessitate the longer period.5. <T3>Use of Acquisition/Rehabilitation Advances to Repay Debt.</T3> Section445 provides that advances for acquisition/rehabilitation may be used torepay any outstanding debt on a loan made to purchase an existing structurefor use as supportive housing. An advance may be used for this purposeonly if the structure was not used as supportive housing before the receiptof assistance. An applicant for an acquisition/rehabilitation advance that intends touse the advance to repay an outstanding debt on a loan made to purchasean existing structure must provide the following information and documentationas a part of the application for the advance:(a) A copy of the contract of sale; (b) A copy of the loan agreement, mortgage agreement, or deed of trust;(c) Documentation showing the purpose of the loan; (d) Documentation of the balance owed on the loan, mortgage, or deed oftrust; and (e) Certification that the structure has not been used as supportive housingbefore the receipt of assistance. This provision is made applicable by the 1988 Amendments Act of all futureapplicants, as well as to any recipients that were notified of awards onor after November 1, 1987 whose funds were later deobligated by HUD uponlearning of the recipient's intent to use the funds to repay a debt madeto purchase the structure.6. <T3>Limitation on Grants for Moderate Rehabilitation.</T3> Section 446sets a cap of $200,000 on grants for moderate rehabilitation. Under andSection;840.110, a grant for moderate rehabilitation of an existing structure waslimited to the lowest of (a) $100,000; (b) the project limit (see andSection;840.110(b)(2)); or (c) 50 percent of the cost of rehabilitation. The amountin (a) will now be $200,000; (b) and (c) will be unchanged. (See III.7for the special circumstances under which a grant in excess of $200,000may be available.)7. <T3>Raised Limits on Advances for Acquisition/Rehabilitation and Grantsfor Moderate Rehabilitation.</T3> Section 449(a) authorizes the Secretaryto raise the limits on advances for acquisition/rehabilitation or grantsfor moderate rehabilitation from $200,000 to $400,000 in areas determinedby the Secretary to have high acquisition and rehabilitation costs. HUDwill consider applications for amounts above $200,000 from applicants ingeographic areas determined by the Secretary to have costs that exceedthe statutory limits of section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C.1701g) by at least 75 percent. (A list of these geographic areas is includedin the application package. Applicants may also obtain a list of the areasfrom HUD Field Offices.) All requirements with regard to matching fundsare applicable to increased advances or grants.8. <T3>Eligible Assistance.</T3> Section 447 provides that a recipient mayreceive both an advance for acquisition/rehabilitation and a grant formoderate rehabilitation under one application. Under andSection; 840.100(b),assistance was limited to either an advance for acquisition/rehabilitationor a grant for moderate rehabilitaion. HUD anticipates that applicantsfor both types of assistance will use the advance for acquisition of astructure and the grant for rehabilitation of the structure.9. <T3>Employment Assistance Programs.</T3> Section 448 authorizes a new typeof assistance in transitional housing_grants for establishing and operatingemployment assistance programs (EAP). Grants will be available for up to50 percent of the cost of establishing and operating an EAP for residentsfor one year, and for up to 50 percent of the cost of operating an EAPfor up to four additional years. Upon approval of an application requestingassistance for an EAP, HUD will obligate amounts for the period sought,not to exceed five years. The funding level for the first year will notexceed the recipient's estimate of the cost of establishing and operatingthe EAP for the first year, less the recipient's matching contribution.The funding level for each of the next four years will not exceed the recipient'sestimate of the costs of operating the EAP for the first year, less therecipient's annual matching contribution. (See andSection; 840.130 for matchingrequirements and III.11 for amendments to the matching requirements bythe 1988 Amendments Act.) Recipients are free to develop their own EAP, but to qualify for assistance,the program must provide for at least the following: (a) Employment of residents in the operation and maintenance of the transitionalhousing; and (b) Where necessary and appropriate, payment of reasonable transportationcosts of residents to places of employment outside the transitional housing.Salaries paid to resident employees may be included as an operating costof an EAP. The cost of transportation for residents to places of employmentoutside the transitional housing is allowable as an operating cost of anEAP. Transportation costs must not exceed the cost of public transportation.If public transportation is not available, other transportation costs,subject to approval by HUD, may be substituted.Amounts obligated for an EAP grant are subject to the same rules as amountsobligated for operating costs grants with regard to deobligation. Thoserules are set out in andSection; 840.400.The extent to which an applicant has an EAP, whether assisted by HUD ornot, will be a ranking criterion in the competition with other applicants,as described in III.12.10. <T3>Site Control.</T3> Section 450 provides that an application for assistancemust furnish reasonable assurances that the applicant will own or havecontrol of a site for the proposed project not later than six months afternotification of an award for grant assistance. Under the final rule atandSection; 840.210(b)(4)(iv)(A), applicants were required to demonstratecontrol of a site at the time of the application for assistance. This changein the rule will permit approval of applications from projects that arenot able to gain control of a site until they have been notified of anassistance award. Reasonable assurance must be satisifed by identificationof a suitable site (a suitable site is one that meets the requirementsof andSection;andSection; 840.210 and 840.330 applicable to sites) and:(a) Certification that the applicant is engaged in negotiations or in otherefforts for the purpose of gaining control of the identified site; or (b) Other evidence satisfactory to HUD showing that the applicant willgain control of the identified site.Although section 450 authorizes an award of assistance to applicants thatdo not have site control, it also provides that the extent to which anapplicant has control of a site upon application for assistance will bea ranking criterion in the competition with other applicants, as describedin III.12.Section 450 also provides that an applicant may obtain ownership or controlof a suitable site different from the one specified in its application.Retention of an assistance award is subject to the new site's meeting allrequirements for suitable sites. If the acquisition or rehabilitation costsfor the substitute site are more than the amount of the advance or grant,the recipient must furnish all additional costs. If the recipient is unableto demonstrate to HUD that it is able to furnish the difference in costs,HUD may cancel or recapture the obligated funds and reallocate the fundsto other projects.If a recipient does not have control of the site within one year afternotification of an award for assistance, section 450 requires HUD to cancelor recapture the obligated funds and reallocate the funds to other projects.This provision applies to all future applicants for assistance under 24CFR Part 840, as well as to any recipients that were notified of awardson or after November 1, 1987 and whose funds were later deobligated byHUD upon learning that the recipient no longer had ownership or controlof the site specified in its application or that the recipient wanted tochange to a site different from the site specified in its application.11. <T3>Matching Requirements.</T3> Section 452 revamps the categories thatmay be used to satisfy the program's matching requirements. Under andSection;840.130, the only ``in-kind'' contributions that could be counted towardthe match were contributions of materials or structures. Section 452 specificallymakes eligible, for matching purposes, the value of time and services contributedby volunteers to carry out the recipient's transitional housing program,at a rate determined by HUD. Thus, applicants may count volunteer contributionsof time and services toward the required match. Consistent with the EmergencyShelter Grants program, these contributions will be valued at $5.00 perhour (see 24 CFR 576.71(b)).Section 452 also specifies that the salaries paid (1) to staff to carryout the grantee's transitional housing program and (2) to residents oftransitional housing under an EAP (see III.9) may be counted toward thematch. The Department will recognize these salaries to the extent theyare paid from sources other than a Federal assistance program, includingthe transitional housing program. To permit Federal assistance both topay staff and resident salaries and to be counted toward the match is aninappropriate double-counting of the amounts involved and dilution of thepurpose of the program's matching requirements.Consistent with andSection; 840.130(b), volunteer time and services, andstaff and resident salaries, will be included in the matching calculationfor the type of assistance to which the contribution relates. For example,if volunteers assist in the rehabilitation of the structure, the contributionwill be calculated as a match for rehabilitation assistance. If outsideservice providers donate supportive services or if volunteers assist inadministration of the program, the value of their services will be calculatedas a match for operating costs. Salaries paid to residents under an EAPmay be calculated as a match for grants for establishing and operating,or operating, the EAP, and staff salaries may be calculated as a matchfor operating costs assistance.Other sources for matching funds recognized by HUD under andSection; 840.130are:(a) State or local agency funds;(b) Contributions of materials (andSection;andSection; 840.130(c)(2) (i) and(ii));(c) Contribution of a fee ownership in a structure (andSection; 840.130(c)(2)(iii));(d) Contribution of a leasehold interest in a structure (andSection; 840.130(c)(2)(iv));and the extent of the fair rental value of the structure;(e) Rental income paid by residents of transitional housing under andSection;840.320 (andSection; 840.130(g)).12. <T3>Ranking Criteria.</T3> The 1988 Amendments Act authorizes two additionalcriteria to be included in the ranking criteria described in andSection;840.215(b). Section 448 provides for the inclusion of the extent to whicha proposed project contains an employment assistance program meeting therequirements described in III.9, and section 450 provides for the inclusionof the extent to which an applicant has control of the site of the proposedproject.(a) Employment Assistance Program. In assessing an application under thisfactor, HUD will award the most points to applications that demonstratethat:(1) The transitional housing will have an employment assistance programproviding for:(i) The employment of all residents either in the operation and maintenanceof the housing or outside the housing, except where they are participatingin a job training program, are actively seeking employment, or are unableto obtain employment due to disabilities (including mental disabilities)or other causes; and(ii) The payment of the full transportation costs of the residents to placesof employment outside the housing, where such payment is necessary andappropriate.(2) The employment assistance program is operated with funds that are obtainedfrom sources other than the Supportive Housing program and that have notbeen used as part of the applicant's matching contribution.(b) Site Control. In assessing an application under this factor, HUD willaward the most points to the applicant that demonstrates that:(1) The applicant owns or has a contract of sale for the site at the timeof the application;(2) The applicant has a lease for the site for a period of 10 years fromthe date of the application;(3) The applicant has an option to purchase the site at the time of theapplication; or(4) The applicant has an option to lease the site for a period of 10 yearsfrom the date of the application.13. <T3>Environmental Review.</T3> Section 443 provides that the provisionsof, and regulations and procedures applicable under, section 104(g) ofthe Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5304(g)) shallapply to assistance and projects under Title IV of the McKinney Act. Section104(g) provides that, in lieu of the environmental protection proceduresotherwise applicable, the Secretary may provide for the release of fundsfor particular projects to grantees who assume all the responsibilitiesfor environmental review, decisionmaking, and action under the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321) (NEPA) and the otherprovisions of law specified by the Secretary that would apply to the Secretarywere the Secretary to undertake such projects as Federal projects. HUDregulations implementing section 104(g) are found in 24 CFR Part 58, andthe Secretary has specified the other provisions of law under which environmentalresponsibilities are to be assumed by grantees in 24 CFR 58.5. (These authoritiesinclude the floodplain restrictions discussed in III.14.)As applied to transitional housing, the Department views section 443 asauthorizing the Secretary to require States, metropolitan cities, urbancounties, tribes, or other governmental entities with general purpose governmentalpowers to assume the responsibility for assessing the environmental effectsof each application for assistance in accordance with the procedural provisionsof NEPA, the related environmental laws and authorities, and HUD's implementingregulations in 24 CFR Part 58. In accordance with the new statutory authorization,the Department will, in connection with future transitional housing advancesor grants, provide for assumption of these responsibilities by jurisdictionswith general governmental powers whenever they are deemed to have the legalcapacity to assume the responsibilities. This policy will <T3>not</T3> be applied to advances or grants made to governmental entitieswith <T3>special</T3> or <T3>limited purpose</T3> powers or to <T3>private nonprofit organizations.</T3> HUD will continue to performthe environmental review for these entities, in accordance with 24 CFRPart 50, to the extent required. Relevant reviews completed for purposesof another McKinney Act program or other HUD programs may suffice for purposesof transitional housing, where permitted under Part 58.An applicant with general purpose governmental powers that believes thatit does not have the legal capacity to carry out the environmental responsibilitiesrequired by 24 CFR Part 58 should contact the appropriate HUD Field Officefor further instructions. Determinations of legal capacity will be madeon a case-by-case basis.With respect to applications for which the applicant will be responsiblefor performing the environmental review under section 104(g) and 24 CFRPart 58, the environmental review process will be independent of the thresholdreview and ranking process, and the applicant may complete the environmentalreview after those processes and after selection for funding. Therefore,andSection; 840.210(b)(7) will not apply to those applications and HUD willnot consider environmental impacts or time delays associated with mitigationmeasures for such proposals in ranking such applications. Similarly, sinceunder andSection; 840.210(b)(7), an application that requires an EnvironmentalImpact Statement (EIS) will not pass threshold review and, therefore, willnot be eligible for assistance, this provision will be applied only tothe applications for which HUD performs the environmental review. HUD willnot enforce this provision where the applicant performs the environmentalreview and, after finding that an EIS is necessary, chooses to preparethe EIS.On August 10, 1988, HUD amended its environmental regulations at 24 CFRParts 50 and 58 to exclude certain activities under HUD homeless assistanceprograms from the NEPA requirements of Parts 50 and 58 (53 FR 30186). (Theamendments were published in conjunction with HUD's final rule governingthe Emergency Shelter Grants Program.) These ``categorical exclusions''from NEPA review are for activities that HUD believes lack potential significanteffect on the human environment. Specifically, the activities consist ofsuch services as health, substance abuse and counseling services, the provisionof meals and payment of rent, utility and maintenance costs, and similaractivities that do not involve physical change to buildings or sites. Environmentalreview focuses on new site selection and physical development activitiessuch as construction, property rehabilitation, renovation, and conversion.Although the activities described above and certain other activities maybe categorically excluded from the NEPA requirements, they are not excludedfrom the individual compliance requirements of other environmental statutes,executive orders, and HUD standards listed in andSection;andSection; 50.4 and58.5, where applicable. However, activities consisting solely of supportiveservices and software normally do not require environmental review underNEPA <T3>or</T3> the related authorities if they do not directly require physicaldevelopment or site selection (<T3>i.e.,</T3> use of a building not previously used for purposes of thisprogram). Such activities that trigger neither NEPA nor the related authoritiesare defined as ``exempt'' under Part 58. Where applicants exercise environmentalreview under section 104(g) and Part 58, procedures for applicant submissionof environmental certifications and Requests for Release of Funds applyto new site selections and the funding of physical development activities.These procedures do not apply to activities that are determined and documentedto be `'exempt.''Applicants and grantees are cautioned that under section 104(g), HUD maynot release transitional housing funds for a project if the grantee, asubgrantee, or another party commits transitional housing funds (<T3>i.e.,</T3> incurs any costs or expenditures to be paid for, or reimbursedwith, such funds) before the grantee submits its request for release oftransitional housing funds to HUD.14. <T3>Floodplain Restrictions. </T3>Section 451 of the 1988 Amendments Actrequires that the flood protection standards for housing acquired, rehabilitated,or assisted with Supportive Housing Demonstration funds may be no morerestrictive than those applicable under Executive Order 11988, FloodplainManagement (May 24, 1977) to the other programs under Title IV of the McKinneyAct. Therefore, the restrictions with respect to location of projects infloodplains contained in the final rule at andSection; 840.210(b)(4)(iv)(C)no longer apply to projects assisted under the transitional housing program.HUD interprets section 451 to mean that, for projects located in floodplains,the eight-step process of public notification and decisionmaking outlinedin the U.S. Water Resources Council Floodplain Management Guidelines (43FR 6030, February 10, 1978) must be undertaken before any decision is madeon the environmental acceptability of the project site for homeless assistance.Grantees will perform the eight-step process during the environmental reviewprocess, whenever they assume other environmental review responsibilities(see III.13).The eight-step process applies to all applications for projects withinthe 100-year floodplain and, for critical actions, the 500-year floodplain.Critical actions are defined as those projects intended to serve developmentallydisabled, chronically mentally ill, or mobility impaired residents. Applicantswith proposed projects located in a floodplain should be aware that thepublic notification and decisionmaking process takes a minimum of 30 daysfrom the time the first published notice in the process appears. WhereHUD will carry out the process, applicants may be required to provide engineeringand structural information (<T3>e.g., </T3>elevations and data) in order to permit HUD to undertakeits analysis. If HUD is unable to make a floodplains determination within60 days from the date it publishes the first notice (where HUD has theresponsibility for carrying out the eight-step process), and the applicanthas not provided the HUD-requested information in a timely manner, theapplication will be rejected.Executive Order 11988 requires HUD or the applicant (where it assumes environmentalreview responsibilities in III.13) to consider alternatives to avoid adverseimpacts associated with the occupancy and modification of floodplains.The alternatives may include actions resulting in less risk to human lifeor property. The review process may result in specific mitigation requirementsor rejection of the site or application for assistance. As part of theeight-step process, HUD or the applicant must reevaluate alternatives toprojects/sites located in floodplains and, where HUD performs the process,HUD will assign a higher environmental rating to applications with lesshazardous sites. If, after initial approval, an applicant changes the site,any new site will be subject to a complete environmental review, including,as applicable, the eight-step public notification and decisionmaking procedurefor sites located in floodplains.The Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4001-4128) and HUDregulations prohibit the approval of applications for projects/sites locatedin an area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)as having special flood hazards, unless: (1) The community in which thearea is situated is participating in the National Flood Insurance Program(not suspended or withdrawn) (see 44 CFR Parts 59-79) or less than a yearhas passed since FEMA notification regarding such hazards; and (2) floodinsurance is obtained as a condition of approval of the application.Applicants with projects/sites (determined through the eight-step processto be environmentally acceptable) that are located in an area that hasbeen identified by FEMA as having special flood hazards will be requiredto obtain and maintain flood insurance under the National Flood InsuranceProgram. This is a separate requirement from the Executive Order 11988procedures, and the availability of flood insurance does not satisfy theeight-step public notification and decisionmaking procedures of the FloodplainManagement Guidelines.15. <T3>Drug- and Alcohol-Free Facilities. </T3>Section 402 of the 1988 AmendmentsAct requires grantees, recipients, and project sponsors under each of thehomeless housing programs authorized by Title IV of the McKinney Act toadminister, in good faith, a policy designed to ensure that the homelessfacility is free from the illegal use, possession, or distribution of drugsor alcohol by its beneficiaries. For more information concerning this requirement,potential applicants are encouraged to read the Notice on ComprehensiveHomeless Assistance Plans, published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on December 28, 1988 (53 FR 52600).<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Changes in the Permanent Housing Program</ITAG>The 1988 Amendments Act made the following changes in the permanent housingprogram (24 CFR Part 841):1. <T3>Project Sponsor. </T3>Section 442 authorizes a public housing agency(PHA) to be a project sponsor for a permanent housing project. Before thisamendment to the McKinney Act, project sponsorship was limited to privatenonprofit organizations. As required by andSection; 841.210(b)(2)(i), theapplicant for assistance must be the State in which the permanent housingis to be located. The application must indicate whether the project sponsoris a private nonprofit organization or a PHA. (The requirement of andSection;841.210(b)(2)(ii)(B) that the applicant demonstrate State approval of thefinancial responsibility of the project sponsor does not apply when theproject sponsor is a PHA).Section 442 also eliminates the requirement, contained in andSection; 841.210(b)(2)(ii),that the applicant's letter of participation and approval of financialresponsibility be signed by the Governor or other chief executive officerof the State. The signature of an authorized State official may be substituted.2. <T3>Grants for Operating Costs.</T3> Section 447 authorizes grants foroperating costs for permanent housing not to exceed 50 percent of the costsfor the first year and 25 percent the second year. The definition of operatingcosts in the final rule governing transitional housing (andSection;840.5)will be applicable for permanent housing as well. As defined in andSection;840.5,operating costs means expenses that a recipient incurs for:(a) The administration, maintenance, minor or routine repair, securityand rental of the housing;(b) Utilities, fuel, furnishings, and equipment for the housing;(c) Conducting resident supportive services needs assessments; and(d) The provision of supportive services to the residents of the housing.Operating costs do not include expenses that a recipient incurs for debtservice in connection with a loan used to finance acquisition or rehabilitationcosts under the program.HUD will provide up to 50 percent of the annual operating costs of permanenthousing for the first year and 25 percent for the second year. Upon approvalof an application requesting operating cost assistance, HUD will obligateamounts for the period sought, not to exceed two years. Each annual fundinglevel will be equal to an amount not to exceed the recipient's estimateof operating costs for the first year of operation, less the recipient'smatching contribution of 50 percent the first year and 75 percent the secondyear. In each of the two years, HUD will make operating cost payments tothe recipient from the amounts obligated. The rules regarding reductionof funding for acquisition/rehabilitation advances and moderate rehabilitationgrants in andSection;841.400 will apply to grants for operating costs. HUDmay deobligate the amounts for annual operating costs if the proposed permanenthousing operations are not begun within a reasonable time following selection.3. <T3>Definition of Project.</T3> Section 441(a) of the 1988 Amendments Actredefines the term ``project'' to include those structures or portionsof structures used for permanent housing that receive operating costs assistanceor technical assistance only. This amendment does not require a changein the final rule. The definition of ``project'' in andSection; 841.5 isnot limited to permanent housing programs that receive operating costsassistance or technical assistance in connection with acquisition or rehabilitationassistance.In addition, applicants may now receive operating costs, which is availableindependent of acquisition or rehabilitation assistance (see IV.2). UnderandSection;841.100(b), technical assistance was available only in connectionwith acquisition or rehabilitation assistance. This will be changed toprovide that technical assistance will be available also in connectionwith operating costs. However, technical assistance is available only inconnection with some other type of assistance.4. <T3>Availability of Operating Costs Assistance and Technical Assistancefor New Structures.</T3> Sections 441 (b) and (c) provide that operatingcosts assistance and certain types of technical assistance may be madeavailable for permanent housing, without regard to whether the housingis an existing structure. This change will allow a project with a structurenot yet completed to receive operating costs assistance and technical assistancewithout also receiving acquisition or rehabilitation assistance. However,no assistance may be provided for the construction of structures, withthe limited exception discussed in IV.5.In addition to compliance with the criteria set out in IV.2 for grantsfor annual operating costs, an applicant for operating costs assistancefor a permanent housing project involving a structure not yet completedmust provide reasonable assurance that construction will be completed withinnine months following notification of an award of a grant for operatingcosts. (``Notification'' of an award means the date of the letter fromHUD to the applicant notifying the applicant that its application for assistancehas been approved.) Reasonable assurance may be satisfied by submissionof the following:(a) Plans and specifications for the proposed structure;(b) Evidence that construction financing has been obtained; and(c) A copy of the construction contract for the proposed structure containingthe terms and conditions with regard to cost and date of completion.HUD may deobligate an award for operating costs and technical assistanceif the construction has not been completed within nine months followingnotification of the award.For permanent housing projects involving structures not yet completed,technical assistance will be offered only in connection with an award ofoperating costs assistance. Under section 441(c), technical assistancefor a structure not yet completed may be available in <T3>operating</T3> permanent housing and <T3>providing supportive services</T3> to the residents of permanent housing.Technical assistance in <T3>establishing</T3> permanent housing is available only in connectionwith existing structures. A description of technical assistance offeredto recipients is contained in andSection;841.115. Since technical assistancedoes not involve a grant of funds, HUD will continue to provide technicalassistance only through HUD offices. As a conforming change, the languagein andSection;841.5 limiting a permanent housing ``project'' to ``existing''structures will be deleted.5. <T3>Availability of Grant for Limited New Construction.</T3> Section 449(b)authorizes an advance for new construction in limited circumstances. UnderandSection;841.120(d), assistance for permanent housing may not be used fornew construction of housing. Section 449(b) will allow an advance for newconstruction only if the Secretary finds that the project:(a) Involves the cooperation of a city and a State university;(b) Has the land donated by a State university;(c) Proposes a supportive housing structure of at least 10,000 square feet;and(d) Proposes a model supportive housing project with a comprehensive supportsystem, including health services, job counseling, mental health services,and housing assistance and advocacy.Where the proposed site for a new construction advance is located in awetland, the procedures required by Executive Order 11990, Protection ofWetlands, must be undertaken before any decision is made on the environmentalacceptability of the project site for assistance. These procedures areidentical to the procedures under Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management(see IV.15). If a proposed new construction site is in a floodplain anda wetland, a single procedure will be carried out under both ExecutiveOrders.6. <T3>Use of Acquisition/Rehabilitation Advances to Repay Debt.</T3> Section445 provides that advances for acquisition/rehabilitation may be used torepay any outstanding debt on a loan made to purchase an existing structurefor use as supportive housing. An advance may be used for this purposeonly if the structure was not used as supportive housing before the receiptof assistance.An applicant for an acquisition/rehabilitation advance that intends touse the advance to repay an outstanding debt on a loan made to purchasean existing structure must provide the following information and documentationas a part of the application for the advance:(a) A copy of the contract of sale;(b) A copy of the loan agreement, mortgage agreement, or deed of trust;(c) Documentation showing the purpose of the loan;(d) Documentation of the balance owed on the loan, mortgage, or deed oftrust; and(e) Certification that the structure has not been used as supportive housingbefore the receipt of assistance.This provision is made applicable by the 1988 Amendments Act to all futureapplicants, as well as to any recipients that were notified of awards onor after November 1, 1987, whose funds were later deobligated by HUD uponlearning of the recipient's intent to use the funds to repay a debt madeto purchase the structure. 7. <T3>Limitation on Grants for Moderate Rehabilitation. </T3>Section 446sets a cap of $200,000 on grants for moderate rehabilitation. Under andSection;841.110,a grant for moderate rehabilitation of an existing structure was limitedto the lower of (a) the project limit (see andSection;841.110(b)(2)); or(b) 50 percent of the cost of rehabilitation. A grant for moderate rehabilitationwill now be limited to the lesser of (a) $200,000; (b) the project limit;or (c) 50 percent of the cost of rehabilitation. (See IV.8 for the specialcircumstances under which a grant in excess of $200,000 may be available.)8. <T3>Raised Limits on Advances for Acquisition/Rehabilitation and Grantsfor Moderate Rehabilitation. </T3>Section 449(a) authorizes the Secretaryto raise the limits on advances for acquisition/rehabilitation or grantsfor moderate rehabilitation from $200,000 to $400,000 in areas determinedby the Secretary to have high acquisition and rehabilitation costs. HUDwill consider applicants for amounts above $200,000 from applicants ingeographic areas determined by the Secretary to have costs that exceedthe statutory limits of section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C.1701q) by at least 75 percent. (A list of these geographic areas is includedin the application package. Applicants may also obtain a list of the areasfrom HUD Field Offices.) All requirements with regard to matching fundsare applicable to increased advances or grants. 9. <T3>Eligible Assistance. </T3>Section 447 provides that a recipient mayreceive both an advance for acquisition/rehabilitation and a grant formoderate rehabilitation under one application. Under andSection;841.100(b),assistance was limited to either an advance for acquisition/rehabilitationor a grant for moderate rehabilitation. HUD anticipates that applicantsfor both types of assistance will use the advance for acquisition of astructure and the grant for rehabilitation of the structure. 10. <T3>Site Control. </T3>Section 450 provides that an application for assistancemust furnish reasonable assurances that the applicant (or project sponsor)will own or have control of a site for the proposed project not later thansix months after notification of an award for grant assistance. Under thefinal rule at andSection;841.210(b)(4)(iv)(A), applicants were required todemonstrate control of a site at the time of the application for assistance.This change in the rule will permit approval of applications from projectsthat are not able to gain control of a site until they have been notifiedof an assistance award. Reasonable assurance must be satisfied by identificationof a suitable site (a suitable site is one that meets the requirementsof andSection;andSection;841.210 and 841.330 applicable to sites) and: (a) Certification by the applicant (or project sponsor) that it is engagedin negotiations or in other efforts for the purpose of gaining controlof the identified site; or (b) Other evidence satisfactory to HUD that the applicant (or project sponsor)will gain control of the identified site. Although section 450 authorizes an award of assistance to applicants (orproject sponsors) that do not have site control, it also provides thatthe extent to which an applicant (or project sponsor) has control of asite upon application for assistance will be a ranking criterion in thecompetition with other applicants, as described in IV.13. Section 450 also provides that an applicant (or project sponsor) may obtainownership or control of a suitable site different from the one specifiedin its application. An applicant may not change sites during the applicationreview period. Retention of an assistance award is subject to the new site'smeeting all requirements for suitable sites. If the acquisition or rehabilitationcosts for the substitute site are more than the amount of the advance orgrant, the recipient must furnish all additional costs. If the recipientis unable to demonstrate to HUD that it is able to furnish the differencein costs, HUD may cancel or recapture the obligated funds and reallocatethe funds to other projects. If a recipient (or project sponsor) does not have control of the site withinone year after notification of an award for assistance, section 450 requiresHUD to cancel or recapture the obligated funds and reallocate the fundsto other projects. This provision applies to all future applicants for assistance under 24CFR Part 841, as well as to any recipients that were notified of awardson or after November 1, 1987 and whose funds were later deobligated byHUD upon learning that the recipient no longer had ownership or controlof the site specified in its application or that the recipient wanted tochange to a site different from the site specified in its application.11. <T3>Matching Requirements. </T3>Under andSection;841.125, which implementedthe matching fund requirements of section 425 of the McKinney Act, therecipient was required to match the assistance provided by HUD with atleast an equal amount of State or local government funds, 50 percent ofwhich were to be State funds. The 50 percent State funds requirement couldhave been waived where HUD determined that the State was experiencing asevere financial hardship and that local governments in the area to beserved would furnish the difference. Section 452 of the 1988 AmendmentsAct provides that a State submitting an application for permanent housingmust certify that it will supplement the assistance provided by HUD withan equal amount of funds from non-Federal sources. The requirement thata portion of the matching funds be from local government funds and theprovision for a waiver for financially burdened States have been eliminated.Section 452 defines the term ``funds from non-Federal sources'' to includea number of sources that can be used as matching funds for an advance orgrant. HUD will recognize matches to the extent they are paid from sourcesother than a Federal assistance program, including the permanent housingprogram, to avoid inappropriate double-counting of the amounts involvedand the dilution of the purpose of the program's matching requirements.A State may include in the calculation of its matching funds: (a) State or local agency funds; (b) Salaries paid to staff to carry out the program of the recipient; (c) Time and services contributed by volunteers to carry out the programof the recipient, valued at $5.00 an hour; (d) Contributions of materials; (e) Contribution of a fee ownership in a structure to the extent of thefair market value of the structure; (f) Contribution of a leasehold interest in a structure to the extent ofthe fair rental value of the structure; (g) Rental income paid by residents of permanent housing under andSection;841.320. Although section 452 does not include cash contributions from third partiesas a source of non-Federal funds, HUD recognizes such contributions asa source of matching funds. HUD will include the value of the matching funds in the calculation forthe type of assistance to which they are related. For example, a contributionof materials will be included in the calculation of a match for an acquisition/rehabilitationadvance or a moderate rehabilitation grant if the materials will be usedin the rehabilitation of a structure for use as permanent housing. A contributionof materials that would fall within the definition of operating costs underIV.2 will be included in the match for operating costs assistance. A contributionof a fee ownership in a structure will be included in the match for anacquisition/rehabilitation advance, and a contribution of a leasehold interestwill be included in the match for a grant for operating costs. Volunteer time and services will also be included in the calculation ofthe match for the type of assistance to which such time and services arerelated. For example, if volunteers assist in the rehabilitation of thestructure, the contribution will be calculated as a match for an acquisition/rehabilitationadvance or a moderate rehabilitation grant. If outside service providersdonate supportive services or if volunteers assist in administration ofthe program, the value of their services will be calculated as a matchfor operating costs. Staff salaries will be included as a match for operatingcosts. 12. <T3>Number of Residents. </T3>Under andSection; 841.325, a permanent housingprogram consisting of dwelling units in a rental building, condominium,or cooperative may not serve more than eight persons and their families(if the head of the family or spouse of the head of the family is a handicappedhomeless person). If the permanent housing is a group home, the projectmay not serve more than eight handicapped homeless persons, and may notserve the families of such persons. Section 444 of the 1988 AmendmentsAct permits HUD to waive this limitation on the number of residents ifthe applicant demonstrates that local market conditions dictate the developmentof a larger project, and that a larger project will achieve the neighborhoodintegration objectives of the program within the community. HUD anticipates that requests for waivers of andSection; 841.325 will befrom project sponsors of permanent housing located in densely populatedurban areas where supportive services, such as health facilities, employmentopportunities, or public transportation, are concentrated. HUD will grantthe waivers on a case-by-case basis. 13. <T3>Ranking Criteria. </T3>The 1988 Amendments Act authorizes an additionalcriterion to be included in the ranking criteria described in andSection;841.215(b). Section 450 provides for the inclusion of the extent to whichan applicant has control of the site of the proposed project. In assessingan application under this factor, HUD will award the most points to anapplicant that demonstrates that: (a) The applicant (or project sponsor) owns or has a contract of sale forthe site at the time of the application; (b) The applicant (or project sponsor) has a lease for the site for a periodof 10 years from the date of the application; (c) The applicant (or project sponsor) has an option to purchase the siteat the time of the application; or (d) The applicant (or project sponsor) has an option to lease the sitefor a period of 10 years from the date of the application. 14. <T3>Environmental Review. </T3>Section 443 provides that the provisionsof, and regulations and procedures applicable under, section 104(g) ofthe Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5304(g)) shallapply to assistance and projects under Title IV of the McKinney Act. Section104(g) provides that, in lieu of the environmental protection proceduresotherwise applicable, the Secretary may provide for the release of fundsfor particular projects to grantees who assume all the responsibilitiesfor environmental review, decisionmaking, and action under the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321) (NEPA) and the otherprovisions of law specified by the Secretary that would apply to the Secretarywere the Secretary to undertake such projects as Federal projects. HUDregulations implementing section 104(g) are found in 24 CFR Part 58, andthe Secretary has specified the other provisions of law under which environmentalresponsibilities are to be assumed by grantees in 24 CFR 58.5. (These authoritiesinclude the floodplain restrictions discussed in IV.15.) As applied to permanent housing, the Department views section 443 as authorizingthe Secretary to require States (as the applicants under andSection; 841.5)to assume the responsibility for assessing the environmental effects ofeach application for assistance in accordance with the procedural provisionsof NEPA, the related environmental laws and authorities, and HUD's implementingregulations in 24 CFR Part 58. In accordance with the new statutory authorization,HUD will, in connection with future permanent housing advances and grants,provide for assumption of these responsibilities by States. Relevant reviewscompleted for purposes of another McKinney Act program or other HUD programmay suffice for purposes of permanent housing, where permitted under Part58. Since applicants will now be responsible for performing the environmentalreview under section 104(g) and 24 CFR Part 58, the environmental reviewprocess will be independent of the threshold review and ranking process,and the applicant may complete the environmental review after those processesand after selection for funding. Therefore, andSection; 841.210(b)(7) willnot be in effect, and HUD will not consider environmental impacts or timedelays associated with mitigation measures for such proposals in rankingthe applications. Similarly, the provision in andSection; 841.210(b)(7) thatapplications requiring Environmental Impact Statements (EIS) will not passthreshold review will not be enforced. On August 10, 1988, HUD amended its environmental regulations at 24 CFRParts 50 and 58 to exclude certain activities under HUD homeless assistanceprograms from the NEPA requirements of Parts 50 and 58 (53 FR 30186). (Theamendments were published in conjunction with HUD's final rule governingthe Emergency Shelter Grants Program.) These ``categorical exclusions''from NEPA review are for activities that HUD believes lack potential significanteffect on the human environment. Specifically, the activities consist ofsuch services as health, substance abuse and counseling services, the provisionof meals and payment of rent, utility and maintenance costs, and similaractivities that do not involve physical change to buildings or sites. Environmentalreview focuses on new site selection or physical development activitiessuch as construction, property rehabilitation, renovation, and conversion.Although the activities described above and certain other activities maybe categorically excluded from the NEPA requirements, they are not excludedfrom the individual compliance requirements of other environmental statutes,executive orders, and HUD standards listed in andSection;andSection; 50.4 and58.5, where applicable. However, activities consisting solely of supportiveservices and software normally do not require environmental review underNEPA <T3>or </T3>the related authorities if they do not directly require physicaldevelopment or site selection (<T3>i.e., </T3>use of a building not previously used for purposes of theprogram). Such activities that trigger neither NEPA nor the related authoritiesare defined as ``exempt'' under Part 58. Procedures for applicant submissionof environmental certifications and Requests for Release of Funds applyto new site selections and to the funding of physical development activities.These procedures do not apply to activities that are determined and documentedto be ``exempt.''Applicants and grantees are cautioned that, under section 104(g), HUD maynot release permanent housing funds for a project if the grantee, a subgrantee,or another party commits permanent housing funds (<T3>i.e., </T3>incurs any costs or expenditures to be paid for, or reimbursedwith, such funds) before the grantee submits its request for release ofpermanent housing funds to HUD.15. <T3>Floodplains Restrictions. </T3>Section 451 of the 1988 Amendments Actrequires that the flood protection standards for housing acquired, rehabilitated,or assisted with Supportive Housing Demonstration funds may be no morerestrictive than those applicable under Executive Order 11988, FloodplainManagement (May 24, 1977) to the other programs under Title IV of the McKinneyAct. Therefore, the restrictions with respect to location of projects infloodplains contained in the final rule at andSection; 841.210(b)(4)(iv)(C)no longer apply to applicants for assistance under the permanent housingfor the handicapped homeless program. HUD interprets section 451 to meanthat, for projects located in floodplains, the eight-step process of publicnotification and decisionmaking outline in the U.S. Water Resources CouncilFloodplain Management Guidelines (43 FR 6030, February 10, 1978) must beundertaken by the applicant before any decision is made on the environmentalacceptability of the project site for homeless assistance. Grantees withprojects in floodplains will perform the eight-step process at the timethey perform the environmental review (see IV.14).The eight-step process applies to all applications for projects for criticalactions within the 500-year floodplain. Critical actions include thoseprojects intended to serve developmentally disabled, chronically mentallyill, or mobility impaired residents and, therefore, include all permanenthousing projects. Applicants with proposed projects located in a 500-yearfloodplain should be aware that the public notification and decisionmakingprocess takes a minimum of 30 days from the time the first published noticein the process appears.Executive Order 11988 requires the applicant to consider alternatives toavoid adverse impacts associated with the occupancy and modification offloodplains. The alternatives may include actions resulting in less riskto human life or property. The review process may result in specific mitigationrequirements or rejection of the site. As part of the eight-step process,the applicant must reevaluate alternatives to projects/sites located infloodplains. If, after initial approval, an applicant changes the site,any new site will be subject to a complete environmental review, including,as applicable, the eight-step public notification and decisionmaking procedurefor sites located in floodplains.The Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4001-4128) and HUDregulations prohibit the approval of applications for projects/sites locatedin an area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)as having special flood hazards unless: (1) The community in which thearea is situated is participating in the National Flood Insurance Program(not suspended or withdrawn) (see 44 CFR Parts 59-79) or less than a yearhas passed since FEMA notification regarding such hazards; and (2) floodinsurance is obtained as a condition of approval of the application.Applicants with projects/sites (determined through the eight-step processto be environmentally acceptable) that are located in an area that hasbeen identified by FEMA as having special flood hazards will be requiredto obtain and maintain flood insurance under the National Flood InsuranceProgram. This is a separate requirement from the Executive Order 11988procedures, and the availability of flood insurance does not satisfy theeight-step public notification and decisionmaking procedures of the FloodplainManagement Guidelines.16. <T3>Drug- and Alcohol-Free Facilities. </T3>Section 402 of the 1988 AmendmentsAct requires grantees, recipients, and project sponsors under each of thehomeless housing programs authorized by Title IV of the McKinney Act toadminister, in good faith, a policy designed to ensure that the homelessfacility is free from the illegal use, possession, or distribution of drugsor alcohol by its beneficiaries. For more information concerning this requirement,potential applicants are encouraged to read to Notice on ComprehensiveHomeless Assistance Plans, published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on December 28, 1988 (53 FR 52600).<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Application Process_Transitional Housing</ITAG>One of the purposes of this Notice is to announce the availability of $65million in funds for transitional housing appropriated by the Departmentof Housing and Urban Development-Independent Agencies Appropriations Act,1989. The Department also is announcing the availability of an additional$24.6 million in funds, which has been reallocated to the transitionalhousing program from funds that were set aside from FY 1987 and FY 1988appropriations for the permanent housing program but were not obligatedfor that program. Section 455 of the 1988 Amendments Act requires the Secretaryto reallocate to transitional housing any amounts set aside for permanenthousing that will not be required to fund approvable applications for permanenthousing funds. Therefore, the Department has reallocated $24.6 millionin unused funds set aside for permanent housing to the transitional housingprogram, making a total availability of $89.6 million in funds for transitionalhousing.Section 428(b) of the McKinney Act requires that at least $20 million infunds for any fiscal year be set aside for transitional housing projectsthat serve homeless families with children. Therefore, at least $20 millionof the total $85 million in funds for transitional housing will be setaside for projects that serve homeless families with children.An application package is available that describes the information anddocuments that transitional housing applicants must submit. The applicationpackage identifies all information and documents that must be submittedby the application deadline, as well as the information and documents thatmust be submitted upon preliminary approval of the application. The packagewill be provided upon the written or oral request of any party made tothe Office of Supportive Housing Demonstration Program at the address setforth in the beginning of this document, or by calling (202) 755-1514 or755-1525. Hearing or speech impaired individuals may call HUD's TDD number(202) 426-0015. (These numbers are not toll-free.)Applications must be in the form prescribed by HUD and must be receivedat the specified address no later than 5:15 p.m. (e.s.t) on March 30, 1989.Late-filed and incomplete applications will be rejected.Following the expiration of the March 30, 1989 deadline, HUD headquarterswill review, rate, and rank the applications in a manner consistent withthe selection procedures described at andSection;andSection; 840.207-840.225,as modified by the statutorily required changes to those procedures announcedin section III of this Notice. HUD will announce its final selections nolater than July 10, 1989. No information regarding the status of applicationswill be released until final selections are made.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Application Process-Permanent Housing</ITAG>This Notice announces the availability of $15 million in funds for permanenthousing appropriated by the Department of Housing and Urban Development-IndependentAgencies Appropriations Act, 1989.An application package is available that describes the information anddocuments required from applicants for assistance for permanent housingprojects. The application package identifies all information and documentsthat must be submitted by the application deadline, as well as the informationand documents that must be submitted upon preliminary approval of the application.The package will be provided to eligible states upon written or oral requestto the Office of Supportive Housing Demonstration Program at the addressset forth in the beginning of this document, or by calling (202) 755-1514or 755-1525. Hearing or speech impaired individuals may call HUD's TDDnumber (202) 426-0015. (These numbers are not toll-free.)Applications must be in the form prescribed by HUD and must be receivedat the specified address no later than 5:15 p.m. (e.s.t.) on April 27,1989. Late-filed and incomplete applications will be rejected.Following the expiration of the April 27, 1989 deadline, HUD headquarterswill review, rate, and rank the applications in a manner consistent withthe selection procedures described at andSection;andSection; 841.207-841.255,as modified by the statutory required changes to those procedures announcedin section IV of this notice. HUD will announce its final selections nolater than July 31, 1989. No information regarding the status of applicationswill be released until final selections are made.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Other Matters</ITAG>The revised collection of information requirements contained in this noticewere submitted to OMB for review under section 3504(h) of the PaperworkReduction Act of 1980. Sections V and VI of this notice have been determinedby the Department to contain collection of information requirements notincluded in the Department's assessments of the burden of these requirementswhen they were originally approved by OMB on July 1, 1988 under controlnumber 2502-0361. Information on the revised reporting burden is providedas follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>5,L2,tp0,i1,s200,10,10,10,10</C> <H1> </H1><H1>Number of respondents</H1><H1>Frequency of response</H1><H1>Hours per response</H1><H1>Burden hours</H1>Permanent HSG:<ITAG tagnum="3">_Applications</ITAG><D>100</D><D>1</D><D>44</D><D>4,400</D><ITAG tagnum="3">_Recordkeeping</ITAG><D>100</D><D>1</D><D>1</D><D>100</D><ITAG tagnum="3">_Environ Review</ITAG><D>100</D><D>1</D><D>14</D><D>1,400</D>Transtl HSG:<ITAG tagnum="3">_Applications</ITAG><D>300</D><D>1</D><D>44</D><D>13,200</D><ITAG tagnum="3">_Recordkeeping</ITAG><D>300</D><D>1</D><D>1</D><D>300</D><ITAG tagnum="3">_Environ Review</ITAG><D/><D/><D/><D/><R/><ITAG tagnum="4">Total Annual Burden<D/><D/><D/><D>19,400</D></ITAG></ITAG>A Finding of No Significant Impact with respect to the environment hasbeen made in accordance with HUD regulations in 24 CFR Part 50, which implementsection 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 42U.S.C. andSection; 4332. The Finding is available for public inspection duringregular business hours at the Office of Rules Docket Clerk, Room 10276,Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington,DC 20410. The General Counsel, as the Designated Official under Executive Order 12606,<T3>The Family, </T3>has determined that some of the policies in this Noticewill have a potential significant impact on the formation, maintenance,and general well-being of homeless families. The Notice makes available$100 million for the Supportive Housing program. Both transitional housingand permanent housing that serve families, including families with children,are eligible for funding under the program. Participation of families inthe program can be expected to support family values, by helping familiesremain together; by enabling them to live in decent, safe, and sanitaryhousing; and in the case of transitional housing, by encouraging them toacquire the skills and knowledge necessary to live independently in mainstreamAmerican society. The General Counsel has also determined, as the Designated Official forHUD under section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612, <T3>Federalism, </T3>that the amendment made by section 443 of the 1988Amendments Act will have federalism implications. That section providesthat HUD shall apply the provisions of, and regulations and proceduresunder, section 104(g) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974to assistance and projects under Title IV of the McKinney Act. Section104(g) provides that the Secretary may require applicants with the legalcapacity to do so to assume the responsibilities for environmental review,decisionmaking, and action under the National Environmental Policy Actof 1969 and the other provisions of law specified by the Secretary thatwould apply to HUD were HUD to undertake such projects as Federal projects.HUD is announcing in this Notice that it will require States and othergovernmental entities with general governmental powers to assume thoseresponsibilities. While the delegation of these responsibilities undersection 104(g) is discretionary with HUD, it is authorized by and clearlythe intent of section 443 of the 1988 Amendments Act. Therefore, the policyis not subject to review under Executive Order 12612. This rule does not constitute a ``major rule'' as that term is definedin section 1(d) of Executive Order 12291 issued by the President on February17, 1981. An analysis of the rule indicates that it does not: (1) Havean annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; (2) cause a majorincrease in costs of prices for consumers, individual industries, Federal,State, or local government agencies, or geographic regions; or (3) havea significant adverse effect on competition, employment, investment, productivity,innovation, or on the ability of United States-based enterprises to competewith foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets. In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 605(b) (the Regulatory Flexibility Act), theundersigned hereby certifies that this rule does not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. Only a limitednumber of small entities will be eligible for and affected by this programbecause: (1) The current funding level will support only a limited numberof recipients; and (2) recipients under the program include small and largeprivate nonprofit organizations and government entities. This document was not listed on the Department's Semiannual Agenda of Regulationspublished on October 24, 1988 (53 FR 41974). The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance program number is 14.178.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 3, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Thomas T. Demery, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Housing_Federal Housing Commissioner.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-293 Filed 1-6-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4210-27-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>