<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89131-0060 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-31-89.f2.A1059</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4703"/><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 19 / Tuesday, January 31, 1989/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 54, No. 19</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Tuesday, January 31, 1989</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">International Trade Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[A-588-801]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Final Determination of Sales at Less than Fair Value: Certain All-TerrainVehicles From Japan</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>We determine that certain all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)from Japan are being, or are likely to be, sold in the United States atless than fair value. We have notified the U.S. International Trade Commission(ITC) of our determination and have directed the U.S. Customs Service tocontinue to suspend liquidation of all entries of certain ATVs from Japanas described in the ``Suspension of Liquidation'' section of this notice.The ITC will determine, within 45 days of the date of publication of thisnotice, whether these imports are materially injuring, or threaten materialinjury to, a U.S. industry.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>January 31, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:</T2>Contact Michael Ready or Louis Apple,Office of Investigations, Import Administration, International Trade Administration,U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW.,Washington, DC 20230, telephone: (202) 377-2613 or 377-1769.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Final Determination</ITAG>We determine that certain ATVs from Japan are being, or are likely to be,sold in the United States at less than fair value, as provided in section735(a) of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (19 U.S.C. 1673d(a)) (theAct). The weighted-average dumping margin for each company is shown inthe ``Suspension of Liquidation'' section of this notice. <ITAG tagnum="84">Case History</ITAG>Since our preliminary determination (53 FR 35220, September 12, 1988),the following events have occurred. On September 8, 9 and 12, Honda Motor Co., Ltd. (Honda), Yamaha Motor Co.,Ltd. (Yamaha), and Suzuki Motor Co., Ltd. (Suzuki) requested a postponementof the final determination until not later than 135 days after the dateof publication of the preliminary determination pursuant to section 735(a)(2)(A)of the Act. On September 21, 1988, we issued a notice postponing the finaldetermination until January 25, 1989 (53 FR 37618, September 27, 1988).During the month of September, 1988, Honda, Yamaha and Suzuki replied toour cost of production questionnaire. Verification of both the sales andcost of production questionnaire responses was conducted in Japan, theUnited States, and Canada during the period between later September andearly November, 1988.A public hearing was held on December 14, 1988. Petitioner and respondentsfiled pre-hearing briefs on December 8, 1988, and post-hearing briefs werefiled on December 21, 1988. <ITAG tagnum="84">Scope of Investigation</ITAG>The products covered by this investigation are certain all-terrain vehicles,assembled or unassembled, provided for in item 692.1090 of the <T3>Tariff Schedules of the United States Annotated</T3> (TSUSA) and classifiableunder sub-heading 8703.21.0000 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule. Certain all-terrain vehicles are motor vehicles designed for off-pavementuse by one operator and no passengers and contain internal combustion enginesof less than 1000cc cylinder capacity. The ATVs under investigation arenon-amphibious, have three or four wheels, and weigh less than 600 pounds.They have a seat designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebarsfor steering control. <ITAG tagnum="84">Period of Investigation</ITAG>The period of investigation is September 1, 1987, through February 29,1988.<ITAG tagnum="84">Such or Similar Comparisons</ITAG>Pursuant to section 771(16)(C) of the Act, we established two categoriesof ``such or similar'' merchandise for all respondent companies: 1) Three-wheelATVs; and 2) four-wheel ATVs. As noted below, Honda, Suzuki and Yamahaall lacked sufficient home market sales in either such or similar categoryto serve as the basis for calculating foreign market value. Therefore,for purposes of the preliminary determination, we based foreign marketvalue on sales to a third country, Canada. For all three companies, salesto Canada reflect the largest sales volume of any country outside the homemarket or the United States.The percentages of each respondent's total sales to the United States thatwere used for such or similar comparisons were: 61.0 percent for Honda,79.8 percent for Yamaha; and, 92.6 percent for Suzuki. <ITAG tagnum="84">Fair Value Comparisons</ITAG>In order to determine whether sales of ATVs from Japan to the United Stateswere made at less than fair value, we compared the United States priceto the foreign market value as specified below. As noted in our preliminarydetermination, one of the manufacturers, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd.(Kawasaki), did not reply to the questionnaire. Therefore, we have determined,consistent with the best information available provisions of section 776(c)of the Act, that it is appropriate for the purposes of this determinationto assign to Kawasaki the higher of either: (1) The highest margin indicatedfor Kawasaki in the petition; or, (2) the hightest weighted-average marginfound for any company that did respond to the questionnaire. Followingthis approach for this determination, we have assigned Kawasaki the highestmargin indicated for Kawasaki in the petition. Another manufacturer, Honda, refused to reply to our cost of productionquestionnaire as it related to ATV models produced prior to the 1987 modelyear. As we determined for Kawasaki, we determined for Honda that it isappropriate to assign it the higher of: The highest weighted-average marginfound for any responding firm, or the highest margin indicated in the petitionfor the non-responding firm. Following this approach, we have assignedto Honda's sales of pre-1987 models the highest margin indicated for Hondain the petition. <ITAG tagnum="84">United States Price </ITAG>For all sales by Honda, Yamaha, and Suzuki, we based United States priceon exporter's sales price (ESP), in accordance with section 772(c) of theAct, because in each case the sale to the first unrelated purchaser tookplace after importation into the United States. We calculated ESP basedon packed, f.o.b. seller's warehouse prices to unrelated purchasers inthe United States. We made deductions, where appropriate, for brokerageand other export expenses in Japan, inland freight in Japan, ocean freight,marine insurance, U.S. customs duty and user's fees, inland freight andrelated expenses associated with moving the ATVs to the seller's warehousein the United States, discounts, rebates, assembly and inspection allowances,credit expenses, advertising expenses, warranty expenses, and, pursuantto section 772(e)(2) of the Act, indirect expenses, including inventorycarrying expenses incurred in both Japan and the United States.<ITAG tagnum="84">Foreign Market Value </ITAG>In order to determine whether there were sufficient sales of ATVs in thehome (Japanese) market to serve as the basis for calculating foreign marketvalue, we compared the volume of home market sales within each such orsimilar category to the total volume of third country sales within eachrespective such or similar category. For each of the three respondents,for both such or similar categories, we found that home market sales wereinsufficient to serve as the basis for foreign market value. Not havingany grounds to believe or suspect that respondents' third country saleswere below cost of production within the meaning of section 773(b) of theAct, we found that Canada was the appropriate third country market to serveas the basis for foreign market value for both such or similar categoriesin our preliminary determination. On July 14, 1988, petitioner alleged that Canadian sales for all respondentswere at prices below the cost of producing the merchandise. Having determinedthat these allegations were sufficiently documented, the Department initiateda cost investigation for Honda, Suzuki and Yamaha. We examined productioncost data submitted by the respondents, including costs for materials,fabrication and general expenses. The cost of production (COP) calculationfor each respondent was adjusted for those costs which were not appropriatelyquantified or valued in the response (see adjustments below).In addition, an amount representing inventory carrying costs for 1987,was included in general expenses for all ATV models produced in that yearand sold by the respondents during the period of investigation. The amountwas determined as an estimate of the interest expense incurred in holding1987 ATV models in inventory for an additional year (<T3>i.e.</T3>; for both 1987 and 1988). The estimate was based on the samemethodology we used for calculating actual inventory carrying costs in1988. It was calculated by multiplying the cost of carrying in inventoryeach 1987 ATV by an estimate of the 1987 internal borrowing rate for eachof the three respondents. The amount calculated was then included in thecost calculation along with the actual interest expense reported as incurredby each respondent during 1988.The following adjustments were made to the cost data submitted by eachresponent: A. Honda (1) General and administrative (Gandamp;A) expenses, including research anddevelopment (Randamp;D) expenses and interest expenses, were reallocatedusing the cost of sales percentage (as reported in the Ministry of FinanceReport) and the cost of manufacturing for each model) (2) Reported interest income was excluded from the calculation of net interestexpense due to the lack of documentation supporting the company's assertionthat interest income was related to working capital and ATV operations.(3) Foreign exchange gains reported as a credit against selling, generaland administrative (S, Gandamp;A) expenses were excluded from the COP andconstructed value (CV) calculations since it could not be demonstratedthat such gains were related to working capital and ATV production. (4) An adjustment was made to COP/CV to reflect the write-off of certainobsolete ATVs held in inventory. (5) A portion of Randamp;D expenses included in the cost of manufacturingwas reallocated to Gandamp;A expenses. The portion reallocated representedRandamp;D of a more general nature and was not considered to be a product-specificcost. (6) An adjustment was made to the cost of materials in the COP/CV calculationto reflect more fairly the market value of items received from relatedparties. (7) Movement expenses, such as ocean freight and maritime insurance, wereexcluded from the COP/CV calculations. B. Suzuki (1) Adjustments to cost variances for all 1987 Canadian models were submittedby Suzuki at verification. These adjustments were accepted since they wereboth verifiable and represented only slight differences from the variancessubmitted in the company's response. (2) Total Randamp;D expense was recalculated to include not only productspecific Randamp;D, but also an allocated portion of other, more generaltypes of Randamp;D expenses. (3) Gandamp;A was adjusted to include legal fees incurred in the disputeover new U.S. ATV safety regulations. (4) The respondent's adjustment eliminating profit on parts received fromrelated suppliers was not accepted since it was not based on the actualprofit realized on such transactions. Instead, no adjustment was allowedfor profit on parts received from related suppliers. (5) Interest expense percentage was calculated using consolidated interestexpense and cost of goods sold from the Ministry of Finance Report. (6) Reported interest income was excluded from the calculation of net interestexpense due to the lack of documentation supporting the company's assertionthat interest income was related to working capital and ATV operations.(7) The Gandamp;A percentage was calculated using the ratio of total Gandamp;Aexpenses to total sales revenues rather than the ratio of total Gandamp;Ato total export sales. C. Yamaha (1) Certain items included in Gandamp;A expenses, such as realized dividendincome and gain on sales of marketable securities, were disallowed forthe COP calculation as they were unrelated to the ATV manufacturing process.(2) A portion of rental income was disallowed. The amount of rental incomeincluded in the COP calculation was that portion which related directlyto rental expense as reported in the records of Shinba, a related company.(3) Certain income items included in ``other income'' were disallowed forthe COP calculation because they represented reimbursements for prior periodexpenses. (4) Actual costs, rather than standard costs, were used for componentstransferred between related companies. We compared the Canadian sales prices, net of all applicable movement expenses,Canadian duty, Canadian sales tax, discounts and rebates, to the cost ofproduction. For Suzuki and Yamaha, we found sufficient Canadian sales abovethe cost of production to allow us to use these prices for foreign marketvalue in accordance with section 773(a)(1)(A) of the Act. Therefore, wecalculated foreign market value based on packed f.o.b. seller's warehouseor delivered prices to unrelated purchasers in Canada. We made deductions,where appropriate, for brokerage and other export expenses in Japan, inlandfreight in Japan, ocean freight, marine insurance, Canadian customs duty,Canadian Federal Sales Tax, inland freight and related expenses associatedwith moving the ATVs to the seller's warehouse in Canada, discounts, rebates,inland freight from seller's warehouse to customer, credit expenses, warrantyexpenses, and advertising expenses. We offset indirect selling expensesincurred on Canadian sales up to the amount of selling expenses incurredon sales in the U.S. in accordance with andSection; 353.15(c) of our regulations.In order to adjust for differences in packing between the two markets,we deducted Canadian packing costs from the foreign market value and addedU.S. packing costs. We made adjustments, where applicable, for differences in the physicalcharacteristics of the merchandise in accordance with andSection; 353.16of the Regulations. In the case of Honda's Canadian sales, we found an insufficient numberabove its cost of production. Therefore, foreign market value was basedupon constructed value in accordance with section 773(e) of the Act. Whencalculating constructed value, the respondent's submission was used, exceptwhen reported costs were not appropriately quantified or valued. With theexception of certain Canadian selling expenses (such as warranty expenses),cost of materials, fabrication and general expenses were based upon productioncosts for U.S. sales. In computing general expenses for constructed value, we added amounts forCanadian warranty expense, advertising, post-sale credit expenses and inventorycarrying expenses associated with Canadian sales. Deductions were madefor interest charged Canadian customers and, in order to avoid double counting,for the portion of estimated interest expense allocated to accounts receivableand inventory. With the exception of this latter deduction, all additionsand deductions were calculated by model using a weighted-average methodology.Since the calculated amount for general expenses was greater than the statutoryminimum of ten percent of the cost of materials and fabrication as specifiedin section 773(e)(1)(B) of the Act, we used the calculated amount. Additionally,the amount of reported profit was less than eight percent of the sum ofthe cost of materials, fabrication and general expenses specified in section773(e)(1)(B). We therefore, used the statutory minimum of eight percent.Finally, we added U.S. packing costs to arrive at the total constructedvalue for the product under investigation. We made appropriate deductionsfrom the constructed value for credit expenses, warranties and advertising,in accordance with 19 CFR 353.15(a). In relevant circumstances, we addedinterest charged to customers to the constructed value. We also made anadjustment to constructed value for indirect selling expenses, in accordancewith 19 CFR 353.15(c). <ITAG tagnum="84">Currency Conversion </ITAG>Since all U.S. sales were exporter's sales price transacitons, we usedthe official exchange rates in effect on the date of sale, in accordancewith section 773(a)(1) of the Act, as amended by section 615 of the Tradeand Tariff Act of 1984. All currency conversions were made at rates certifiedby the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. <ITAG tagnum="84">Verification</ITAG>We verified the information used in making our final determination in accordancewith section 776(b) of the Act. We used standard verification proceduresincluding examination of relevant accounting records and original documentsof the respondents.<ITAG tagnum="84">Interested Party Comments</ITAG>HondaComment 1Petitioner argues that Honda's writedown of ATV inventory should be includedas an expense in the COP/CV. The respondent advocates allocating only aportion of this total write-off on the basis of additional informationsubmitted subsequent to the cost verification.DOC PositionThe Department agrees in principle that the value of obsolete inventorywritten off represents one of the costs incurred in producing ATVs. Assuch, it should be allocated over the period during which obsolescenceis assumed to have occurred. An adjustment was made to allocate the costof ATV inventory write-offs to the period's ATV production. Informationsubmitted subsequent to verification was not considered in such calculations.Comment 2The respondent states that the reported cost of materials and componentspurchased from affiliated companies in which Honda has a 5-49% ownershipinterest should be accepted although the ``market value'' of these componentswas not fully supported. Respondent further states that it provided alldocumentation which was reasonably available. Respondent argues that thesecomponents were specifically designed for Honda products and, therefore,there are no market prices for identical merchandise. The respondent statesthat Honda's minority interest in these suppliers does not affect the priceof purchased components and, in fact, the prices reflect an ``arms length''transaction.The petitioner argues that since Honda did not provide satisfactory evidenceof the market value of components, the Department should base componentvalues on the best information available.DOC PositionThe Department informed all respondents prior to verification of the needto establish that significant component purchases from related companieswere conducted at arm's length, and that the prices charged reflected thecomponent's true market value. Honda did not establish the arm's-lengthnature of the transactions, nor did the company provide adequate documentationof the components' market value. The company did provide financial statementsfor three of its related suppliers, nothing that each of the suppliersoperated at a profit during the period of investigation. However, the financialstatements were provided subsequent to our verification and since the suppliersprovided parts and components for a number of purchasers, we could notascertain that the particular parts sold to Honda were at market value.Therefore, the Department reviewed other respondents' direct material costsfor similar models, and established a percentage factor representing thehigher materials costs incurred by the other companies. This factor wasadded to Honda's direct materials costs as ``best information available''.Comment 3Respondent contends that the Department should include Honda's foreignexchange ``gain'' in its COP/CV calculation.DOC PositionThe Department diagrees. Exchange rate gains unrelated to the productionof the merchandise under investigation are not properly considered creditsto COP/CV. In Honda's case, net foreign exchange gains were not consideredan offset against financial expenses since they were not demonstrated tobe directly related to the production of ATVs.Comment 4Respondent maintains that Gandamp;A expenses are properly functions of thesales value of the products and, therefore, should be allocated based onthe c.i.f. value of the merchandise produced.DOC PostionGandamp;A expense items are normally associated with the cost of producingmerchandise and maintaining an organization's structure. For purposes ofcalculating COP and CV, Gandamp;A is determined as a percentage of totalcost of manufacturing for all ATV products. This percentage is then appliedto cost of manufacturing for each individual product. Calculating Gandamp;Aexpenses as a percentage of c.i.f. value, and then applying that percentageto cost of manufacturing, would be distortive in that it would understatethe Gandamp;A incurred in producing and selling the ATVs under investigation.Comment 5Randamp;D activities carried out by a related company are reimbursed by Hondabased on the period's sales results. Honda therefore believes Randamp;D allocatedto the subject ATVs should be on the basis of c.i.f. value.DOC PositionThe Department believes that the nature of Randamp;D activities is properlyassociated with the cost of manufacturing. In this case, the specific repaymentterms between the related companies does not change the appropriate methodof allocating these costs. Therefore, for the purpose of the COP and CVcalculations, these costs were adjusted on a cost of manufacture basis.Comment 6Respondent contends that the Department should exclude all three-wheelATVs from its fair value comparison. Honda contends that these models areobsolete and no longer being imported into, or sold in, the United States.Furthermore, consistent with a consent decree affecting ATV sales, Hondahas no plans to resume United States imports or sales of three-wheel ATVs.DOC PositionWe disagree. The antidumping duty law is intended to eliminate unfair pricediscrimination_that is, the dumping of merchandise in the United Statesat prices below those in effect in the foreign producer's home or otherexport markets. To this effect, the law clearly contemplates that the Departmentwill select a period during which sales of the subject merchandise haveoccurred and to establish, where justified, an estimated dumping marginwhich may or may not be reviewed and revised during later periods.We have determined, and no one has contested, that a petition coveringthree and four-wheel ATVs was properly filed in this case. Therefore, three-wheelATVs comprise part of the merchandise subject to investigation.The Department will, on occasion, exclude certain U.S. sales from its fairvalue comparisons when those sales are not representative of the respondent'sselling practices in the U.S. market, or where those sales are so smallthat they would have an insignificant effect on the margin. In this case,however, there is nothing particularly unusual about Honda's sales of three-wheelATVs in the United States. It is not possible to conclude that Honda'spricing practices with respect to three-wheel ATVs are not representativeof its behavior in the U.S. market.In sum, the Department is required to take a snapshot of Honda's pricingpractices during the period of investigation and to calculate a dumpingmargin based upon these sales. Since Honda sold three-wheel ATVs duringthe period of investigation in the United States, three-wheel ATVs areproperly included within our dumping calculation. Comment 7 The respondent contends that the Department should not use a sale-by-saleinterest expense for inventory carrying and post-sale credit expenses inits calculation of COP and CV. It contends that the Department is requiredto use whatever amount appears in Honda's financial statements and records.The petitioner states that it is essential for the Department to includeso-called ``imputed'' interest expenses in the COP and CV calculations.In order to measure accurately the relative returns obtained by Honda,the petitioner argues that the Department must calculate credit and inventorycarrying expenses on a sale-specific basis. The petitioner further statesthat the use of sale-specific data is consistent with generally acceptedaccounting principles.DOC Position We cannot accept respondent's argument that no adjustment to the fair valuecomparison should be made for <T3>actual differences </T3>in the extension of credit by the firm andthe time for which finished merchandise is maintained in inventory. Thefact that Honda has essentially chosen not to finance its accounts receivablesand inventory carrying costs with short-term borrowings does not disposeof the fact that Honda has had differing credit and inventory carryingexperiences in the United States and Canada. <T3>See Silver Reed v. United States, </T3>Slip Op. 88-5 (CIT, January12, 1988). We also cannot embrace the calculation of interest expensesaccording to one methodology in the case of U.S. sales (<T3>e.g., </T3>imputed interest expenses) and another methodology in thecase of home or third country sales (<T3>e.g., </T3>actual interest expense). Therefore, inventory carryingcosts and post-sale credit expenses should be calculated (1) on a sale-specificbasis, not as an allocation of total actual cash outlays and (2) the sameway for both foreign market value (including constructed value) and UnitedStates price. The Department has, therefore, followed its usual practiceand included an imputed interest expense for these items as part of sellingexpenses in constructed value, <T3>see e.g., Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value; CertainGranite Products from Italy, </T3>53 FR 27187, 27191 (July 19, 1988), andadjusted for the actual differences in the extension of credit by the firmand the time finished merchandise is maintained in inventory. <T3>See e.g., Color Televisions from Korea; Final Results of AdministrativeReview of Antidumping Duty Order, </T3>49 FR 50420, 50427, 50430 (Dec.28, 1984); <T3>Portable Electric Typewriters from Japan; Final Results of AdministrativeReview of Antidumping Order, </T3>48 FR 40761 (Sept. 9, 1983). To avoiddouble counting the portion of reported interest expense attributable toaccounts receivable and inventory carrying costs was deducted from totalinterest charges in CV. In the case of cost of production calculations, however, price discriminationand relative returns on sales are not at issue. When we calculate COP pursuantto section 773(b) of the Act, we are only interested in determining theactual costs incurred to produce the merchandise under investigation. Oncethose costs have been determined, the Department compares them with therevenue generated from the sale of the merchandise in the home or thirdcountry market to determine whether, in fact, these sales have been madeat below cost. <T3>See </T3>19 CFR 353.7. Because we are not comparing COP to United Statessales, there is no need to measure the actual differences that may or maynot exist between home market or third country selling expenses and U.S.selling expenses. Therefore, the methodology which leads us to impute interestexpenses when making fair value comparisons is simply not present whencalculating COP. As we explained in <T3>Color Television Receivers from Korea; Final Results of AntidumpingDuty Administrative Review, </T3>53 FR 24975, 24977 (July 1, 1988):<ITAG tagnum="21">In a cost of production calculation, we are not concerned with costsin the same way we are where there are differences in circumstances ofsale and adjustments must be made in order to compare U.S. and home marketprices on an `apple-to-apple' basis. Therefore, whether imputed costs usedfor a circumstance of sale adjustment are higher or lower than respondents'actual financing costs is not relevant for purposes of determining costof production.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20"/><T3>Id. </T3>at 24977.In certain recent final antidumping duty determinations, the Departmentdid not apply this methodology. <T3>See e.g., Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value; CertainInternal Combustion, Industrial Forklift Trucks from Japan, </T3>53 FR12552, 12555 (April 15, 1988). After extensive consideration of this issue,and after reviewing the lengthy comments of the parties at the hearingand in their written briefs, we have determined to follow the methodologyoutlined in the Korean TV determination. Comment 8 Respondent maintains that the Department should limit its COP/CV calculationto the 1987 and 1988 ATV models for which Honda supplied full and completecost information. Respondent contends that it would have been enormouslydifficult, if not impossible, to report cost information for pre-1987 models.Petitioner urges the Department to reject this claim. It contends thatthe COP/CV for pre-1987 models should be based on the cost to produce currentmodels as the best information available. DOC Position During the period of investigation, Honda sold in the United States ATVsproduced for the model years 1983-1988. Honda only provided cost of productioninformation for 1987 and 1988 models, which accounted for about 90 percentof Honda's sales to the U.S. during the period of investigation. Lackingcost data for the pre-1987 models, we were unable to determine whetheror not these models were sold below their cost of production. Therefore,as noted above, for best information available pursuant to section 776(c)of the Act, we have assigned to Honda's sales of pre-1987 models sold inboth the Canadian and U.S. markets, the highest margin indicated for Hondain the petition.Yamaha Comment 9 The petitioner raises a number of questions regarding the validity of theprocessing standards developed from a processing time study which Yamahafailed to retain in its records. The respondent argues that it is impractical to maintain records of allthe time studies on which the standards are based due to the large numberof finished products and the number of parts and processing steps involvedto produce ATVs. Respondent claims that since the variances among productsin the motorcycle factories did not significantly differ, the standardsmust be fairly accurate to approximate actual costs so closely.DOC PositionAt verification: (1) The methodology for developing the standard costs,(2) the elements (i.e., depreciation, labor) of the standard costs, (3)the relationship of the standard costs to budgeted costs and (4) the useof the standard costs in YMC's normal accounting system, were tested. Wedetermined that sufficient information was available to support the reasonablenessof these processing standards. Comment 10The petitioner argues that adjusting standard costs for a single monthby an annual variance is not an acceptable method for arriving at actualcosts. It is not acceptable for Yamaha to submit costs only for the monthof March, which is outside the period of investigation. The respondent argues that Yamaha does not maintain a product-specific/assemblyline ATV variance in its normal accounting practice. Yamaha uses full-year,rather than semi-annual variances because of the stability of actual materialprices during the fiscal year, and because supplier rebates are includedonly in the full-year variance. DOC PositionShinba, Yamaha's related assembly plant, only accumulates product-specificcosts during the month of March. Therefore, to facilitate verification,we accepted Yamaha's March standard cost information, which incorporatedthe cost data for Shinba. However, we also examined Yamaha's cost informationfor several months within the period of investigation to ensure that Marchstandard costs were representative of cost standards during the periodof investigation, and were not significantly higher, lower, or otherwisemisleading. Since March standard costs were determined to be representativeof the full 1988 fiscal year, applying the annual variance to those standardsprovides an accurate representation of the actual costs incurred. Comment 11The petitioner argues that use of factory-wide variance distorts the adjustmentfrom standard costs to actual costs. The respondent argues that there is little deviation from using a factory-widevariance instead of product-specific variances which the factory does notmaintain. When Yamaha repurchases the fully-assembled ATV from Shinba,it reports the assembly cost as its cost of goods sold. Thus, the companyfeels that it is unnecessary to calculate a product-specific variance forATV engines.DOC PositionAlthough we agree with the petitioner that product-specific variances wouldbe desirable, we verified that the respondent used a weighted average ofthe finished product variances within the factory, and therefore are satisfiedthat a factory-wide variance is an acceptable alternative. Comment 12The respondent argues that in order to support the ``market value'' ofcomponents obtained from related companies, it submitted adequate componentcost information during verification which demonstrated that major componentswere purchased by Yamaha at prices above their costs. DOC Position We verified the cost of production of a number of major components at tworelated suppliers, and determined that costs were below the transfer priceto Yamaha. Comment 13The respondent contends that it has adequately clarified that both thenet loss on disposal of fixed assets and net interest expenses are includedin the general and administrative expenses provided in Shinba's cost response.DOC PositionWe agree. During verification we identified these items as part of generaland administrative expenses. Comment 14The petitioner argues that Yamaha did not provide a sufficient reason fornot submitting Shinba's processing costs for models produced in 1987.The respondent argues that it was justified in using actual 1988 processingcosts as the basis of costs for both 1987 and 1988 model year units. Sincethe company does not develop information on assembly costs for particularmodels, the respondent would have had to calculate the cost of productionfor the year ended March 31, 1987 by developing assembly time for eachmodel produced in 1987. Due to the enormous difficulty of these calculations,the company used 1988 costs as a substitute. DOC PositionWe verified the use of the assembly time study and the fiscal year 1988processing costs used for the 1987 costs, and determined that fiscal year1988 processing data provided an acceptable basis upon which to calculate1987 processing costs. Comment 15The respondent argues that the omission of certain items from the generalexpenses of the two related suppliers which were reviewed, and the variousmethodologies used to allocate general expenses to product lines, are notissues for consideration since these items have no impact on the investigation.For the submission, Yamaha used an aggregate general expense ratio, whichresults in figures similar to the actual general expenses. DOC PositionWe determined that calculating general expenses using an aggregate generalexpense ratio produces virtually the same results as using actual generalexpenses. Therefore, no adjustment was made to the data in the questionnaireresponse. Comment 16The petitioner argues that material costs transferred to Shinba are basedsolely on the standard costs in Yamaha's inventory system, and that Yamahahas made no attempt to reconcile these standard costs to Shinba's actualcosts or to include related variances. Thus, the petitioner believes thesubmitted costs are not Yamaha's actual costs. The respondent argues that products transferred to Shinba for incorporationinto a finished ATV are ultimately recorded in its costs of goods soldat the fully-assembled transfer price. For the purposes of Shinba's costaccounting system, as an independent accounting entity, it is impossibleto pass through variances as in the case of the accounting methodologyused for the so-called independent factories within Yamaha itself.DOC PositionAlthough the engines were transferred to Shinba at standard cost, we verifiedthe actual cost of the engines, which capture the variances. It is theactual costs that are included in the Department's COP calculation. Comment 17The petitioner argues that the per-unit standard times used in the calculationof Shinba's processing costs were not reconciled to total actual hoursworked; therefore, the processing costs in the submission do not necessarilyrepresent fully-absorbed, actual costs. The respondent argues that it was not necessary to reconcile the per-unitstandard times to the total actual hours worked since the basis of theper-second labor cost includes total labor costs, which includes the amountfor total actual hours worked.DOC PositionThe Department verified the components included in the per-unit standardtime calculation. One of the components verified was actual labor costs,including actual total hours worked. Therefore, if these costs were dividedby standard hours, the full costs would be absorbed. Comment 18The petitioner argues that since Yamaha could identify those supplier penaltiesrelated to ATVs, it could have identified a separate materials-purchasevariance for ATVs. The respondent argues that supplier penalties are accumulated in a specificaccount and paid on a supplier-by-supplier basis. Isolating ATV-specificpenalties is relatively easy. The materials variance is much more complex,and includes more than supplier rebates, such as the pass-through of variancesfrom Yamaha's other factories. DOC PositionWe verified the calculation of the ratio of supplier penalties relatingto ATVs to the cost of ATVs sold to determine the amount for supplier penaltiesincluded in general and administrative expenses. After viewing the productionprocess, we agree that the respondent cannot isolate a product specificassembly line variance, even though it may maintain specific records pertainingto supplier penalties. Comment 19Respondent contends that the use of imputed interest rather than actualshort term interest in calculating COP and CV is illogical and contraryto law. The Department should follow its prior decisions that reflect apreference for actual interest expenses over imputed costs. Furthermore,Yamaha argues that the use of imputed interest in the CV calculation unlawfullyinflates the statutory eight percent minimum amount for profit. If theDepartment insists on using imputed interest expenses, it should accountfor the revenue that would have been generated by unused capital. DOC PositionBecause a sufficient number of Yamaha's Canadian sales were determinedto be above COP, we did not base its foreign market value upon CV. Therefore,respondent's comments with respect to the propriety of utilizing so-called``imputed'' interest expenses in CV are moot.Regarding the use of imputed interest expenses in COP, we explain in responseto Honda's comment 7 that the Department based inventory carrying costsand post-sale credit expenses upon each respondent's financial statementsand records. Comment 20Respondent urges the Department to continue its decision from the preliminarydetermination and exclude from the fair value comparison all non-standardsales and sales of models with no corresponding Canadian models. Due tothe burden placed on the respondent and the extremely small amount of salesinvolved, the Department should not produce calculations for the handfulof accommodation sales, barter sales, promotional sales, sales of damagedmerchandise, so-called ``safety-education sales'', and sales of repossessedmodels. DOC PositionWe have determined that an adequate number of comparisons are possibleby limiting comparisons to those models which were sold in both the U.S.and Canadian markets. Due to the nature of the ``non-standard'' sales itis difficult and time consuming to find matches between the U.S. and Canadianmarkets. For administrative convenience, we have omitted these comparisons.Furthermore, the quantity of such sales is quite small compared to respondent'stotal U.S. sales. Therefore, we do not believe that omitting comparisonson non-standard sales has any significant effect on our margin calculations.Comment 21Respondent also contends that several hundred sales of three-wheel ATVsduring the period of investigation should be excluded from the Department'sfair value comparison.DOC PositionWe disagree. See our response to Honda's comment 6, above. Comment 22Petitioner contends that since information regarding the deduction of corporateincome tax from Yamaha's Canadian indirect selling expenses was submittedafter the preliminary determination, it should be rejected as untimely.DOC PositionThe information submitted by Yamaha regarding the deduction of corporateincome tax from Canadian indirect selling expenses was verified by theDepartment and was used for this final determination.Suzuki  Comment 23  The petitioner argues that transfer prices for parts purchased from relatedsuppliers should not be reduced by a percentage based on the related supplier'soverall profit. The petitioner argues that the actual profit or loss onthe ATV parts may be entirely different from this average.  DOC Position  The respondent provided neither market price nor cost of production datafor parts purchased from related suppliers. Consequently, no documentationwas available to support the amount of profit deducted by the respondentin adjusting related supplier transfer prices to actual cost. We, therefore,disallowed the company's profit adjustment on parts received from relatedsuppliers.  Comment 24  The petitioner argues that the methodology used to compute variance ratiosat the processing department level was questionable. It argues that varianceratios should have been computed at the motorcycle group level insteadof on a company-wide basis.  DOC Position  The Department was unable to verify variance ratios at the product divisionlevel since Suzuki's variance statistics are only kept by the processingdepartment at the company level, rather than the division level.  Comment 25  The petitioner argues that general Randamp;D, Randamp;D for future ATV models,and Randamp;D related to new safety features for ATVs, should have been includedin the COP for purposes of the final determination.  DOC Position  We agree. Randamp;D for general ATV purposes, for future development, andfor new safety features, are all related to ATV production and were includedin our calculation of COP.  Comment 26  The petitioner argues that Gandamp;A expenses should not be expressed asa ratio of sales revenue and then applied to the cost of manufacture ona per-unit basis.  DOC Position  Because Suzuki does not record cost of sales data on a product-specificbasis, we were unable to verify the actual cost of sales for the ATVs underinvestigation using this method. As an altlernative procedure, we comparedthe company's submitted ratio of general expenses to actual ATV sales tothe ratio of general expenses to standard cost of sales for ATVs. The tworatios were approximately equal. We, therefore, accepted the company'sratio.  Comment 27  The petitioner argues that legal expenses incurred by the respondent inorder to defend itself against the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commissionshould be included in indirect selling expenses and not in Gandamp;A expenses. DOC Position  The legal expenses are not considered related to the actual sale of theproduct and thus should be included in Gandamp;A expenses and not as an indirectselling expense.  Comment 28  The petitioner argues that all interest income should be ignored for thepurpose of calculating cost of production for the following reason: a)Information on interest income on a consolidated basis was not providedat verification; and b) long-term interest income should be consideredrelated to investments rather than to the general operations of the company. DOC Position  We agree. Interest income was not used as an offset to the interest expenseincluded in the submission.  Comment 29  The petitioner argues that long-term interest expense should be includedin the cost of production because it is related to the financing of plantand equipment and, as such, is clearly related to the production of ATVs. DOC Position We agree. We have included long-term interest expense in our cost of productioncalculation.  Comment 30  The respondent contends that the Department should not use a sale-by-saleinterest expense for inventory carrying costs and post-sale credit expensesin its calculation of COP and CV. Citing U.S. Department of Commerce, <T3>Treatment of Opportunity Costs in COP Cases, </T3>Policy Paper No.16 (1982) and U.S. Department of Commerce, <T3>Summary of COP and Constructed Value Principles, </T3>Policy PaperNo. 47 (1982), respondent argues that the Department has explicitly repudiatedthe use of imputed or ``opportunity'' costs in either COP and CV.  The petitioner states that it is essential for the Department to includeso-called ``imputed'' interest expenses in the COP and CV calculations.In order to measure accurately the relative returns obtained by Honda,the petitioner argues that the Department must calculate credit and inventorycarrying expenses on a sale-specific basis. The petitioner further statesthat the use of sale-specific data is consistent with generally acceptedaccounting principles.  DOC Position  As we explain in response to Yamaha's comment 19 and Honda's comment 7,we based our calculation of interest expenses in COP upon the books andrecords of each respondent. Since Suzuki's foreign market value was basedupon Canadian selling prices, its comment with respect to CV is moot. Comment 31  The respondent contends that its sales of model LT125 in the United Statesduring the period of investigation were close-out sales which should notbe included in the department's fair value comparison. Since Suzuki's salesof other models provide a more than adequate sample of U.S. sales, salesof the obsolete model should not be included.DOC Position  We disagree. See our response to Honda's comment 6.  Comment 32  The petitioner argues that ATVs produced in the United States in a ForeignTrade Zone from both imported and domestic parts should be subject to antidumpingduties.  DOC Position  We disagree. The completed ATVs produced by Kawasaki at its Lincoln, Nebraskafacility are considered to be domestic products and therefore not subjectto antidumping duties.  Comment 33  Suzuki argues that in calculating exporter's sales price, Suzuki's motorcycleincentive program should be disregarded as that program was totally unrelatedto the ATVs subject to investigation. Petitioner argues that rebates onATVs as a result of this program should be deducted by the Department incalculating United States price.  DOC Position  We disagree with respondent and agree with petitioner. The incentive programin question provided, among other things, that retailers would be paida rebate on certain ATV purchases by dealers if the dealer's purchasesof certain motorcycles exceeded certain levels. Respondent argues thatat the time of sale of any given ATV, respondent did not know whether thatparticular unit would qualify for the rebate. Regardless of whether Suzukiknew that a particular ATV sale would qualify for the rebate, Suzuki didknow that the sale was potentially eligible for the rebate and this potentialwas built into Suzuki's price structure. We therefore have deducted theserebates in the calculation of United States price.  Comment 34  The petitioner argues that the ``viability test'' (the determination ofwhich market on which to base the calculation of foreign market value)should be made by comparing above-cost Canadian sales to all Canadian sales,with viability being established at ten percent. Alternatively, petitionerargues that above-cost Canadian sales be compared to all third countrysales with viability being established at five percent. Petitioner additionallyargues that above-cost Canadian sales must exceed five percent of totalU.S. sales in order to meet the viability test.  DOC Position  We partially agree with petitioner. As noted above, we have determinedthat none of the respondents had a viable home market because their homemarket sales did not exceed five percent of their sales to third countries.We also determined that for each respondent the only viable third countrymarket was Canada. When we compared the respondents' net selling pricesto Canada with cost of production, we found that for Yamaha and Suzuki,more than 10 percent of their Canadian sales were above their cost of production.We therefore based foreign market value for Yamaha and Suzuki on theirabove-cost Canadian sales. Once this 10 percent threshold is reached, however,we disagree with petitioner's contention that we should then redetermineviability by comparing the amount of above-cost Canadian sales to the amountof sales in the U.S.  Continuation of Suspension of Liquidation  We are directing the U.S. Customs Service to continue to suspend liquidationof all entries of certain ATVs from Japan, as defined in the ``Scope ofInvestigation'' section of this notice, that are entered or withdrawn fromwarehouse, for consumption, on or after the date of publication of thisnotice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The U.S. Customs Service shall continue to requirea cash deposit or posting of a bond equal to the estimated amounts by whichthe foreign market value of the ATVs from Japan exceeds the United Statesprice, as shown below. This suspension of liquidation will remain in effectuntil further notice. The weighted-average margins are as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L0,tp0,p6,8/9,g1,t1,i1,s20,9  </C> <H1> </H1><H1/><T3>Weighted-average margin percentage</T3>  Manufacturer/producer/exporter:  <ITAG tagnum="3">Honda Motor Co., Ltd</ITAG><D>32.89  </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Yamaha Motor Co., Ltd</ITAG><D>8.47  </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Suzuki Motor Co., Ltd</ITAG><D>14.11  </D><ITAG tagnum="3">Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd</ITAG><D>35.43  </D><ITAG tagnum="3">All Others</ITAG><D>24-59</D></ITAG>  <ITAG tagnum="84">ITC Notification  </ITAG>In accordance with section 735(d) of the Act, we have notified the ITCof our determination. In addition, we are making available to the ITC allnonprivileged and nonproprietary information relating to this investigation.We will allow the ITC access to all privileged and business proprietaryinformation in our files, provided the ITC confirms that it will not disclosesuch information, either publicly or under administrative protective ortder,without the written consent of the Assistant Secretary for Import Administration. If the ITC will determine that material injury, or threat of material injury,does not exist, this proceeding will be terminated and all securities postedas a result of the suspension of liquidation will be refunded or cancelled.However, if the ITC determines that such injury does exist, the Departmentwill issue an antidumping duty order on ATVs from Japan entered, or withdrawnfrom warehouse, for consumption after the suspension of liquidation, equalto the amount by which the foreign market value exceeds the United Statesprice.  This determination is published pursuant to section 735(d) of the Act (19U.S.C. 1673d(d)).  <ITAG tagnum="6">Jan. W. Mares,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Import Administration.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="34">January 25, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-2220 Filed 1-30-89; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-DS-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>