<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89823-0116 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-23-89.f2.A1115</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 162 / Wednesday, August 23, 1989/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Demonstration Project; Department of Agriculture</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Personnel Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of a proposed demonstration project.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Title VI of the Civil Service Reform Act authorizes theOffice of Personnel Management (OPM) to conduct demonstration projectswhich experiment with new and different personnel management concepts todetermine whether such changes in personnel policy or procedure would resultin improved Federal personnel management. This notice meets the legal requirementunder Title VI that OPM publish a project plan in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> before conducting, or entering into any contractor agreement to conduct, a demonstration project.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2><T3>Comment date: </T3>To be considered, written comments must be receivedon or before October 23, 1989. <T3>Hearing date:</T3> A public hearing will be held on the proposed planon October 18, 1989, at the Jefferson Auditorium, U.S. Department of Agriculture,South Building, 14th and Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC, beginningat 10:00 a.m.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comment address: Written comments may be addressedto Donna Beecher, Assistant Director for Systems Innovation and Simplification,U.S. Office of Personnel Management, 1900 E Street NW., Room 7638, Washington,DC 20415. Public hearing address: Jefferson Auditorium, U.S. Departmentof Agriculture, South Building, 14th and Independence Avenue SW., Washington,DC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>(1) On proposed demonstrationproject and public hearing: Mary Ellen Recchia, U.S. Department of Agriculture,(202) 447-8580; (2) on proposed demonstration project, Paul R. Thompson,Office of Personnel Management, (202) 632-6164.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On proposed demonstration project:the Department of Agriculture has submitted a proposed demonstration projectfor consideration under chapter 47 of title 5, U.S. Code entitled ``TheU.S. Department of Agriculture Demonstration Project.''The purpose of the project is to demonstrate a flexible and responsivestaffing system which will permit managers to attain a quality workforcereflective of society. To this end, the demonstration project tests fourmajor innovations in current personnel policy and practice:(1) Delegation of authority for the day-to-day recruitment and hiring processto the agency for internal redelegation, as appropriate;(2) A streamlined candidate assessment and selection process, based ongreater delegation of direct hire authority and replacement of numericalratings with broad quality groupings;(3) Recruitment incentives, including bonuses and relocation expenses,to attract candidates to hard-to-fill positions; and(4) Establishment of a 2-3 year provisional appointment, to provide greateropportunity to evaluate employee performance before granting career status.The demonstation project will cover up to 5000 newly hired employees, atany given time, at over 130 locations within the Forest Service and theAgricultural Research Service. Covered employees will represent all occupationalgroups and grade levels (excluding SES) at the project sites, includingboth General Schedule (GS) and Federal Wage System (FWS) employees.On public hearing: A public hearing will be conducted by OPM at the Departmentof Agriculture in Washington, DC on October 18, 1989. At this time, interestedpersons or organizations may present their written or oral comments onthe proposed demonstration project. The hearing will be informal. However,anyone wishing to testify should contact the person listed under ``<T2>For Further Information Contact</T2>,'' so that OPM can plan the hearingand provide sufficient time for all interested persons and organizationsto be heard. Priority will be given to those on the schedule, with othersspeaking in any remaining available time. Each speaker's presentation willbe limited to 10 minutes. The hearing record will be left open two weeks,until November 1, 1989, to receive additional written data, comments, andarguments from hearing participants.<ITAG tagnum="20">U.S. Office of Personnel Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Constance B. Newman,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director.</ITAG>The plan for the proposed demonstration project reads as follows:<ITAG tagnum="74">U.S. Department of Agriculture, Demonstration Project_Project Plan</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">Table of Contents</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">I. Executive Summary</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">II. Introduction</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">A. Purpose</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B. Problems with the Present System</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">C. Benefits to be Derived from the Project</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">D. Participating Organizations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">E. Types and Numbers of Participating Employees</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">III. Methodology</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">A. Objective andplusmin;1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B. Objective andplusmin;2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">IV. Training</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">V. Cost/Benefit Analysis</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">VI. Duration of the Project</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">VII. Evaluation Plan</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Table 1: Expected Effects, Measures, Data Sources</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">VIII. Experimental Design</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix A: Required Waivers to Law and Regulation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Appendix B: Experimental and Comparison Sites </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Executive Summary</ITAG>A. PurposeThe purpose of this demonstration project is to develop a recruitment andselection program for new hires that is flexible and responsive to localrecruitment needs and which will facilitate the attainment of a qualityworkforce reflective of society.In support of this goal, the following project objectives have been identified:(1) Increase the flexibility and responsiveness of the recruitment andhiring system.(2) Increase the reliability of the decision to grant career tenure.During the course of this project, the following interventions will betested:(a) Decentralize the decision to authorize direct hire in shortage categories.(b) Establish an alternative candidate assessment method which uses categoricalgrouping instead of numeric score.(c) Provide monetary incentives for recruitment purposes.(d) Reimburse travel and transportation expenses beyond those currentlyauthorized for travel to first post of duty.(e) Make initial appointments on a provisional basis, with career tenureearned through on-the-job performance.B. Benefits To Be Derived From the ProjectThe combined changes are expected to simplify the hiring system, and toimprove the ability of the agency to compete for quality candidates, reflectiveof society.C. Project AdministrationThe project is a joint effort on the part of the U.S. Department of AgricultureOffice of Personnel, the Agricultural Research Service, and the ForestService. The project will be guided by an Executive Steering Committeeand conducted through a project task group. Representatives from the Officeof Personnel, the Agricultural Research Service, and the Forest Service,will serve on both the steering committee and the task group, reflectingthe joint nature of the project.D. Participating OrganizationsThe demonstration project will be conducted entirely within the AgriculturalResearch Service and the Forest Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture,at selected experimental and comparison sites, which have been listed inAppendix B. These sites may be subject to change prior to final implementation.E. Types and Numbers of Participating EmployeesDemonstration project coverage is limited to 500 employees hired underproject provisions and currently serving under a provisional appointmentor receiving a recruitment incentive. Since the project covers only prospectivenew hires, the occupational mix of participating employees cannot be identifiedprecisely. Based on historical staffing patterns at the participating sites,it is anticipated that the annual breakdown of new hires will include thefollowing approximate percentages for each of the participating agencies:<ITAG tagnum="15">Agricultural Research Service: 17% scientific, 9% professional, 11%administrative, 36% technical, and 27% clerical and wage grade.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Forest Service: 2% scientific, 18% professional, 8% administrative,43% technical, and 29% clerical and wage grade.</ITAG>The most populous occupational series at the Agricultural Research Serviceinclude biological technician, entomologist, plant physiologist, and chemist.The most populous occupational series at the Forest Service include forester,forestry technician, engineering technician, and civil engineer.F. Labor ParticipationAgricultural Research Service employees are represented at various experimentallocations by the American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE) andthe National Federation of Federal Employees (NFFE); Forest Service employeesare also represented by both AFGE and NFFE and by the National Associationof Government Employees (NAGE).Briefings will be conducted by both agencies during the developmental stageof the project. In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 4703 (f) and (g), the agencieswill consult and negotiate, as appropriate, with employees and labor organizationsbefore publication of the final project plan.G. MethodologyThis proposal provides a detailed description of the following interventions,or personnel system changes, to be tested and evaluated during the lifeof the project: (1) Delegated direct hire authority; (2) an alternativecandidate assessment method; (3) recruitment incentives; (4) payment oftravel and transportation expenses; and (5) a provisional appointment system.H. TrainingA comprehensive training effort will be accomplished prior to project implementationin order to ensure that project interventions are implemented as originallyconceived.I. Evaluation PlanA preliminary evaluation plan has been designed for the purpose of measuringthe outcomes expected to result from project implementation. The scopeof the evaluation plan is intended to provide sufficient data to evaluatethe Federal sector-wide applicability of each of the interventions.The evaluation model is part of a quasi-experimental design using experimentaland comparison groups matched for characteristics but not necessarily forpopulation numbers. The model will provide statistical and historical dataregarding the effects attributable to the experiemental treatments. Baselinedata collection will occur pre-treatment, and data will be collected duringthe post-treatment period for comparison and analysis.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Introduction</ITAG>A. PurposeThe project was conceived in response to managerial concern with the adequacyof the present recruiting and hiring system in light of the predicted recruitmentchallenges of the future, which have been described in recent publicationsincluding Workforce 2000, and Civil Service 2000, which were prepared bythe Hudson Institute for the Department of Labor and The Office of PersonnelManagement, respectively. The purpose of this project is to develop andtest an alternative system which will enable Federal managers to meet thesechallenges.Workforce 2000 outlines an employment future characterized by a slowlygrowing population, which will result in slower labor force growth. This,in turn, is expected to result in tighter labor markets, with fewer well-educatedworkers available, and increased competition among employers for availablecandidates.Civil Service 2000 provides the following analysis of the impact of thesetrends within the Federal sector: ``Because these tight labor markets arelikely to develop in different ways in different states and to shift quicklyin response to economic and population changes, it is essential to decentralizeresponsibility and to provide more flexibility in hiring and personnelmanagement than is characteristic of the current system. Federal employersin locally tight or expensive labor markets must be able to compete forworkers on a par with private employers if they are to continue to fulfilltheir responsibilities'' (page 27).This publication goes on to describe a slowly emerging crisis of competence,as labor markets become tighter and it becomes increasingly more difficultto hire qualified workers. The competition for qualified workers will onlyintensify, for coupled with slower labor force growth is the fact thatsubstantial numbers of new entrants to the labor market will have lowerlevels of competence in language, math, and other basic skills. The inabilityof Federal agencies to adapt as easily as private employers to fluctuatinglabor market conditions means that, ``* * * some of them will be unableto compete successfully with the private sector, and may find it much harderto recruit and keep good employees'' (page 30).It is imperative that Federal managers and others in positions of responsibilityprepare to meet the recruitment challenges of the future. This projectwas developed as part of a continuing effort to anticipate and successfullyconfront these challenges. The strategies and recommendations providedby Workforce 2000, Civil Service 2000, and other publications providedguidance and direction as we developed this project. It is our intentionto evaluate the demonstration project in order to determine the extentto which each intervention impacts the recruitment and hiring program.It is anticipated that an alternative recruitment and hiring system, offeringexpanded incentives for recruitment purposes, will enable Federal managersto more readily adapt to fluctuating labor market conditions. In addition,the level of performance demonstrated by those hired under the new systemis expected to be equal to the level of performance demonstrated by employeeshired through traditional methods.B. Problems With the Present SystemThe current method of employee intake, through centralized testing, assumesa surplus of applicants for available positions within the Federal sector,with a concomitant emphasis on the stratification process required to providemanageable rosters of best qualified candidates from among the numerousapplicants for a given position vacancy.In reality, however, the manner in which changing demographics have fundamentallyaltered the American labor force has been well documented in the publicationscited above. As the population ages and technological innovation accelerates,shortages of qualified candidates either already exist or are predictedto develop in a wide variety of occupations. Trend lines indicate an exacerbationof this problem. Simply stated, the supply/demand curve for labor resourcesno longer reflects an excess of supply but, rather, an almost insatiabledemand for well-trained, quality candidates.For example, the Forest Service has been recruiting candidates with backgroundsin engineering research combined with a knowledge of wood technology. Thesecandidates are in exceedingly short supply; the few meeting these criteriaare found either in academia, or conducting research in private wood technologyfirms. Experience has shown that potential candidates have been lost tocompeting employers who can more quickly make position offers and establishreporting dates.As another example, the Agricultural Research Service has advertised aGS-13 Plant Geneticist position at a remote location on two separate occasionsduring the past year and received only two applications. Neither applicantpossessed the highly specialized skills necessary to perform the dutiesof the position. The availability of recruitment incentives might haveenhanced the ability of the agency to attract qualified candidates to thislocation.C. Benefits To Be Derived From the ProjectThe demonstration system is expected to simplify the selection and appointmentof candidates to the Federal service. Additionally, the system is expectedto improve the ability of agencies to compete with other public employersand private industry for available quality candidates. D. Participating Organizations Agricultural Research Service and Forest Service experimental and comparisonsites are identified in Appendix B. These sites may be subject to changeprior to final implementation. E. Types and Numbers of Participating Employees Demonstration project coverage is limited to permanent new hires receivingprovisional appointment to the competitive service at the experimentalsites identified in Appendix B whose appointments fall within the followingcategories: First permanent competitive Federal appointment, and appointmentscurrently made under Schedule B PAC or future equivalent. Excluded from coverage are candidates who transfer from other Federal agencies;candidates whose initial appointments confer noncompetitive conversioneligibility (other than Schedule B PAC), e.g., appointments through cooperativeeducation programs, Veterans Readjustment appointments, etc.; and candidatesfor positions for which direct hire authorized by OPM is in effect at anytime during the life of the project. Candidates with reinstatement eligibility as currently defined by regulationmay continue to be noncompetitively appointed under the reinstatement authority.At the discretion of the selecting official, however, these candidatesas well as candidates eligible for any of the appointment types listedunder exclusions, above, may be considered for competitive appointmentunder the demonstration project authority and all provisions pertainingthereto. Candidates for appointment to the Senior Executive Service or under theExecutive Assignment System are excluded from coverage. Demonstration project coverage is extended to General Schedule (GS), FederalWage System (FWS), and Performance Management and Recognition System (PMRS)employees, regardless of occupational series.The rate at which the number of accessions approaches the regulatory limitationof 5,000 employees to be covered under this authority will be centrallymonitored throughout the test sites. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Methodology </ITAG>A. Objective andplusmin;1: Increase the Flexibility and Responsivenss ofthe Recruitment and Hiring System <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Interventions </ITAG>(a) Decentralize the decision to authorize direct hire in shortage categories.(b) Establish an alternative candidate assessment method which uses categoricalgrouping instead of numeric score. (c) Provide monetary incentives for recruitment purposes.(d) Reimburse travel and transportation expenses beyond those currentlyauthorized for travel to first post of duty. Interventions (a) and (b), and (c) and (d), will be discussed separatelyin the sections that follow. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Description of Interventions (a) and (b) </ITAG><T3>A. Introduction. </T3>Civil Service 2000 recommends a number of strategiesfor attracting, hiring, training, motivating, and keeping talented people.Chief among these is the following: ``Decentralize authority and responsibilityfor operations and hiring * * * Standardized recruiting, testing, competition,classification, and pay should give way to decentralized personnel management,giving agency managers full responsibility not only for their missions,but for the human resources they need to accomplish them * * *'' (page32). The concept of decentralized authority and full responsibility for humanresources is fundamental to this project. The alternative system is foundedupon the assumption that centralized registers no longer meet local hiringneeds and that a level of qualifications can be established at which allcandidates meeting this level are well qualified. Selection will be madefrom this group following the normal candidate evaluation process, whichmay include such additional measures as personal interview, reference checks,etc. The experimental sites will have examining authority for all of their positions.The elimination of centralized registers which establish fine distinctionsamong candidates will be balanced by an increased emphasis on the responsibilityand accountability of managers for ensuring that selection and advancementare determined on the basis of the ability, knowledge, and skills necessaryto perform the duties of the position.This system is expected to produce a workforce equal to that which hasbeen obtained through traditional testing and examining, without compromisingthe merit system principles, outlined in 5 U.S.C. 2301, which stipulatethat, ``* * * Recruitment should be from qualified individuals from appropriatesources in an effort to achieve a workforce from all segments of society,and selection and advancement should be determined solely on the basisof relative ability, knowledge, and skills, after fair and open competitionwhich assures that all receive equal opportunity.'' Fair and open competition will be provided by the proposed system as follows:(1) All candidates (other than those eligible for appointment under thedirect hire option) will be considered against the same job-related evaluationcriteria for the purpose of placing candidates in the quality group. (2) All candidates meeting these criteria will be available for selection,taking veterans preference into account. Candidates who do not meet thesecriteria are available for selection when there is an inadequate numberof candidates in the quality group. (3) Candidates will no longer be eliminated from consideration by the ruleof three or point score ranking.(4) Information regarding all vacancies to be filled under the demonstrationproject authority shall be made available to the appropriate State EmployementService offices and local Federal Job Information Centers. Finally, recognizing the mandate contained in title 5, U.S. Code, thatthe work force be from all segments of society, and to the extent thatthe current system may be a barrier to proportional representation of protectedgroups, the alternative system will allow managers and supervisors moredirect access to a candidate pool that is reflective of society. <T3>b. Overview of Method. </T3>Candidates eligible for appointment underthe demonstration project authority will be evaluated using the followingmethod: (1) Candidate's basic eligibility is determined using OPM Handbook X-118or modified standard, as outlined below. Questions regarding a candidate'ssuitability or general fitness to perform the duties of the position maybe resolved at this or at any stage prior to appointment.(2) Candidates meeting basic eligibility requirements are then evaluatedfor eligibility under the direct hire option, which allows candidates inshortage categories to be directly appointed. (3) All remaining candidates meeting basic eligibility requirements areevaluated against job-related evaluation criteria, outlined below, whichmeasure above average educational achievement, quality experience, andhigh ability. Candidates meeting any one of these criteria are place inthe quality group. Selection will be made from the quality group, taking into account suchfactors as personal interview or reference check, etc. Candidates not meetingany of these criteria are in the eligible group, and may only be selectedwhen there is an inadequate number of quality candidates available. Veteranspreference will apply when selecting candidates from either group. Theagency will justify the nonselection of preference eligibles. <T3>c. Recruitment Methods and Sources. </T3>The agency will identify appropriaterecruitment methods and sources in order to ensure that qualified candidatesare available for consideration. Demonstration project implementation atexperimental sites does not preclude the use of other available noncompetitiveappointing authorities intended to facilitate access to particular candidates,e.g., disabled individuals, students eligible for cooperative educationprograms, etc. The continued use of these programs is encouraged in supportof agency employment goals and objectives. Appropriate recruitment methods and sources include those that are likelyto yield candidates with knowledges, skills, or abilities sufficient toperform the duties of the position. Agencies will continue to utilize recruitmentmethods and sources which identify disabled individuals or members of protectedgroups. As no specific waivers of law or regulation are required prior to the developmentof an effective recruitment strategy, agencies will explore the use ofinnovative or creative recruitment methods and sources in order to facilitatethe attainment of a quality workforce, reflective of society. Towards thisend, agencies will take advantage, to the extent necessary, of the fullrange of telecommunications, printed, and other media in order to reacha sufficient number of qualified candidates. Recruitment and consideration of candidates under the demonstration projectauthority will be subject to the following requirements:(1) Current law and regulation concerning the Reemployment Priority List(RPL), and Displaced Employee (DE) or other outplacement programs, willbe observed. The agency is responsible for maintaining and following theregulations concerning the RPL as outlined in pertinent FPM and Departmentalguidance. No part of these regulations is waived for the purpose of thisproject.Additionally, agencies are responsible for contacting the appropriate OPMoffice concerning the referral of displaced employees prior to making competitiveappointments under the demonstration project authority, and according bonafide consideration, as appropriate, to DE or other outplacement programeligibles.(2) Information regarding all vacancies to be filled under the demonstrationproject authority regardless of source will be made available to the appropriateState Employment Service offices and local Federal Job Information Centers.Procedures for providing such notification will be established at the locallevel.Recruitment sources may include, but are not limited to, such activitiesas attendance at a job fair, career day, or professional association meeting;preparation and distribution of a vacancy announcement; on-campus recruiting;or other focused recruitment effort, etc. Procedures for the acceptanceof unsolicited or walk-in applications will be established at the locallevel.<T3>d. Determination of Basic Eligibility. </T3>A determination regardingeach candidate's basic eligibility for a particular position will be madeutilizing the standard criteria.No part of law or regulation concerning citizenship requirements, securityinvestigations, or other suitability issues is waived under this authority.Additionally, the requirement to pass any pre-employment physical, drugscreening, or other fitness for duty examination remains in effect.The determination that a candidate meets experience or education requirementswill be made using OPM Handbook X-118 or approved single-agency standards.Positive education, licensure, and professional certification requirementswill remain in effect as currently reflected in the standards unless waivedthrough some other authority.Selective placement factors may be established when judged to be criticalto successful job performance and will be communicated to all candidatesfor particular position vacancies. These must be met for basic eligibility.Test requirements as outlined in X-118 or elsewhere, including minimumtyping or stenography scores, are eliminated. Emphasis will instead beplaced on the supervisor's assessment of the candidate's ability to dothe work of the position. Supervisors may, however, continue to acceptcandidates' self-certification of typing or stenography proficiency whensuch documentation is necessary to perform an adequate assessment of basiceligibility.Agencies are authorized to modify X-118 experience requirements (otherthan positive education, professional certification, or licensure requirements)when the candidate's background includes experience which has providedthe skills and abilities necessary for successful job performance. Agenciesmay not, however, require additional amounts of education or experiencebeyond those required by the standards, other than selective placementfactors as indicated above.The decision to modify X-118 experience requirements is discretionary onthe part of the supervisor and is intended to provide management with arecruitment tool which will allow the consideration of candidates for whomX-118 might otherwise serve as a prima facie basis for exclusion. The opportunityto qualify under a modified standard, however, will be given to all candidatesbeing considered in connection with a particular position vacancy.Agencies may delegate the decision to use a modified standard to the lowestpracticable level within the organization. The decision to modify X-118requirements will be documented and placed on the right-hand or permanentside of the Official Personnel Folder.e. <T3>Candidate Evaluation. </T3>(1) <T3>Direct Hire of Individuals in Shortage Categories. </T3>Candidatesmeeting basic eligibility requirements as outlined above, and who are inshortage categories as locally determined by the agency, may be directlyappointed. Agency determination of shortage category will be made by applyingthe criteria in 5 CFR 572.301 or other factors which the agency has determinedto be significant, and may be delegated to the lowest practicable levelwithin the organization.Agency determination of shortage category may include, but is not limitedto, consideration of such factors as external or local labor market demands,extent or impact or prior recruitment efforts, critical or recurring needfor particular knowledges or skills based on chronic shortages, turbulentstate of the art, etc.A determination by one agency that a shortage of eligibles exists for aparticular title, series, grade, and geographical location does not requirea like determination by any other agency. A determination made in connectionwith one specific vacancy does not establish a precedent in connectionwith future vacancies.Agency determination of shortage category will be documented. The documentationsupporting the decision to appoint an individual under this authority willbe placed on the right-hand or permanent side of the Official PersonnelFolder.<T3>(2) Evaluation of Candidates in Non-Shortage Categories.</T3> Candidatesmeeting basic eligibility requirements as outlined above, but who are noteligible for direct hire as outlined in the section immediately preceding,may be considered for appointment against the job-related evalution criteriaoutlined below under above average educational achievement, quality experience,and high ability.All candidates, to the extent necessary, will be evaluated against eachof these criteria; that is, no candidate will be eliminated from the qualitygroup without being considered under the three criteria outlined under(a), (b), and (c), below.It is hypothesized that all employees hired through this system are equallylikely to demonstrate successful job performance, regardless of the criterionunder which the candidate qualifies.Minimum grade point averages established under above average educationalachievement or high ability, below, may be adjusted by mutual agreementbetween the participating agencies and OPM.(a) Candidates demonstrating above average educational achievement underany of the options outlined below are eligible for the quality category:1. Candidate has completed all the requirements for, or is a candidate,within nine months, for a high school diploma, or a degree from an accreditedjunior college, college, university, or other baccalaureate institution,provided he or she meets one of the requirements listed below (b. andamp;c. apply to post-high school only):a. Candidate's grade point average is at least 2.70 on a 4.0 scale or equivalent.This is either the average of all completed courses at the time of application,or the average of all courses completed during the last two years of ahigh school, college, or other four year program, in which case verificationthat the required average was maintained is prerequisite to appointment.b. Candidate's grade point average in the major field of study is at least3.0 on a 4.0 scale or equivalent. This is either the average of all completedcourses at the time of application, or the average of all courses completedduring the last two years of a four year curriculum, in which case verificationthat the required average was maintained is prerequisite to appointment.c. Candidate is a member of one of the national honorary scholastic societiesmeeting the minimum requirements of the Association of College Honor Societies,other than freshman honor societies.Applicants may not be appointed on the basis of overall grade point averageif more than 10 percent of their grades were based on pass/fail or similarsystems rather than on traditional grading systems. Such applicants mayclaim credit under this provision only on the basis of national honorarysociety membership.Candidates are required to submit an official transcript or similar correspondencedocumenting grade point average in order to establish eligibility for appointmentbased on above average educational achievement. In the event that gradepoint average has not been computed by the educational institution, anofficial transcript may provide the basis for manual computation. Transfercredits, foreign credits, and credits from more than one educational institutionmust be evaluated and included to the extent that they provided the basisfor awarding the degree or the certificate.Eligibility under this provision is awarded to candidates who have completedor who are about to complete a formal educational program culminating inthe granting of a degree. Once a candidate has completed a qualifying periodof education as outlined above, leading to the completion of a degree ora diploma, and during which a qualifying grade point average was maintained,he or she is eligible for the quality category. Additional course workhas no impact on eligibility, once established.For example, a candidate qualifying on the basis of high school grade pointaverage retains that eligibility even though he or she may go on to completeseveral more courses as part of a continuing education program. The additionalcourse work does not become part of the overall grade point average computation.However, unsuccessfully completed course work beyond the high school levelshould be factored into the decision to appoint candidates to administrative,management, specialist, or other positions for which such education wouldnormally be qualifying in lieu of experience.2. Candidate has completed all requirements for an advanced degree froman accredited institution, appropriate to the position being filled. Anadvanced degree is defined as beyond the baccalaureate , e.g., D.V.M.,M.A., Ph.D., etc. Candidate must provide certification of completion ofall degree requirements, e.g., thesis, dissertation, etc.Evaluation of candidates under this provision will take into account therelevancy of both the type <T3>and </T3>the level of education completed to the knowledges, skills,and abilities required to perform the duties of the position.Candidates are required to submit an official transcript or similar correspondencedocumenting actual course work, and grade point average, if necessary,in order to establish eligibility for appointment based on above averageeducational achievement. In the event that grade point average has notbeen computed by the educational institution, an official transcript mayprovide the basis for manual computation. Transfer credits, foreign credits,and credits from more than one educational institution must be evaluatedand included to the extent that they provided the basis for awarding thedegree.Inasmuch as eligibility under this provision requires completion of a degreeor a diploma, candidates who have completed either without meeting anyof the criteria outlined above, or who have not completed any type of degreeor diploma, will be evaluated under the criteria addressing experienceand ability outlined in (b) and (c), below.(b) Candidates who have quality experience in the field are eligible forthe quality category. Quality experience in the field is defined as directly related experience,and is differentiated from the specialized experience requirements outlinedin X-118 to the extent that it is directly related to the position to befilled, was gained in the same functional specialization, and has clearlyequipped the candidate with superior ability to perform the duties andresponsibilities of the position. The directly related experience musthave been at an acceptable level of competence in order to qualify forappointment under this provision.OPM's generic standard for two-grade interval professional positions definesspecialized experience as that, `` . . . which is in or related to theline of work of the position to be filled and which has equipped the applicantwith the specific knowledge, skills, and abilities to successfully performthe duties of the position.'' Similar language also appears in the othergeneric standards. The intent of the ``quality experience'' provision isto go beyond experience which is simply related to the line of work andfocus upon directly related experience in the same field.Assessment of individual candidates under this provision will take intoaccount the extent of the candidate's experience beyond that which is necessaryto meet basic eligibility requirements; therefore, modification of X-118qualification requirements is not an option for these candidates.Candidates currently employed in the same or a directly related occupation,either within the agency under temporary or excepted service appointments,or outside the agency in State or local government, private industry oracademia, are likely to qualify for provisional appointment leading tocareer status under this authority. For example, candidates employed inone of the private forestry operations located in the Pacific Northwestmay possess experience that is directly related to one of the specializationscovered by the forester or forestry technician standard.Candidates who have made an outstanding contribution to the state of theart or to the advancement of knowledge in a directly related field mayalso qualify under this provision. Evaluation of these candidates willbe performed by an agency subject matter expert and will focus upon extraordinaryprofessional achievement, beyond normal professional competency, whichmay include, but is not limited to, such accomplishments as the publicationof groundbreaking experimental results, authorship of seminal works inthe field, or other noteworthy achievements or credentials.Documentation regarding the extent to which the candidate's experienceexceeds that which is required for basic eligibility, or documentationof extraordinary professional achievement, will be placed on the right-handor permanent side of the Official Personnel Folder.(c) Candidates who demonstrate high ability to do the work of the positionare eligible for the quality category.The intent of this provision is to allow candidates, who do not meet criteriaestablished for above average educational achievement or quality experience,to be considered on the basis of having demonstrated high ability throughsome other means.Assessment of the candidate's high ability will utilize the following measures:1. Candidate has received a certificate or other indicator of successfulcompletion of a trade or vocational program that is directly related tothe work of the position to be filled, for positions for which this typeof education has been determined to be appropriate. Candidates must alsomeet applicable experience requirements; that is, program completion isnot a substitute for, but clearly exceeds, basic eligibility requirements.2. Candidate has a grade point average of at least 2.7 on a 4-point scale,or equivalent, for at least 24 semester hours, or equivalent, of coursework above the high school level that is directly related to the positionto be filled.f. <T3>Grouping of Eligibles. </T3>Candidates who have been evaluated againstthe criteria outlined above are grouped as follows:(1) Candidates meeting any one of the criteria outlined above are placedin the quality group.(2) Candidates who do not meet any of these criteria are placed in theeligible group.(3) Within each group, veterans will be listed ahead of nonveterans. Inaddition, for positions other than scientific and professional at GS-9and above, preference eligibles with a compensable service-connected disabilityof 10 percent or more who meet basic qualifications requirements will belisted at the top of the quality group.The quality group and/or the eligible group for a particular position vacancymay include candidates from one or more sources, provided that candidatesfrom the State Employment Service or Federal Job Information Center areincluded, as appropriate.g. <T3>Selection and Appointment. </T3>Selection will be made from among candidatesin the quality group. When an inadequate number of candidates are in thequality group, all qualified candidates from all sources will be listedas a single group.In making selections, veterans will be given preference over nonveterans.The provisions granting extra points for veterans and the rule of three(i.e., selection from the top three) will not be followed because candidateswill not be assigned points or ranked numerically within a group. However,a preference eligible may not be passed over to select a nonpreferenceeligible, except under formal objection procedures. The agency will haveauthority to act on proposals to pass over preference eligibles, includingcompensably disabled veterans, for suitability, qualifications, and otherdisqualifying reasons. To do so, the agency will follow the proceduresin title 5, United States Code.Candidates selected under the demonstration project authority will receiveprovisional appointments and may be eligible for recruitment incentives,subject to the requirements outlined below.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Description of Interventions (c) and (d)</ITAG><T3>a. Introduction. </T3>Incentives will be authorized in order to positivelyimpact the complete employment and compensation package as part of an effortto enhance the ability of the agency to compete with other employers forindividuals with desired skills. Subject to OPM approval, the agency maydecide to identify additional incentives under this authority at a futuredate. Any such additions will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.<T3>b. Method. </T3>Recruitment incentives will be authorized to encourageindividuals to enter as well as to remain with the Federal service. Thesewill include cash payments and reimbursement for travel and transportationexpenses, any combination of which may be authorized for an individualcandidate.The decision to authorize an incentive will be based upon such market factorsas salary comparability and salary offer issues; relocation considerations;programmatic urgency; emerging technologies; unique qualifications; andshortage categories.<T3>(1) Cash Payments. </T3>Cash payments as a percentage of salary areauthorized for recruitment purposes. The amount of a cash payment willbe firmly established prior to entrance on duty, and is not consideredto be a part of an individual's basic pay.Cash payments may be made either in a lump sum upon entrance on duty, incrementallyover a period not to exceed 36 months, or deferred until the completionof a specified period, not to exceed 36 months.<T3>(2) Travel and Transportation Expenses. </T3>The authority to reimbursenew appointees for travel and transporation expenses is expanded to includeall of the expenses authorized for transferred employees as outlined in5 U.S.C. 5724 and 5724a, 5724b, and 5724c. This includes payment to newappointees for such expenses as house hunting trips, sale of residence,purchase of new residence, access to relocation services, and other servicesnormally available only to transferred employees.<T3>(3) Statement of Conditions of Employment. </T3>A statement summarizingconditions of employment under which a recruitment incentive will be authorizedwill be prepared in each case, and will address the following:<ITAG tagnum="15">(a) Type of incentive(s)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">1. Cash payment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">2. Travel and transportation expenses</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(b) Total authorized percentage of salary</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(c) Method and schedule for payment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">1. Cash payment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">2. Intermittent over a period NTE 36 methods</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">3. Deferred until the end of a specified period, NTE 36 months</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(d) Service requirement</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">1. Time: 0 to 36 months</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">2. Location in which to be served</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">a. Federal service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">b. Hiring agency or subdivision thereof</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(e) Conditions for repayment or cessation of payment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">1. Repayment of lump sum not required</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">2. Intermittent payment ceases, repayment not required</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">3. Full repayment of lump sum or travel required</ITAG><T3>(4) Failure to Meet Service Requirement. </T3>Repayment of incentivesis required if the employee is separated from the location identified underconditions of employment prior to fulfilling the service requirement, unlessthe reasons for the separation are beyond the control of the employee andare acceptable to the agency. Repayment is required in all cases wherethe employee is separated for misconduct. Actions to collect repaymentmay be terminated under appropriate circumstances and in accordance with5 U.S.C. 5584.B. Objective andplusmin;2: Increase the reliability of the decision to grantcareer tenure.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Intevention</ITAG>Make initial appointments on a provisional basis, with career tenure earnedthrough on-the-job peformance.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Introduction</ITAG>The purpose of the provisional appointment is to allow managers an adequateperiod of time within which to assess job performance, and determine whetheror not to continue the employment of the individual. The provisional appointmentsystem replaces the current three-tier system of initial probationary period,career-conditional status, and career tenure, with a two-tiered systemwhich effectively extends the maximum length of the probationary period,and which provides for conversion to career tenure.The provisional appointment system will change the timeframes within whichnew hires are awarded career tenure. The formal processes required to effectthese changes will be incorporated, to the maximum extent possible, intoestablished processes and systems within the agency.Aside from extending the time period, all other features of the currentprobationary period are retained, including the potential to remove anemployee without providing the full substantive and procedural rights affordeda career employee. This creates a clear distinction between provisionaland career status. Under the experimental system the new employee's statusremains provisional until his or her performance and conduct have beenevaluated over an appropriate period of time.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Method</ITAG>Candidates hired under the demonstration project authority, as describedunder section II. E., above, Types and Numbers of Participating Employees,will be given provisional appointments to the competitive service as follows:<T3>Scientific positions: </T3>Three year provisional appointment. <T3>All others: </T3>Two year provisional appointment. To ensure that supervisors have sufficient time to make tenure decisions,provisional appointment may be extended by the amount of time spent innon-duty status, except when protected by law, e.g., credit is given fornonpay time due to compensable injury and military service. For the purpose of this subsection, provisional appointment means a permanentappointment, to the competitive service, which provides for conversionto career tenure. Scientific positions are those which are covered underthe Research Grade Evaluation Guide. A provisional appointee to the competitive service is given the full rangeof benefits provided to career-conditional employees under the currentsystem, i.e., retirement, insurance, leave, within grade increases, etc.Provisional appointees are assigned to tenure group II. Provisional appointees are eligible for training opportunities and positionchanges, subject to the time after competitive appointment requirement,in the same manner as career and career-conditional employees. Provisionalappointment is portable both within and between ARS and FS experimentalsites. Provisional appointment is not portable to non-experimental sitesor to non-participating agencies. On position change within USDA but outsidethe experimental sites, an employee is converted to career conditionalstatus. A discussion of probation and tenure follows in the next paragraph.Provisional appointees who have already been converted to career tenureremain in tenure group I upon position change, regardless of the lengthof time spent under provisional appointment. Provisional appointees are eligible for transfer to other Federal agenciesas career conditional employees. In such conversions both within and outsideof USDA, employees must serve any remaining balance of the one-year probationaryperiod. The three year period counting toward career tenure begins withthe provisional appointment. Provisional appointees who have already beenconverted to career tenure transfer as career employees, tenure group I,regardless of the length of time served under provisional appointment.Provisional appointment confers reinstatement eligibility identical tothat conferred through career conditional employment, as outlined in 5CFR 315.401. A provisional employee reinstated to a demonstration projecttest site begins a new provisional appointment. A provisional employeereinstated to either a comparison site, or to a non-participating agency,becomes a career conditional employee and must serve a one-year probationaryperiod if the employee has not completed one year of satisfactory serviceunder provisional appointment. In both cases, reinstatement is to tenuregroup II. Provisional appointees who have already been converted to careertenure, and preference eligibles, have unlimited reinstatement eligibility,regardless of the length of time served under provisional appointment.Provisional appointees will have restoration rights under 5 CFR part 353following military service or a job-related injury. They will not be eligible,however, for the reemployment rights in 5 CFR part 352 based on other servicesuch as with an international organization, as these rights are generallydiscretionary with the agency head or reserved for non-probationers. Therefore,exclusion of provisional appointees is consistent with existing policies.Completion of provisional appointment as a supervisior or manager fulfillsthe requirement to complete a supervisory probationary period. Any employee appointed prior to the implementation date of the projectwill not be affected. Present performance management systems will not beaffected, as performance standards must still be established against whichemployees will continue to be rated annually. If the agency decides to separate a provisional employee for non-RIF reasons,the agency shall follow the current procedures for separating probationaryemployees, as outlined in 5 CFR 315.804, 315.805, and 315.806. 5 CFR parts432 and 752 do not apply to an employee under a provisional appointment,regardless of the employee's length of service. If the agency must consider the employee for release from the competitivelevel under reduction in force procedures as outlined in FPM Chapter 351,provisional appointees are in tenure group II, subgroup AD, A, or B, asappropriate. They will be eligible for retained grade and pay and severancepay, as well as for the Displaced Employee Program and the ReemploymentPriority List, if requirements unrelated to appointment type are met. Formerprovisional appointees who have been converted to career tenure are intenure group I, regardless of the length of provisional appointment. On the basis of exceptional performance, the agency may choose to convertthe employee to a career appointment prior to the conclusion of the twoor three year provisional appointment. If the supervisor decides to convertthe employee to career tenure at an earlier date, documentation must beprovided in support of this decision. This documentation should addressthe employee's exceptional performance, along with any exceptional skillsor abilities demonstrated by the employee. However, the employee must serveat least one year before conversion to career tenure under provisionalappointment. The decision to convert an employee may take into account such factorsas performance, suitability, conduct, aptitude, etc., as outlined in FPMChapter 315, Subchapter 8. The decision to convert an employee in a scientificposition will also take into account the documentation of his or her researchfindings. Employees must be rated at least fully successful in order tobe converted. Four months prior to the conclusion of the provisional appointment, thesupervisor will be asked for a decision to either convert the employeeto career tenure, or to separate the employee. This does not preclude theagency from separating a provisional employee any time prior to the conclusionof the provisional appointment. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Training </ITAG>A coordinated and extensive training effort, for managers and personnelistsat both experimental and comparison sites, will be conducted prior to projectimplementation. The purpose of the training is to ensure that the experimentalinterventions are implemented as originally conceived, and that the intentof all interventions, policies, and procedures developed in connectionwith the project are clearly communicated to all managers, supervisors,employees, and others affected by project implementation. Training will be conducted prior to implementation to ensure that managersand personnelists understand not only the internal and standard operatingprocedures established in connection with the project but also the expandedrole of the personnelist in providing management advisory services.  Training and orientation will include the following major elements: 1. An in-depth description of each of the project interventions, includingphilosophy and expected effects; 2. A detailed outline of the policies and procedures established in supportof each intervention; and, 3. An overview of the project evaluation effort, including the methodsthrough which data collection will be accomplished. To the extent that the continuing success of the project is a functionof the adequacy of the training effort, periodic refresher training sessionsare planned for the purpose of ensuring that experimental interventionscontinue to be implemented as originally conceived. As the system was designedto increase managerial and supervisory accountability for the success ofthe recruitment and hiring program, a training effort particularly directedat managers and supervisors is critical to implementation. More specifically focused and ad hoc training modules will be developedas additional training needs are identified throughout the life of theproject. <ITAG tagnum="84">V. Cost/Benefit Analysis </ITAG>The experimental modifications are expected to be budget neutral. Currentdecentralized policies and procedures regarding the expenditure of agencyfunds will be retained. No additional funding will be requested; all costswill be charged to available funds through existing appropriations, includingthose incurred in the areas of project development, training, and projectevaluation. No additional costs are expected to accrue to the implementation of thealternative recruitment and hiring, the provisional appointment, or therecruitment incentive system. In fact, the alternative recruitment andhiring system is expected to reduce the number of staff hours expendedtesting, examining, and rating applicants, as well as to alleviate someof the administrative burden generated in support of these activities.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Duration of the Project </ITAG>The project will terminate at or before the end of the five year periodbeginning on the date on which the project takes effect, unless otherwiseextended or terminated at an earlier date in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 4703(e).<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Evaluation Plan </ITAG>A. Introduction An evaluation methodology is established in order to comply with the requirementthat the demonstration project be evaluated in terms of the impact of projectresults against stated objectives as well as to determine whether or notpermanent changes in law and/or regulation should be considered or proposed.The agency plans to enter into an agreement or contract with a qualifiedthird party, to be identified at a later date, for the purpose of conductingthe evaluation. B. Methodology While the formal evaluation will be conducted by an independent externalparty, it is expected to follow a modified Action Research Model process.The utilization of that model in this situations means that the evaluators,researchers, and research participants share information about the researchresults to the extent that interventions detrimental to the organizationcan either be modified or aborted. This is to prevent the continuationof an intervention with obvious and severe impact deficiencies. The evaluation effort will be carried out in four distinct phases, as follows:1. Design phase_includes the development of the experimental model, selectionof test and comparison sites, and the collection of baseline data priorto implementation; 2. Implementation phase_includes actual project implementation, and monitoringto assure that each of the project interventions has been operationalizedas originally conceived; 3. Evaluation phase_includes data collection and analysis. Periodic reportsand annual summaries will be presented throughout the life of the project;and, 4. Concluding phase_summary evaluation and overall assessment of the impactof the project; conclusions and final recommendations. C. Model There are two objectives, five interventions, two constraints, and fourteenrelated hypotheses. It is operationally not feasible to apply interventions(a), (b), and (e) independently, nor can interventions (c) and (d) be brokeninto separate experiments. It was further decided to apply all interventionsas one experimental design because to do otherwise would create inadequatesample sizes and become too difficult to manage. Hence, all interventionswill be introduced at each of the experimental sites, although the authorizationof recruitment and retention incentives is discretionary on the part ofmanagement. The utilization and results of experimentation with these incentiveswill be separately identified to the extent possible. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Objectives </ITAG>(a) Increase the flexibility and responsiveness of the recruitment andhiring system. (b) Increase the reliability of the decision to grant career tenure. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Interventions </ITAG>(a) Decentralize the decision to authorize direct hire in shortage categories.(b) Establish an alternative candidate assessment method which uses categoricalgrouping instead of numeric score. (c) Provide monetary incentives for recruitment purposes. (d) Reimburse travel and transportation expenses beyond those currentlyauthorized for travel to first post of duty. (e) Make initial appointments on a provisional basis, with career tenureearned through on-the-job performance. <ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table</T4> 1._<T4>Expected Effects, Measures, and Data Sources</T4><H1>Constraints/Hypotheses</H1><H1>Measures</H1><H1>Data sources</H1>Overall Project Constraints:<ITAG tagnum="2">A. Fair representation of protected groups, will not be adversely impacted<D>Number of women andamp; minorities in workforce</D><D>PR</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Number among applicants</D><D>RAF</D><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Number offered positions</D><D>RAF</D><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Number hired</D><D>PR</D><ITAG tagnum="2">B. Demonstration project will be cost neutral<D>Administrative costs for recruiting and hiring</D><D>To be identified</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Amount spent for recruitment incentive andamp; travel expenses</D><D> </D>Objective 1: Increase the flexibility and responsiveness of the recruitmentand hiring systemInterventions:<ITAG tagnum="13">(a) Expand authority for approving direct hire</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="13">(b) Implement alternative candidate assessment method using categoricalgroupings</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="13">(c) Provide option of awarding monetary incentives for recruitingpurposes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="13">(d) Provide option of reimbursing travel and transportation expensesfor recruiting purposes</ITAG>Hypotheses:<ITAG tagnum="3">A. Managers will perceive the new system as more responsive to localrecruitment needs</ITAG><D>Managers' perceptions</D><D>Annual Survey of managers (AS)</D><ITAG tagnum="3">B. Managers will be more satisfied with the new recruitment and hiringsystem than with the traditional system</ITAG><D>Managers' attitudes</D><D>AS</D><ITAG tagnum="3">C. Under the experimental employee intake process, new employees willbe hired more quickly than under the traditional system</ITAG><D>Time required to fill positions</D><P>Managers' perceptions</P><P>New hire's perceptions</P><D>RAF</D><P>AS</P><P>Pre-employment survey (PES)</P><ITAG tagnum="3">D. The experimental employee intake process will require less stafftime than the traditional system</ITAG><D>Activities required to fill positions</D><P>Staff hours required to fill positions</P><D>RAF</D><P>RAF</P><ITAG tagnum="3">E. Quality of new hires under the experimental system, as measuredby appropriate indicators, will be equivalent to that of employees hiredthrough traditional methods</ITAG><D>GPA</D><P>Education level</P><P>School attended</P><P>Field of Study</P><P>Scholastic honors</P><P>Year of degree</P><P>Number of professional publications</P><P>Level of experience</P><P>Relevant experience</P><P>Previous salary</P><P>Competing offers</P><D>PES</D><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><P>PES</P><ITAG tagnum="3">F. Level of performance for new hires will be equal to or greater thanthat for those hired through traditional means</ITAG><D>Performance appraisal</D><P>Performance awards</P><P>Adverse actions</P><P>Managers' perceptions</P><D>PR</D><P>PR</P><P>PR</P><P>AS</P><ITAG tagnum="3">G. Competitive recruiting position will improve for sites using theexperimental recruiting and hiring system relative to those using traditionalprocedures</ITAG><D>Managers' perception of competitive position</D><P>Candidates lost to competition</P><P>Number of qualified candidates who apply for USDA positions</P><D>AS</D><P>RAF</P><P>RAF</P><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Ability to hire candidates whom managers perceive as best qualified</D><D>AS</D><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Declination/acceptance ratio</D><D>RAF</D><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D>Number, type, and $ values of incentives awarded</D><D>RAF</D><ITAG tagnum="3">H. Recruitment incentives and payment of expenses will increase acceptancerates above and beyond any effects of the new recruitment and hiring system</ITAG><D>Declination/acceptance ratio</D><P>Number, type, and $ value of incentives awarded</P><D>RAF</D><P>PR</P><ITAG tagnum="3">I. Recruitment incentives tied to service agreements will improve retentionof appointees relative to those hired without service agreements</ITAG><D>Rate at which service agreements are met</D><P>Turnover rates</P><P>Number, type, and $ value of incentives awarded</P><P>Time span of service agreements</P><D>PR</D><P>PR</P><P>PR</P><P> </P><P>PR</P>Objective 2: Increase the reliability of the decision to grant career tenureIntervention: (e) Make initial appointments on a provisional basis, withcareer tenure earned through job performance<ITAG tagnum="3">A. Managers will have more confidence in career tenure decisions underthe new system than under the traditional system</ITAG><D>Managers' perceptions</D><D>AS</D><ITAG tagnum="3">B. Managers will utilize the flexibilities provided by the provisionalappointment system</ITAG><D>Turnover rates, reasons</D><P>Length of time spent under provisional appointments</P><D>PR</D><P>PR</P><ITAG tagnum="3">C. Recruitment efforts will not be hampered by the requirement to hirenew employees under provisional appointments</ITAG><D>Managers' perceptions</D><P>New employees' perceptions</P><D>AS</D><P>PES</P>Overall Project Expectations:<ITAG tagnum="3">A. Supervisory accountability for the success of the recruitment andhiring program will increase</ITAG><D>Managers' perceptions</D><P>Senior managers' perceptions</P><P>Documentation of accountability</P><D>AS</D><P>Interviews</P><P>Performance Standards</P><ITAG tagnum="3">B. Management advisory role for personnel specialists will increase</ITAG><D>Managers' perceptions</D><D>AS</D><P>Interviews</P></ITAG>D. ProceduresExperimental results will be evaluated annually (1) against baseline datacollected before the implementation of the interventions, and (2) betweenthe experimental and comparison populations in each block and in toto.While the introduction of the interventions will continue throughout thefive year life of the project, the collection of data and consequent evaluationefforts will continue until reasonably stable results can be identified.It is not necessary to wait until the results of the last experimentallyhired employee can be fully evaluated before declaring the evaluation completedif the evaluators are satisfied that sufficient valid data have been accumulatedto draw such a conclusion.E. Implementation EvaluationThe evaluation model presents a framework for evaluating the success ofthe demonstration project in meeting its stated objectives. An equallyimportant component of the overall evaluation is the description and monitoringof the implementation of the project.Implementation monitoring will provide a qualitative context in which tounderstand and interpret evaluation results. This facet of the evaluationwill help to answer the ``why'' questions that are likely to arise, whetherthe project is a success or failure, and provide the documentation of actualimplementation necessary to replicate the results of this demonstrationproject in other settings.Through examination of project-related documents, ongoing contact withkey players in the participating agencies, interviews with project participants,and case studies of selected units, the implementation evaluation willaddress such questions as:1. When are project changes implemented?2. What training and orientation is delivered to facilitate implementation?3. What operating procedures/guidelines are developed to manage projectimplementation? How do these guidelines differ from the project plan?4. How does actual practice differ from the project plan and/or operatingguidelines?5. To what extent are recruiting and hiring practices being carried outin a manner consistent with the merit principles outlined in 5 U.S.C. 2301?6. To what extent do users of the new system understand it?7. What differences in actual practice exist with respect to differenttypes of candidates and/or new appointees?8. To what extent are discretionary interventions (i.e., recruitment incentives)actually used?9. How similar are the experimental and the comparison sites? How are theydifferent?10. What other changes occurring at experimental/comparison sites mightprovide competing explanations for observed changes?11. What events in the external environment might provide competing explanationsfor observed changes or lack of change?12. What unintended consequences of the demonstration project initiativemay be observed?13. What impact does the application of veterans preference under the projecthave on the examining and selection process? How many preference eligiblesare being hired at experimental and comparison sites?<ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Experimental Design</ITAG>The experimental design uses experimental and comparison groups matchedfor characteristics but not necessarily for population numbers in ten populationblocks. The populations were classified into five occupational categories:scientists, professionals, administrative employees, technicians, and allothers (includes clerical and Federal Wage System). Each participatingunit of the two agencies, the Agricultural Research Service and ForestService, appeared in as many of these five blocks as the occupational categorydistribution represents.The occupational categories were then further subdivided into two situationalcategories: Difficult and simple. In the difficult situation, the workingsite or environment, and/or the local personnel supply pool, make it verydifficult to attract candidates in a particular occupational category.This situational condition is not necessarily constant for all five occupationalcategories at any one location. It was postulated that this random assignmentto the experimental and comparison groups within these ten groupings wouldresult in ten matched groups. Except for limited administrative pre-selection,the assignments to experimental and comparison groups within each of theten blocks were by random draw.A detailed description of the selection process is available upon request.<ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix A_Required Waivers to Law and Regulation \1\</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Waivers to title 5 United States Code</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1104.(a)(2) Delegation<NOTE/> of authority for personnel management </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Waiver required only to the extent that the project conflictswith pertinent provisions of law and regulation.<ITAG tagnum="26">3309. Preference eligibles; examinations; additional points for</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3312.(b) Preference eligibles; physical qualifications; waiver</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3313. Competitive service; registers of eligibles</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3317.(a) Competitive service; certification from registers</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3318.(a),(b) Competitive service; selection from certificates</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3582. Rights of transferring employees</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">4303.(f) Actions based on unacceptable performance</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">5723. Travel and transportation expenses of new appointees and studenttrainees; manpower shortage positions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">5724a, 5724b, 5724c. (Relocation Expenses)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">7511.(a)(1) Definitions; application</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Waivers to title 5 Code of Federal Regulations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1.3 (c) Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">2.1(b) Competitive Examinations and Eligible Registers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">2.2 Appointments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">212.301 Competitive status defined.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.201 Service requirement for career tenure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.301 Tenure on appointment from register.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.302 Acquisition of competitive status.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.401(a) Reinstatement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.402 Tenure on reinstatement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.501 (Transfer) Agency authority.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.502 Tenure on transfer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.801 Probationary period; when required.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">315.802 Length of probationary period.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">330.303 OPM (Displaced Employee) program.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Part 332_Recruitment and Selection Through Competitive Examination(except 332.101)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">335.101 Effect of position change on status and tenure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">335.102 Agency authority to promote, demote, or reassign.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">337.101 Rating applicants. (except (c))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">351.501(b)(2) Order of retention_competitive service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Part 352_Reemployment Rights</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Part 353_Restoration to Duty</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">410.302 Selection and assignment of trainees.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Part 432_Reduction in Grade and Removal Based on Unacceptable Performance</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">536.102 (Grade and Pay Retention) Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">550.701(b) (Severence Pay) Coverage.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Part 752_Adverse Actions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix B_Experimental and Comparison Sites; Agricultural ResearchService  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Experimental Sites:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Aiea/Hilo/Honolulu, HI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Akron, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Albany, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ames/Ankeny, IA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Athens, Ga</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Beaumont, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Beckley, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Beltsville, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Bozeman, MT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Byron, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Canal Point, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Charleston, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Clemson, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Columbia, MO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Corvallis, OR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Davis, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Dawson, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">East Grand Forks, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">East Lansing, MI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Experiment, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Fairbanks, AK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Fargo, ND</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Florence, SC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Frederick, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Fresno, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Fort Collins, CO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Geneva, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Grand Forks, ND</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Houston, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ithaca, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kerrville, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lane, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Las Cruces, NM</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lexington, KY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Logan, UT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lubbock, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Madison, WI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Manhattan, KS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Miami, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Miles City, MT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">New Orleans, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Orient Point, NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Orlando, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Orono, ME</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Oxford, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Oxford, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Pasadena, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Peoria, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Phoenix, AZ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Pullman, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Raleigh, NC</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Reno, NV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Riverside, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">San Francisco, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Shafter, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Sidney, MT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">St. Paul, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">St. Croix, VI</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Stillwater, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Stoneville, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Suffolk, VA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Temple, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Tifton, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Tucson, AZ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">University Park, PA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Watkinsville, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Weslaco, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Woodward, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wooster, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Yakima, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Comparison Sites:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Aberdeen, ID</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Auburn, AL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Baton Rouge, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Boise, ID</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Booneville, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Boston, MA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Brawley, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Brookings, SD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Brooksville, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Brownwood, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Burns, OR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Bushland, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cheyenne, WY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Clay Center, NE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">College Station, TX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Columbus, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Coshocton, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Delaware, OH</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Dubois, ID</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Durant, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">El Reno, OK</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ft. Lauderdale, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gainesville, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Georgetown, DE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Greeneville, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Headquarters, MD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Houma, LA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Jackson, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kearneysville, WV</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kimberly, ID</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Laramie, WY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lewisburg, TN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lincoln, NE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Mandan, ND</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Mayaguez, PR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Mississippi State</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Morris, MN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Newark, DE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Pendleton, OR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Poplarville, MS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Prosser, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Salinas, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Savannah, GA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Stuttgart, AR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Tuxtla, MX</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Urbana, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wenatchee, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">West Lafayette, IN</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Winter Haven, FL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wyndmoor, PA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Forest Service </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Experimental Sites:</ITAG>Region 1<ITAG tagnum="25">Regional Office (includes MTDC)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Clearwater NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Custer NF (includes Helena NF)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Flathead NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Idaho Panhandle NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kootenai NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lolo NF </ITAG>Region 2<ITAG tagnum="25">Big Horn NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Black Hills NF (includes Nebraska NF)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Pike and San Isabel NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Rio Grande NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Routt NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Shoshone NF </ITAG>Region 3<ITAG tagnum="25">Apache Sitgraves NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Cibola NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Coconino NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Coronado NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kaibab NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lincoln NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Sante Fe NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Tonto NF </ITAG>Region 4<ITAG tagnum="25">Regional Office/Intermountain Station</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Targhee NF (includes Bridger-Teton, Challis, Caribou, and Salmon NF) </ITAG>Region 6<ITAG tagnum="25">Colville NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Deschutes NF (includes Malheur and Ochoco NF) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Mt. Baker/Snoqualmie NF (includes Seattle Lab)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Mt. Hood NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Olympic NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Siuslaw NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Umpqua NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wallowa-Whitman NF (includes LaGrande Lab and Umatilla NF)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wenatchee NF (includes Wenatchee Lab and Okanogan NF)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Willamette NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Winema NF (includes Fremont NF) </ITAG>Region 8<ITAG tagnum="25">Region Office (includes Macon Seed Lab and Caribbean NF) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Chattahoochee and Oconee NF (includes Frances Marion and Sumter NF)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Jefferson NF (includes George Washington NF)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Kisatchie NF (includes Texas NF, part of Alexandria Lab) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Mississippi NF (includes NF's in Alabama and Florida) </ITAG>Region 9<ITAG tagnum="25">Region Office </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Allegheny NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Chequamegon NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Chippewa NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Hiawatha NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Huron-Manistee NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Mark Twain NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Monongahela NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Nicolet NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ottowa NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Superior NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Wayne-Hoosier NF </ITAG>Region 10<ITAG tagnum="25">Regional Office </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Chatham Area </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Chugach NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ketchikan Area  </ITAG>Research Units<ITAG tagnum="25">Forest Products Lab </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Intermountain Station/R-4 RO </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Northeast Station/Area </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Southeast Station (includes North Carolina NF) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Southern Station </ITAG>Headquarters<ITAG tagnum="20">Comparison Sites:  </ITAG>Region 1<ITAG tagnum="25">Beaverhead NF (includes Gallatin NF) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Bitterroot NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Deerlodge NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Lewis and Clark NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Nez Perce NF </ITAG>Region 2<ITAG tagnum="25">Regional Office </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Medicine Bow NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">San Juan NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">White River NF  </ITAG>Region 3<ITAG tagnum="25">Regional Office </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Carson NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gila NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Prescott NF  </ITAG>Region 4<ITAG tagnum="25">Payette NF (includes Boise and Sawtooth NF) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Utah-Nevada Cluster: Fish Lake, Dixie, Humboldt, Toiyabe, Uinta, Wasatch-Cache,Manti-LaSal, Ashley NF, and Geometronics Service Center  </ITAG>Region 6<ITAG tagnum="25">Regional Office/PNW </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Gifford Pinchot NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Rogue River NF (includes Siskiyou NF)  </ITAG>Region 8<ITAG tagnum="25">Daniel Boone NF (includes Cherokee NF) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Ouachita NF (includes Ozark-St. Francis NF)  </ITAG>Region 9<ITAG tagnum="25">Green Mountain and Finger Lakes NF </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Shawnee NF</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">White Mountain NF </ITAG>Region 10<ITAG tagnum="25">Stikine Area  </ITAG>Research Units<ITAG tagnum="25">North Central Station</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Pacific NW Station/R-6 RO</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">Rocky Mountain Station (includes Arapahoe and Roosevelt NF) </ITAG>Headquarters<ITAG tagnum="25">Washington Office </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-19673 Filed 8-22-89; 8:45 am) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6325-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>