<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89609-0108 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-09-89.f2.A1107</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Fish and Wildlife Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Moratorium on Importation of Raw and Worked Ivory From all Ivory Producingand Intermediary Nations </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Effective immediately, the United States establishesa moratorium on importation of raw and worked African elephant ivory fromall ivory producing and intermediary nations. This action is being takenunder authority of sections 2202(a) and 2202(b) of the African ElephantConservation Act, which require the Department of the Interior to establishmoratoria on ivory trade with all nations which cannot meet its criteriafor continuation of trade with the United States. Despite the existenceof an Ivory Trade Control System set up by the parties to the Conventionon International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), most ivory is tradedoutside of the system and illegal and excessive taking of elephants isnow taking place at unsustainable levels. Ivory producing nations are currentlyunable to effectively control taking of elephants, and intermediary nationscannot ensure that all ivory trade originates from legal sources. In October1989, the 102 parties to CITES will decide whether to end all commericaltrade in African elephant ivory, as recently proposed by the United Statesand a number of African nations. Import of legally taken sport hunted trophieswill not be affected by this action.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>The effective date of the moratoria established by thisnotice is June 9, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Marshall P. Jones, Chief, Officeof Management Authority, or Mr. Frank McGilvrey, African Elephant Coordinator,Office of Management Authority, P.O. Box 3507, Arlington, Virginia 22204-3507(telephone 703/358-2093).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>.<ITAG tagnum="84"> Background </ITAG>The African elephant (<T3>Loxodonta africana</T3>) is protected by the provisions of an internationaltreaty and two U.S. domestic laws. Internationally, in 1977 the Africanelephant was listed on Appendix II to the convention on International Tradein Endangered Species (CITES). Under provisions of this listing and subsequentresolutions adopted by the CITES party nations, commercial trade in Africanelephant ivory is allowed, subject to regulation by a system of exportpermits and an Ivory Control System administered by the CITES Secretariat.(The Asian elephant, <T3>Elephas maximas, </T3>is listed on CITES Appendix I and as endangeredunder the U.S. Endangered Species Act, prohibiting all commercial tradein its ivory). Since 1978 the African elephant has been listed as a threatened speciesunder the endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531-1543). Trade inAfrican elephant ivory is allowed by a special rule promulgated under theauthority of section 4(d) of the Act and codified at 50 CFR 17.40(e). Theprincipal conditions applied by the special rule to imports are that theivory must originate in a CITES party country, must be imported from aCITES party country, and must be imported from a CITES party country, andmust be accompanied by proper CITES export permits and documentation. On5 May 1989, the Service issued a rulemaking proposal (54 FR 19416) to revisethe special rule to conform to the requirements of the African ElephantConservation Act, which are discusseed later in this notice. On 9 May 1989,the Service found pursuant to section 4(b)(3)(A) of the Act that a petitionsubmitted in February 1989 presents substantial evidence that reclassificationof the African elephants to endangered status may be warranted, but thatthe status of the species was not so precarious so as to require emergencyreclassification to endangered status under section 4(b)(7) of the Act.The Service has initiated a status review of the species and must issuea finding by February 1990 as to whether reclassification to endangeredstatus is in fact warranted. The newest U.S. domestic measure, signed into law on 7 October 1988, isthe African Elephant Conservation Act (the Elephant Act), which was TitleII of the Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1988 (16 U.S.C. 4201 <T3>et seq.</T3>). The goal of the Elephant Act is for the United Statesto help perpetuate healthy populations of the African elephant by supportingconservation programs and ending its participation in illegal or excessiveivory harvest and trade. In order to implement the latter requirement,the Service has undertaken three major actions. These are:   (1) On 27 December 1988 (53 FR 52242), in compliance with sections 2202(a) and (b) of the Elephant Act, the Service placed a moratorium on allivory imports into the United States from nations which are not partiesto CITES. (2) On 24 February 1989 (54 FR 8008), in response to information containedin a petition from the World Wildlife Fund and information obtained fromother sources, the Service placed a moratorium on all ivory imports intothe United States from the nation of Somalia under provisions of sections2202 (a) and (b) of the Elephant Act. (3) On 3 February 1989 (54 FR 5553), in compliance with section 2201(b)of the Elephant Act, the Service announced initiation of a review of theelephant conservation and protection programs of all ivory producing nations(defined by the Act as those African nations within which is located anypart of the range of a population of African elephants). The comment periodfor this review closed on 5 June 1989. The Act contains five criteria onwhich this review is to be based: (A) The country is a party to CITES and adheres to the CITES Ivory TradeControl System. (B) The country's elephant conservation program is based on the best availableinformation, and the country is making expeditious progress in compilinginformation on the elephant habitat condition and carrying capacity, totalpopulation and population trends, and the annual reproduction and mortalityof the elephant populations within the country. (C) The taking of elephants in the country is effectively controlled andmonitored. (D) The country's ivory quota is determined on the basis of informationreferred to in subparagraph (B) and reflects the amount of ivory whichis confiscated or consumed domestically by the country. (E) The country has not authorized or allowed the export of amounts ofraw ivory which exceed its ivory quota under the CITES Ivory Control System.Simultaneously, in letters to each of the 33 ivory producing nations, theAssistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks requested commentson their ability to comply with these criteria and adequately conservethe species. The letters also explained that section 2202(a) of the Actrequires the Service to establish a moratorium on all ivory imports intothe United States from any nation immediately upon finding that the countrycannot meet all of the criteria of section 2201(b)(1). The letter notedthat many of the nations addressed have already prohibited legal ivoryexports, and that a moratorium by the Service would serve to bolster theirlaws in that case. It went on to state that the Service would assume thatany nation which did not respond to the notice was requesting the Serviceto place a moratorium on ivory imports into the United States. In the same 3 February 1989 <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice, the Service also requested informationfrom interested parties on ivory trading practices of intermediary nations(defined by the Act as nations which export raw or worked ivory originatingin another country), in order to determine whether there are intermediarynations which: 1. Are not parties to CITES; 2. Do not adhere to the CITES Ivory Control System; 3. Import raw ivory from countries which are not ivory producers; 4. Import raw or worked ivory form countries not party to CITES; 5. Import raw or worked ivory originating in an ivory producing countrythat was taken or exported in violation of the laws of that ivory producingcountry; 6. Substantially increases its exports of raw or worked ivory form a countrythat is subject to a moratorium; or 7. Imports raw or worked ivory form a country subject to a moratorium,after the first three months of that moratorium, unless the ivory is importedby a vessel during the first six months of the moratorium and is accompaniedby shipping documents showing it was exported before establishment of themoratorium. A finding that a country fails to meet any one of these criteria requiresthe Service to impose an immediate moratorium on ivory imports, in accordancewith seciton 2202(b) of the Elephant Act.   At the time of publication of this notice, the Service already had on handsubstantial information regarding general difficulties with control ofthe ivory trade. At a CITES African Elephant Working Group meeting in Nairobi,Kenya, in November 1988, the Service and other representatives in attendancereceived presentations from experts on the ivory trade and its effectson elephant populations. These presentations indicated that the volumeof ivory trade taking place within the CITES system represents only a smallfraction of the total ivory trade, and that this total now greatly exceedsthe annual sustainable harvest of ivory. Many ivory movements between Africannations also were reportedly not being recorded within the CITES system,making it virtually impossible to track the original source of ivory shipmentsor the amount of ivory leaving source nations. The February 1989 petitionto the Service for reclassification of the elephant to endangered statusunder the Endangered Species Act likewise presented information indicatingthat the ivory trade had become excessive and perhaps out of control.Subsequent to publication of the 3 February 1989 notice, two additionalsignificant events have occurred which have a major effect on the reviews.First, on 12 May 1989, proposals for changes in the listing of specieson Appendix I and Appendix II of CITES were due to the CITES Secretariatfor consideration at the October, 1989, CITES Conference of the Parties.Due to the failure of international efforts to control illegal trade inAfrican elephant ivory and the resulting deteriorating status of wild populationsof the species, at least seven African nations have called for a halt tothe commercial ivory trade. Four of these nations, including Tanzania,Kenya, Gambia, and Somalia, have submitted formal proposals that the Africanelephant be reclassified to CITES Appendix I, which would end all internationalcommercial trade in ivory and other elephant products. On 12 May 1989 theDepartment of the Interior submitted a similar United States proposal tothe CITES Secretariat recommending reclassification of the African elephantto Appendix I and thus an end to the commercial trade.These Appendix I proposals confirm and expand upon information availableregarding failure of international ivory trade control efforts. The proposalfrom Tanzania, for example, notes the large worldwide volumes of illegalivory trade and trade with non-CITES nations, as well as the amount ofundocumented raw ivory trade between some African nations. It also presentsstatistics for 1987 (the most recent year for which such statistics areavailable) showing that the CITES registered legal ivory trade of 154 metrictons was only 20% of the total estimated world trade of 771 tons. Moreover,the Tanzanian proposal cites work by an ivory trade expert and contractorto the CITES Secretariat that most of the ``official'' ivory in trade isnow seized contraband_i.e. ivory from illegal and excessive taking of elephants.It goes on to reference work by a noted population biologist to concludethat ``the unauthorized offtake presently far exceeds the species' maximumsustainable yield, i.e., CITES is in fact facilitating the continuing unsustainableofftake of elephants by allowing for very large amounts of ivory from poachedelephants to enter the legal international trade.''Secondly, on 1 June 1989, the Ivory Trade Review (Ivory Group), a consortiumof wildlife conservation groups which have been participating in a cooperativestudy of the ivory trade, released a public statement on its findings.The study was commissioned by the African Elephant and Rhino SpecialistGroup of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and NaturalResources, was funded by Wildlife Conservation International (a divisionof the New York Zoological Society), the World Wildlife Fund, and the Service,and was carried out in collaboration with Trade Records Analysis of Floraand Fauna in Commerce (TRAFFIC), the CITES Secretariat, and the AfricanWildlife Foundation.The Ivory Group's statement presents further evidence of the chaotic, uncontrolledconditions of the international ivory trade today. For example, it foundthat poaching has become so prevalent that ``the legal (i.e. governmentcontrolled) and the illegal trades have become virtually indistinguishable''and that ``exploitation of elephants to supply ivory, as currently practicedthroughout most of the continent (of Africa) is quite unsustainable.''The Ivory Group also points out that recent proposals for Appendix I statusfor the species will lead to a rapid rise in the price of ivory and verylikely to ``unprecedented poaching efforts''. Thus its findings that illegaland legal trade can no longer be distinguished even by the most conscientiousof governments, and that ivory harvests are unsustainable, will likelybecome even more critical factors over the next few months. For these reasons,the Group not only concluded that it would support proposals for CITESAppendix I status, but also recommended an immediate, voluntary ban onall ivory trade until the October meeting of the CITES Conference of theParties, in order to help prevent an increasing slaughter of elephantsthis summer.<ITAG tagnum="84">Review of Ivory Producing Nations</ITAG>The Service has taken into the account both of these new developments inthe course of its review of the adequacy of ivory producing nations tomeet the criteria of the Act, in conjunction with all other available information.Specifically, the Service notes that:(1) Most of the ivory producing nations have such low elephant populationsthat they have determined that no sustainable harvest is possible and haverequested no ivory export quota in 1989. No imports of ivory from thesenations into the United States would be permissible.(2) As noted in the Ivory Group's findings, there is now likely no sustainableharvest of elephants throughout most of Africa, even among nations whichhave CITES export quotas, due to the rapidly declining populations. Manynations which sincerely desire to effectively manage their elephant populationsnevertheless lack the resources to adequately assess population levelsand determine scientific harvest rates. Furthermore, any harvest of elephantsmay now represent a lack of effective control of taking, because of recent,drastic population declines for the species as a whole. The extensive ivorymovements among African nations undocumented by the CITES system make iteven more difficult to determine the amount of harvest being allowed withinsome nations.(3) Among the nations which have ivory export quotas, the Service has alsofound that most now have significant poaching problems. Even those nationswhich have made diligent efforts to control poaching are finding that thehigh price of ivory and increasingly well-organized efforts of the poachersand middlemen, often from outside their national borders, make it impossiblefor them to control the illegal take with currently available resources.Furthermore, there is a great likelihood that the increasing price of ivoryover the next few months, as warned by the Ivory Group, may lead to aneven greater gap between available resources and those needed to overcomepoaching problems. Under these new conditions the indistinguishabilityof legal and illegal ivory will become an even more critical problem, andthe proportion of illegal ivory in trade will almost certainly increaseeven more from the 80% estimate of 1987.Based on these considerations, the Service has determined that no ivoryproducing nation is able to comply with all of the criteria of section2201(b)(1) of the Act. Furthermore, the Service has determined that theparticular criterion 2201(b)(1)(C), effective control and monitoring oftake, cannot be complied with by any ivory producing nation under the currentchaotic condition of the ivory trade. Accordingly, as required by section2202(a) of the Act, the Service hereby imposes an immediate moratoriumon all African elephant ivory imports from all ivory producing nations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Review of Intermediary Nations</ITAG>Many of the factors discussed above regarding ivory-producing nations havea significant bearing on the ability of intermediary nations to complywith the criteria of section 2202(b) of the Act. The Service has takenall available information into account in reaching the following findings:(1) The Service's review of the ivory trading practices of all major intermediarynations which are parties to CITES has indicated that every one of thesenations has engaged in import of raw ivory from other intermediary nations,a criterion for establishment of a moratorium under section 2202(b)(3).This is a pervasive practice among all of the major intermediary nationswhich they have not stopped, despite numerous communications from the Service,and which in many cases they apparently cannot stop if they are continueto deal in ivory at all under current market conditions.(2) In addition, due to the virtual impossibility of distinguishing legalfrom illegal ivory (as described in the preceding discussion for ivoryproducing nations), it is also no longer possible for any intermediarynation to ensure that it is not importing raw or worked ivory from an ivoryproducer in violation of the laws of the ivory producer. In such cases,it is also impossible for intermediary nations to ensure that they arenot importing ivory which originated in nation which is not a party toCITES or for which a moratorium on ivory imports into the United Stateshas already been established. The Service notes that the United Statesitself, as an intermediary nation, would be subject to some of these samedifficulties regarding the origin of ivory imports into this country.Based on these considerations, the Service has determined that under currentchaotic conditions no intermediary nation is able to comply with all ofthe criteria of section 2202(b) of the Elephant Act. Furthermore, the Servicehas determined that specific criterion 2202(b)(3), avoidance of importof raw or worked ivory taken in violation of the laws of the ivory producer,cannot be complied with by <T3>any</T3> intermediary nation. Accordingly, as required by section 2202(b)of the Act, the Service hereby imposes an immediate moratorium on importsof African elephant ivory from all intermediary nations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Relationship of Elephant Act Moratorium to CITES Actions</ITAG>The Service is taking this action in order to implement the requirementsof the Elephant Act and in hopes of contributing to a reduction, ratherthan an increase, in demand for African elephant ivory between now andthe CITES Conference of the Parties in October, 1989. At that time, the102 CITES parties will determine what action should be taken with regardto the pending proposals for Appendix I status. Results of this meetingwill be taken into account in deciding whether changes are necessary regardingthe moratoria now placed on ivory imports under the Elephant Act.<ITAG tagnum="85">Relationship of Elephant Act Moratoria to the Endangered Species Act</ITAG>As noted previously in this notice, on 5 May 1989 (54 FR 19416), the Servicepublished a proposed revision to the existing special rule for the Africanelephant, which was adopted under the authority of the Endangered SpeciesAct and is codified at 50 CFR 17.40(e). As specifically indicated in thatproposed rulemaking, however, the proposal does not serve to delay theeffectiveness of the Elephant Act. It is rather intended to conform theprovisions of the existing special rule to the terms of the new law. Section2302 of the Elephant Act specifically provides that the authority of theDepartment of the Interior under the Elephant Act is in addition to, andshall not affect, the authority of the Department under the EndangeredSpecies Act. Consistent with this additional authority, the Service hasalready imposed moratoria on all countries not party to CITES (53 FR 52241,27 December 1988) and on the nation of Somalia (54 FR 8008, 24 February1989). As indicated above, additional moratoria are now being imposed onall imports from ivory producing and intermediary nations, effective immediately.These actions will be taken into account as the Service continues its reviewof the proposed amendment to the African elephant special rule under theEndangered Species Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">Sport-Hunted Trophies</ITAG>Section 2202(e) of the Elephant Act makes a specific exception allowingimport of legally taken sport-hunted trophies into the United States, fromall countries which have CITES ivory export quotas, even if these countriesare otherwise subject to a moratorium on ivory imports. Legal sport huntingis effectively controlled by the nations which permit it and has not beenfound to be contributing to the African elephant's decline. On the contrary,it contributes substantial revenues to the wildlife management programsof these nations. On 20 March 1989 (54 FR 11449) the Service publisheda notice detailing the countries which have duly established quotas andfrom which legally taken sport-hunted trophies may be imported.The Service will update this notice as additional quotas are establishedby the CITES Secretariat and will continue to accept import of legallytaken sport-hunged trophies from all nations which have such a quota. TheService will also continue to review sport hunting take of elephants toensure that it has not become a factor contributing to the species' decline.The primary author of this rule is Marshall P. Jones, Chief, Office ofManagement Authority, U.S. Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: June 7, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Susan Reece Lamson,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-13911 Filed 6-8-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-55-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>