<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89518-0116 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-18-89.f2.A1115</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-206; License No. DPR-13]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56"> Southern California Edison Co. and San Diego Gas andamp; Electric Co.,San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Unit No. 1; Order for Modificationof License</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I</ITAG>Southern California Edison Company and San Diego Gas and Electric Company(the licensees) are the holders of Provisional Operating License No. DPR-13which authorizes the licensees to operate San Onofre Nuclear GeneratingStation, Unit No. 1, at power levels up to 1347 megawatts thermal (ratedpower). The facility is a pressurized water reactor located on the licensees'site in San Diego County, California. The license is subject to all applicableprovisions of the rules, regulations, and orders of the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission. <ITAG tagnum="84">II</ITAG>Following the accident at the Three Mile Island Unit 2 facility on March28, 1979, a number of investigations were undertaken to assess the adequacyof design features, operating procedures, and personnel of nuclear powerplants to provide assurance of no undue risk regarding severe reactor accidents.The report ``NRC Action Plan Developed as a Result of the TMI-2 Accident''(NUREG-0660, May 1980) described a comprehensive and integrated plan involvingmany actions that served to increase safety. The Commission-approved itemsfor implementation were identified in a second report ``Clarification ofTMI Action Plan Requirements'' (NUREG-0737, November 1980). Among the items approved was item II.F.2, ``Instrumentation for Detectionof Inadequate Core Cooling'' which required licensees to describe additionalmeans proposed to provide an unambiguous, easy-to-interpret, indicationof inadequate core cooling (ICC). On November 4, 1982, the Commission refined its requirements in this areaand determined that an instrumentation system for detection of inadequatecore cooling (ICC) consisting of upgraded subcooling margin monitors, core-exitthermocouples, and a reactor coolant inventory tracking system is requiredfor the operation of pressurized water reactor facilities. These new requirementswere the subject of Generic Letter No. 82-28, ``Inadequate Core CoolingInstrumentation System'' (December 10, 1982). On the basis of analysis of information provided by licensees, meetingswith industry groups and independent studies by the NRC Staff, the Commissionfound that during a small LOCA, there is a period of time before the corehas boiled dry (indicated by core exit thermocouples) when the operatorshave insufficient information to clearly indicate a void formation in thereactor vessel head or to track the inventory of coolant in the vesseland primary system. The Subcooling Margin Monitor gives early indicationof a problem but does not indicate whether the condition is getting worseor better. The addition of a reactor coolant inventory system improves the reliabilityof plant operators in diagnosing the approach of ICC and in assessing theadequacy of responses taken to restore core cooling. The benefit is preventivein nature in that the instrumentation assists the operator in avoidanceof ICC when voids in the reactor coolant system and saturation conditionsresult from overcooling events, steam generator tube ruptures, and smallbreak loss of coolant events. The addition of a reactor coolant inventorysystem, coupled with upgraded in-core thermocouple instruments and a subcoolingmargin monitor, provides an ICC instrumentation package which could significantlyreduce the likelihood of human misdiagnosis and errors for events suchas steam generator tube ruptures, loss of instrument bus or control systemupsets, pump seal failures, or overcooling events originating from disturbancesin the secondary coolant side of the plant. For events of lower likelihood,involving coincidental multiple faults or more rapidly developing smallbreak LOCA conditions, the ICC also reduces the probability of human misdiagnosisand subsequent errors leading to ICC. <ITAG tagnum="84">III</ITAG>Southern California Edison (SCE) responded to Generic Letter 82-28 on June20, 1986,\1\<NOTE/> in which SCE concluded that no additional ICC instrumentationwas required, but that the core-exit thermocouple system would be upgradedto meet requirements of NUREG-0737. Thus, SCE did not propose to installa reactor vessel water level instrument, contrary to Generic Letter 82-28.The NRC staff's review of the SCE submittal was issued on May 9, 1988 whichconcluded that relief from this post-TMI item was not acceptable and requestedSCE to respond with a commitment to install a reactor vessel water levelinstrumentation system (RVLIS) and respond to a request for additionalinformation concerning other aspects of II.F.2_the core-exit thermocouplesand the subcooling margin monitor. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The response was delayed due to an extended outage toupgrade the seismic design of the facility. By letter of August 8, 1988, SCE responded to the request for additionalinformation. In its response, SCE reiterated its belief that there areinsufficient safety ro technical benefits to merit the large expenditure,but provided additional information regarding a proposed single non-safetygrade thermocouple which could be installed in the reactor upper internals.SCE's relief from the requirement to install a RVLIS is based upon uniqueplant design, plant response to transients, and offsite dose considerations.In comparison to larger and more modern plants, SONGS-1 has a smaller core(1347 Mwt) resulting in a smaller source term. The margin between operatingpressure (2085 psi) and the PORV setpoint (2190 psi) is the same as otherplants (100 psi). The margin between normal operating temperature and thesaturation temperature for the RCS is about 10anddegrees;F greater. Due toits smaller RCS volume (6940 ft\3\) compared with large plants (10,600ft\3\) and high capacity injection pumps, the licensee stated that SONGS-1is less susceptible to small break LOCAs.SCE evaluated the Westinghouse differential pressure (dp) RVLIS and theCombustion Engineering (CE) Heated Junction Thermocouple (HJTC) systemsfor their applicability to SONGS-1. The Westinghouse RVLIS generic designcannot be installed in SONGS-1 due to the lack of a bottom vessel penetration.SCE stated that the pressure vessel head penetrations and reactor internalswould require extensive modification and corresponding hydraulic and stressanalyses in order to accommodate HJTC probes, resulting in very high cost.Their value-impact assessment was done using the estimated costs associatedwith installing the HJTC system (this cost is two to three times higherthan the average cost). SCE further stated that it has considered a modifiedWestinghouse dp system which would measure only from the hot leg to thevessel head, but did no serious cost estimates for this alternative. Thealternative head-to-hot leg design was deemed less desirable because ofits limited measurement range, which is essentially the same as the HJTCsystem, and its inoperability when primary coolant pumps are running. Nomention was made of the possibility of using pump power monitoring to detectvoids when the pumps are running. This alternate would meet II.F.2 requirements.SONGS-1 is the smallest of five Westinghouse plants that are in the rangeof 0.4 to 0.5 times the size of the modern four-loop Westinghouse plant.Only one, Yankee Rowe, is smaller (600 Mwt) and it has been granted relieffrom installing a RVLIS. Yankee Rowe, which is located in a remote area,is operating at 400 psi margin between operating pressure and the PORVsetpoint and 25anddegrees;F subcooling margin with upgraded SMM and CET systems.Haddam Neck and Ginna are the most similar to SONGS-1 due to the fact thatthey do not have reactor vessel bottom penetrations. Ginna has installeda modified Westinghouse type RVLIS from head-to-hot leg, and Haddam Neckhas installed the CE HJTC system.A considerable portion of the SCE submittal is devoted to evaluation ofevents potentially leading to inadequate core cooling and a probabilisticrisk assessment to evaluate the risk of core damage due to ICC with existingSONGS-1 design. Although the study has merit, it involves essentially thesame considerations used by the licensees and the NRC several years agoin determining if additional ICC requirements were needed. After due considerationof many analyses, the NRC determined that new requirements were neededand imposed those defined in NUREG-0737. The evaluation of the SCE exemptionrequest is therefore based on the differences in performance between SONGS-1and larger plants that make ICC less likely to occur or the consequencesless severe. The principal difference noted by the scenarios presented in the submittalis that the smaller RCS volume of SONGS-1 leads to more rapid depressurizationand early initiation of safety injection flow in the event of a small break.Safety injection flow can match the break flow for breaks smaller than2.5 inches and core uncovery is not predicted. For larger breaks in the2.5 to 5.2 inch range, less uncovery and lower peak clad temperatures arepredicted than for larger plants. The report suggests that a 3.0 inch linebreak at SONGS-1 is comparable to a 4.0 inch line break at more typicallarger reactors. A probabilistic risk assessment focused on the risk associated with inventory-threateningscenarios leading to inadequate core cooling. In a small break LOCA event,the safety injection system is designed to provide sufficient injectionflow to prevent core damage. When this injection flow has depleted theRefueling Water Storage Tank, the system must be realigned so that thenormal charging system in conjunction with the containment recirculationpumps provide recirculation and injection to the reactor coolant system.The risk assessment utilizes event and fault trees to describe the sequenceof events and failures which must occur for an inadequate core coolingcondition to result. The fault trees include both equipment and human operatorperformance estimates for the existing plant configuration and instrumentation.The data input for the assessment were taken mostly from other studies.The validity of this data has not been confirmed, but the overall resultappears reasonable in relation to the information given for other plants.The risk assessment was then adjusted for an assumed incremental improvementwhich might result from the inclusion of RVLIS. It was assumed, however,that the RVLIS did not provide any new information of value, but was onlyredundant to the existing information so that the scenarios were virtuallyunaffected by the addition of RVLIS information. No procedural adjustmentswere made based on the availability of RVLIS. The only indication of approachto ICC in the existing system is elevated hot leg temperatures or elevatedcore-exit temperatures which respond only late in the event when the coreis partially uncovered. The evaluation gives no credit for early detectionof approaching ICC with vessel water level indication and the correspondingpotential for corrective operator action. This is contrary to the conclusionreached by the staff based on other analyses which led to the establishmentof the RVLIS requirements. The biased input assumption that RVLIS is ofno value guarantees the PRA result obtained. For each of the assessments,it is stated that the uncertainty of the analysis was not calculated, butis assumed to be large. In fact, the value of RVLIS in significantly increasingthe likelihood of correct operation response is not adequately assessed.The offsite consequence analysis submitted by SCE does not present a clearcase for any less diligence in detecting and preventing ICC. Recent increasein population density in the vicinity of the plant appears to place SONGS-1in a similar risk category as many other plants, all of which have installedICC instrumentation as mandated. SONGS-1 has a small advantage due to itslower operating power and correspondingly smaller source term. The licensees have not presented adequate technical justification for excludinga reactor vessel level measurement system from their instrumentation todetect inadequate core cooling. Other plants of similar size and designhave installed an acceptable level measurement system (either a genericallyapproved one or a modified one). For the reasons discussed, I have determinedthat the public health, safety, and interest require implementation ofitem II.F.2 of the TMI Action Plan and that the license should be modified,as described below. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV </ITAG>Accordingly, pursuant to sections 103, 161b and 161i of the Atomic EnergyAct of 1954, as amended, and the Commission's regulations in 10 CFR 2.204and 10 CFR Part 50, <T3>It is hereby ordered </T3>That Provisional Operating License No. DPR-13is hereby modified as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21">Licensees shall implement all the requirements of item II.F.2, ``InadequateCore Cooling Instrumentation System'' (Generic Letter 82-28) as soon aspracticable but not later than startup for fuel cycle XI (approximatelyJanuary 1991). Specific plans for implementation shall be submitted toNRC for approval by no later than December 1, 1989.</ITAG>The licensees or any person who has an interest adversely affected by thisorder may request a hearing within 30 days of the date of publication ofthis order in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. A request for hearing must be addressed to theDirector, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation, U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission, Washington, DC 20555, with copies to the Assistant GeneralCounsel for Enforcement at the same address. If a person other than thelicensees requests a hearing, that person shall set forth with particularitythe manner in which the petitioner's interest is adversely affected bythis order and should address the criteria set forth in 10 CFR 2.714(d).If a hearing is requested, the Commission will issue an order designatingthe time and place of the hearing. If a hearing is held, the issue to beconsidered shall be whether this order should be sustained. Upon the failureto answer or request a hearing within the specified time, this order shallbe final without further proceedings.<ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Thomas E. Murley, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 10th day of May, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-11953 Filed 5-17-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>