<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891129-0004 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-29-89.f2.A1003</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">MARITIME ADMINISTRATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">46 CFR Part 382</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. R-107]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2133-AA43</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Bulk and Packaged Preference Cargoes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This rule establishes new administrative procedures andmethodology for determining fair and reasonable rates for the carriageof dry and liquid bulk and packaged preference cargoes on United Statescommercial cargo vessels. This regulation requires operators to submitdata on the operating and capital costs of their vessels. Based on thisdata, the Maritime Administration (MARAD) will calculate fair and reasonableguideline rates according to the method explained in the <T2>Supplementary Information</T2> Section of this notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>This rule is effective January 1, 1990.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Arthur B. Sforza, Director, Officeof Ship Operating Assistance, Maritime Administration, Washington, DC 20590,Tel (202) 366-2323.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Section 901(b)(1) of the Merchant MarineAct of 1936 (the Act), as amended (46 U.S.C. 1241(b)), requires that atleast 50 percent of any equipment, materials or commodities purchased bythe United States or for the account of any foreign nation without provisionfor reimbursement, or acquired as the result of funds or credits from theUnited States, shall be transported on privately owned U.S.-flag commercialvessels, to the extent that such vessels are available at fair and reasonablerates. In 1985, section 901 was amended to exclude certain programs fromthe application of cargo preference and to raise the U.S.-flag share to75 percent on certain others, phased in over three years. Upon request,MARAD provides fair and reasonable guideline rates to shipper agencies.Section 901(b)(2) of the Act provides the authority for MARAD (by delegationfrom the Secretary of Transportation) to issue regulations governing theadministration of section 901(b)(1).Until recently, MARAD has used two separate methods for determining guidelinerates for bulk cargoes carried by U.S.-flag bulk cargo vessels. For vesselsbuilt before 1955, guideline rates were calculated for vessel categoriesarranged by deadweight tonnage. Since there are only a few such vesselsremaining in service, MARAD no longer calculates category rates. MARADnow calculates rates separately for all vessels.There are no current procedures, except for parcel lots on liner vessels,for calculating guideline rates that are formalized in MARAD regulations,and there is no existing MARAD regulatory requirement that operators participatingin the bulk cargo preference trades submit cost data to MARAD on an annualbasis. Since accurate and verifiable cost data for all participating vesselsare not available, MARAD has been unable to verify some cost data usedin calculating guideline rates. For these reasons as well as those statedlater in this discussion, MARAD believes there is a need to develop andformalize the guideline rate procedures and to require periodic submissionof cost data.In developing these procedures MARAD was guided by: (1) An opinion of theComptroller General (Opinion B-95832, Feb. 17, 1955), issued shortly afterenactment of section 901(b), that the term ``fair and reasonable rate''did not necessarily mean the going market rate, but ``* * * would appearto call for reasonable compensation to the operator, including a fair profit;''and, especially, (2) court decisions which, while upholding MARAD's ratesetting authority for preference cargoes, clearly require that MARAD selectrates which will allow an operator to earn a reasonable profit or, if not,explain why the language and legislative history of the Act justify therate methodology chosen (<T3>See e.g., American Maritime Association</T3> v. <T3>United States,</T3> 766 F.2d 545, 559 (D.C. Cir., 1985)). As is morefully explained below, MARAD believes the procedures selected comply withthis guidance.<ITAG tagnum="84">Prior Rulemaking Actions</ITAG>MARAD published an initial NPRM on August 6, 1985 (50 FR 31735) that containeddata submission requirements and a methodology for determining fair andreasonable guideline rates for full shiploads of dry and liquid bulk preferencecargoes. That methodology was an averaging technique based on a ``leastsquares regression analysis.'' MARAD received nine comments and concludedthat the use of the ``least squares regression analysis'' methodology wasgenerally unsatisfactory. Accordingly, MARAD issued a SNPRM on December17, 1986 (51 FR 45136), that proposed and requested public comment on acost-based methodology for calculating fair and reasonable guideline ratesthat would be based on each vessel's actual or constructed costs.Following the comment period on the SNPRM, MARAD published a second SNPRMfor comment on June 28, 1988 (53 FR 24324). This SNPRM was incorrectlydesignated as RIN number 2133-AA51. It should have been designated as RINnumber 2133-AA43. The methodology in the second SNPRM utilized averagedoperating costs (except fuel) for competing vessels, by vessel size categories,and constructed capital items based on actual capitalized costs.<ITAG tagnum="84">Data Submission Requirements</ITAG>The information that MARAD would have required from the operators for eachvessel under the second SNPRM included statistical information on the vessel(e.g., normal operating speed, deadweight tonnage); operating expenses(e.g., wage costs of officers and crews, insurance costs); capital costs(e.g., capitalized costs, interest rates); and port and cargo handlingcosts (e.g., stevedore costs, canal fees). Such data was to be for theyear preceding the current year and was to be submitted no later then April30 of the current year. This final rule contains essentially the same datasubmission requirements as in the second SNPRM.Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), the requesteddata submissions have to be considered confidential commercial or financialinformation not to be disclosed to the public provided certain prerequisitesare satisfied. As discussed later, a provision is included in this regulationunder which data would be presumed confidential.<ITAG tagnum="84">Comments</ITAG>Responses were received from nine commenters with regard to the SNPRM ofJune 28, 1988. The respondents were American Gulf Shipping (AGS); CoastalCarriers Corp. (CCC); Diversified Marine International (DMI); Falcon ShippingGroup (Falcon); Gulf Coast Transit Company (GTC); O'Conner andamp; Hannan,on behalf of the Government of Israel Supply Mission (Israel); Dyer, Ellis,Joseph andamp; Mills, on behalf of Liberty Marine Corporation (Liberty);and Preston, Thorgrimson, Ellis andamp; Holman, on behalf of OMI Corp. (OMI).As a result of the substantial interest evidenced by the replies to thesecond SNPRM, MARAD determined that a public hearing was necessary to affordthe public the opportunity to clarify various positions regarding controversialsections of the proposed rule. A Notice of Public Hearing was publishedin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on August 22, 1988 (53 FR 31870), setting thedate of the hearing for September 8, 1988. The meeting was attended byrepresentatives from 13 companies operating self-contained vessels or tug/bargeunits in the bulk preference trades. Also attending were representativesof four private organizations either representing vessel operators or havingan interest in bulk shipping; three liner operators who engage in the bulkpreference trades from time-to-time; and the United States Agency for InternationalDevelopment (AID) and the Department of Agriculture (USDA).American Trading Transportation Company (ATT), Dixie Carriers (Dixie),OSG Bulk Ships, Inc. (OSG), Keystone Shipping (Keystone), and OMI providedwritten comments in advance of the hearing. AGS, CCC, Coastal Barge Corporation(CBC), DMI, Falcon, GTC, Liberty, OMI, Ocean Transport Company (OTC), andthe Transportation Institute (TI) provided written comments after the hearing.Many of the comments received were similar in nature. Therefore, to facilitatediscussion of the comments, they will be discussed by subject matter.<ITAG tagnum="84">No Requirement for Regulation</ITAG>Comments in this category basically fall into two groups: (1) Those operatorswho believed that the current system of rate determination is more accurateand works best; and (2) those who believed that competition in the marketis the better regulator and that guideline rates are unnecessary wheresuch competition exists. Some commenters expressed both views. One commenterasserted that, since no one has complained about the present system, theonly entity that can be interested in implementing the proposed systemof regulations is the Government.The genesis of the fair and reasonable guideline rate regulation lies inthe concerns over rates and costs brought forth during the amendment ofthe Act in 1970. MARAD began preliminary work on this regulation in thelate 1970's. Ultimately, a draft regulation was prepared, and internalreview of the regulation within the Department of Transportation beganin May of 1983. On June 18, 1985, two years later, the GAO issued a reportrecommending codification of fair and reasonable rate procedures for linervessels and verification of cost data collected in general. The GAO reportmerely added impetus to MARAD's effort to codify guideline rate proceduresfor bulk cargo vessels and led to a reexamination of the data reportingrequirements contained in the bulk regulations under preparation. As notedpreviously, the regulation was first issued in proposed form on August8, 1985.In reviewing the comments presented on this issue, MARAD can find no compellingreason to redirect this regulatory effort from its current course. Theneed for clear definition of the procedures for calculating guideline ratesstill exists. As a related matter, MARAD concludes that while there issome rationale to the arguments presented by several commenters that guidelinerates are not required when there is substantial competition for cargo,we do not believe that section 901(b), of the Act allows such latitude.The legislative history of section 901(b), as noted in the ComptrollerGeneral's opinion, clearly indicates the rejection of the argument thata rate dictated by market conditions would always be fair and reasonable.The Comptroller General cites the specific removal of the term ``market''rate and its replacement with the ``fair and reasonable'' rate in the constructionof the legislation for stating that ``fair and reasonable'' rates ``shouldnot be construed to mean the going market rates as such for the UnitedStates-flag commercial vessels.''<ITAG tagnum="84">Rate of Return</ITAG>Most commenters expressed the general opinion that the rate of return setforth in the proposed regulation is inadequate. All commenters on thissubject stated that a rate of return based on a transportation industryindex is not sufficient to provide a fair return for bulk shipping ventures.All expressed the view that shipping is a high risk venture and that acorrespondingly high rate of return is required in order for an operatorto attract sufficient venture capital to meet its needs and remain in business.One tug/barge operator added that because most tug/barge operators aresmall and financing is difficult to obtain, an adequate return is especiallycritical to this segment of the industry. Four commenters stated that arate of return geared to the industry's risk level would be more acceptablethan a general average rate based on non-maritime industries. One commenternoted that an average rate of return may or may not be adequate to providea shipping operator with a fair return in any given year. A number of commentersmade specific suggestions as to an adequate rate of return and one indicatedthat the yield on junk bonds would be appropriate. The specific rates ofreturn suggested ranged from 16.5 percent after taxes to 27 percent.At the public hearing, an adjustable rate of return was suggested, basedon a company's overall performance over a year. This concept was supportedby a number of other commenters at the hearing. One commenter visualizedthe concept as an average target rate of return that would permit swingsabove and below the overall guideline rate, provided that the company'sperformance for the year averaged out to the target rate of return. Ina similar vein, it has previously been suggested by at least one commenterthat prior losses be factored into subsequent guideline calculations. Somecomment has also been made that the guideline rate should include botha floor and ceiling rate. Another commenter stated that the rate shouldbe calculated on an annualized basis.With respect to the general concept of a guideline rate which varies asa result of prior company operations, there is considerable evidence thatCongress intended that the guideline be an individual fixture rate whichacts as a ceiling and that the Government should take advantage of cyclicalswings of below ceiling rates. In oversight hearings on the Cargo PreferenceAct of 1954 by the House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries (<T3>Administration of Cargo Preference Act,</T3> H.R. Rep. No. 80, 84thCong. 1st Sess. 18 (1955)), the committee reported that ``The Governmentmust be in a position to take advantage of the pendulum of supply and demandwhen it swings in its direction.'' In view of this guidance, a ceilingrate would be appropriate, but not a floor or variable rate. The ceilingrate would properly protect the Government from paying excessive freightrates. On the other hand, establishment of either a floor or variable ratewould place the Government in a position that would be clearly contraryto Congressional intent.However, we note that a number of contingency factors have been includedin this rule to address the problem of cyclical vessel utilization, bothon a seasonal and long-term basis. These include the 300 day operatingperiod for capital cost, the 5 and 10 percent delay factors (as appropriate),the 20 year depreciation period, and the 100 percent working capital allowance.The intent of all these devices is not to guarantee a profit for any operator,but is to give the operators the opportunity to earn a profit on the basisof the efficiency of their individual operations.Because of considerable interest shown by the comments on what constitutesan adequate rate of return or profit, MARAD reviewed alternative methodsof calculating a return on the shipowner's investment. The staff surveyedreturns over several years on sales, assets, equity and speculative gradebonds. In this regard, MARAD believes that return based on the owner'sinvestment in its assets is the most appropriate tool to base a rate ofreturn. Since returns based on sales and bond yields do not reflect theacquisition of operating assets, they are not useful. A return on assetsalso presents certain problems as available indices are based on totalassets, not fixed assets, and are thus unusable. A return on the operator'sequity remains feasible and reflective of a company's actual investmentin its vessels. Accordingly, MARAD will continue to use return on equityas a basis for its return on shipowner's investment.It is noted that the second SNPRM proposed a rate of return based on across section of the rates of return experienced in transportation industries,including maritime shipping. MARAD's analysis of various rates of returnin transportation fields indicates that a return based on such a crosssection generally reflects the risks inherent in the maritime transportationindustry. For this reason, MARAD sees no reason to change its views onthe rate of return. However, MARAD concedes that market conditions in anygiven year could cause upward or downward distortions. To correct this,MARAD will use a five year moving average to assure that the return reflectsthe rate of return or profit a participant in the transportation industrywould expect to attain. During its analysis, MARAD also noted the lackof reliable pretax rate of return indices. Accordingly, the rate of returnwill be based on an after tax rate.<ITAG tagnum="84">Operating Period</ITAG>Another major area of contention is the 335-day operating period proposedby MARAD in determining daily capital costs. Six commenters responded tothis issue. Citing numerous examples of situations wherein a vessel wouldnot be profitably employed, each commenter claimed that actual operatingexperience showed that 335 days is not a realistic operating period. Ofthe operators quantifying their experience, actual operating days rangedfrom 270 days to 326.The range of operating experience cited above was also discussed in thepublic hearing. It was agreed that any operator able to attain the highend of the range would have to have access to either in-house or dedicatedcargoes. The general consensus was that 270 days is closer to true industryexperience, especially for tug/barge operators. Most of the commentersindicated that an average of 300 days would be acceptable.MARAD believes that the use of an operator's actual experience has somemerit. However, MARAD is also mindful that the number of operating dayscannot be set at a level so low as to permit the recapture of inordinateamounts of capital costs through the fair and reasonable rate system. Inaddition, this would also tend to skew the rate of return index and resultin higher rates than necessary under the proposed system. In this regard,MARAD notes that the lower 270-day proposal reflects certain market conditionsin the domestic tug/barge trades which MARAD believes to be transient andnot reflective of the longer term market. Accordingly, MARAD is willingto accept the 300-day operating period suggested by the commenters as thestandard for an efficient operator in determining the capital component.<ITAG tagnum="84">Depreciation</ITAG>The determination of a depreciation allowance is another issue that generateda number of comments. Generally, the commenters believed that 25-year,straight-line depreciation is not reflective of current industry practice.Two of the commenters also pointed out that in tug/barge operations, avessel may have a useful life in excess of 25 years. Further, several commentersinsisted that they provide a higher level of maintenance than others, whichhelps to extend their equipment's useful life. Some commenters also believedthat an allowance should be made for operators of older equipment to receivea return on their investment in that equipment when the age of the equipmentexceeds 25 years. As a related matter, it was suggested that MARAD makea determination of market value for such vessels and use it in the capitalcalculation. Another commenter believed that because of wear and tear onthe equipment, 25 years is too long and that a 15-year period should beused.Yet another commenter objected to the provision which allows a new capitalizedcost for acquired vessels. This commenter stated that depreciation shouldbe based on the vessel's original value less depreciation determined pursuantto an accelerated depreciation method and that changes in ownership shouldnot alter the previously established depreciation value. Still anothercommenter believed that a 20-year period would be more in keeping withindustry practice.It is recognized that there are many methods of depreciating an asset,but the choice of that method is an individual management decision basedon a number of factors. A regulation that is generally applicable to theentire bulk cargo industry cannot and, indeed, should not accommodate alldepreciation scenarios. To do so would introduce a number of inequitiesin the guideline rate calculation that could present problems for the shipperagencies in selecting vessels for the carriage of preference cargoes. Theuse of a standard depreciation period places operators on an equal footingin bidding for preference cargoes. However, after review of this issue,MARAD believes that a 20-year depreciation period is now the norm for thebulk industry. Accordingly, straight line depreciation based on a 20-yeareconomic life will be incorporated in the regulation.With respect to the additional overhaul and major maintenance costs citedby certain tug/barge operators, it should be noted that, in most cases,these items are capitalizable and depreciable over the remaining life ofan asset. The rule as proposed would recognize such expenses. For vesselsover 10 years old, including otherwise fully depreciated vessels, capitalizedexpenses would be recognized over a minimum 10-year period. With regardto the establishment of a market value for fully depreciated equipment,MARAD can find no merit in the concept. Aside from the fact that marketvalues tend to be subjective and fluctuate, MARAD can find no basis toallow a cost where none exists. Further, if MARAD were to establish marketvalues on vessels, the actual market value of the vessels could be influencedarbitrarily by MARAD's actions.Similarly, MARAD cannot find merit in the suggestion that the originallyestablished depreciable value follow the ownership of a vessel. When anew owner makes an investment in an existing vessel, MARAD has no alternativebut to recognize the acquisition cost as the vessel's new capital cost,provided acquisition of the vessel is an arm's length transaction.<ITAG tagnum="84">Overhead and Administrative Costs</ITAG>Five commenters stated that the four percent allowance for brokerage andoverhead is inadequate. All pointed out that while the 2.5 percent allowancefor brokerage is adequate, the remaining 1.5 percent allowed for overheadis significantly understated. Three of the commenters quantified theiropinions, advising that an appropriate allowance for overhead would be12.5 percent, six percent, and six percent, respectively. Participantsattending the public hearing as well as follow-up written comments stronglyechoed these views. In addition, one operator stated that the calculationof brokerage and overhead should be separated.MARAD has conducted a review of in-house data available as well as dataprovided as a result of the public hearing and finds that there is meritin the operators' claims. The findings show a wide range of overhead expenditureswith an overhead figure of six percent generally supportable for overheadand administrative expenses alone. Therefore, the final regulations allowsa total of 8.5 percent for brokerage and overhead.<ITAG tagnum="84">Cost Averaging</ITAG>Generally, the commenters believed that cost averaging will discriminateagainst some operators. Two commenters noted the inconsistency of averagingall operating costs, except fuel. One commenter stated that: (1) Cost averagingwill competitively eliminate approximately one-half of the U.S.-flag operatorsand reduce the availability of U.S.-flag vessels for the cargo preferencetrades and that (2) averaging will discriminate against operators of moreexpensive vessels. This commenter believed that while the Government maysave money on the carriage of preference cargoes, it will also reduce utilizationof U.S.-flag vessels in the long run.Another commenter pointed out that cost averaging may make sense for singleunit vessels, but not for tug/barge combinations. The commenter claimedthat older, single unit U.S.-flag vessels tend to be less efficient andmore heavily manned than more modern vessels, partly because of the shiftfrom steam to diesel operation and the greater use of shipboard automationin newer vessels. It is pointed out, however, that technology and manningon tug/barges has not changed significantly in several decades, so thatmany older tug/barges are as efficient as newer units. This commenter claimedthat some older tug/barge units may be more cost efficient than newer unitsbecause of lower capital costs. The commenter also believed that averagingpenalizes operators who spend more than minimum amounts on maintenanceand upkeep and that averages for tug/barges will be skewed because of smallcategory sizes.Two commenters, on the other hand, laud the use of averaging in the promotionof operator efficiency. However, others pointed out that excluding fuelin the averages for operating costs is inconsistent and promotes inefficiencyby restoring a major cost item to operators of vessels with less efficientpower plants. Another supported averaging costs to promote efficiency andpoints out that the use of averaging is also consistent with the intentof the 1954 Cargo Preference statute and maximizes the efficiency of MARAD'sdata collection procedures. The latter commenter also believed the useof actual fuel costs is inconsistent with the statute and inefficient.Impetus for the use of averaged operating costs was rooted in the ComptrollerGenerals' Opinion (B-95832 of February 17, 1955) and in MARAD's desireto keep an element of competition in the bidding process for bulk preferencecargoes. The Comptroller General wrote that ``the statute contemplatesaverage fair and reasonable rates; which may or may not be profitable,or even compensatory, to a high-cost operator.'' MARAD originally embracedthe use of averaging as a method of encouraging efficient vessel operations.However, based on the various comments, and a thorough review of the issue,MARAD now believes that the use of actual costs in the fair and reasonablerate calculation is appropriate.The staff believes that the Comptroller General's opinion was preparedat a time when little diversity existed in oceangoing vessels and seagoingtug/barge combinations were virtually an unknown entity. Operating costsfor the vessels and their operating characteristics were virtually thesame. The only major variable in company costs came purely from managementdecisions. Accordingly, inefficient management was the primary cause ofhigh cost operations. In today's environment, where a wide array of differentvessel types compete for cargoes, the basis for the Comptroller General'sopinion is no longer completely valid. A high cost vessel or type may bevery efficiently operated relative to its characteristics, but may notbe viewed as such relative to other vessel types. Accordingly, the guidelinerate system should not penalize vessels for their inherent vessel characteristics.Unfortunately, MARAD is unable to determine whether any given vessel isoperated efficiently without extensive reporting and review requirements,which are not feasible or appropriate.Since neither the MARAD staff nor any of the concerned commenters wereable to develop a viable alternative which incorporates efficiency incentives,comports with the Comptroller General's opinion and subsequent court decisions,and is fair to all concerned, the staff is persuaded that a system basedon actual operating costs for each individual vessel is appropriate. Givenmodern computer technology, such a system is achievable and maintainableif the data provided by each operator is up to date and correct. Accordingly,MARAD is modifying the proposal to establish a guideline rate system andwill use actual operating costs to establish a guideline rate system foreach vessel.<ITAG tagnum="84">Fleet Categories</ITAG>Categorization of vessels generated responses from seven operators. Basically,all the commenters believed that there are too many variables to make categorizationof the fleet feasible. One believed that the size of any particular classor category will distort the data averages. Four others believed that thefleet is too diverse to be categorized fairly. One commenter stated thata category should be based on the operator's ability to carry the cargoand not vessel size.One commenter raised the point that because of variations in vessel age,capital costs and operating costs vary widely among vessels of any givensize. Another commenter stated that no explanation is given as to how categoriesare developed and, further, that if categories are used they should bebased on the cargoes tendered, not vessel size. This commenter also assertedthat each category should be large enough to be statistically significant.With regard to tug/barge operations, one commenter pointed out that diversityof the fleet is more pronounced in the tug/barge segment because of widevariations in barge equipment and tug size.Another recommended categorization of tug/barges in increments of 5,000DWT. Yet another commenter suggested increments of 6,000 DWT, if categorizationis deemed necessary.The diversity of the comments received on this subject reflects, amongother things, the difficulty in establishing vessel categories. The categoryconcept was based upon MARAD's original intention to average non-fuel operatingcosts for all operators. It was developed in an effort to avoid comparingbids from vessels of widely varying size against each other. Changes inthe method of determining operating costs, previously discussed, now obviatethe use of fleet categories and the need for a definition of ITB's as well.Accordingly, vessel categories will be eliminated in the revised guidelineregulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Recovery of Costs</ITAG>Comments regarding the recovery of certain costs not included in the operatingcost calculation were received from five interested parties. Each of thecommenters cited particular operating costs which are not covered in theoperating costs computation, and expressed the opinion that these costsshould be recoverable as legitimate items of expense.The majority of the comments in this area were received from tug/bargeoperators. Generally, all of the commenters stated there are certain costsassociated with the operation of tug/barge units that are peculiar to theoperation of that type of vessel that are not addressed in the proposedmethodology. These costs include extra shoreside cleanup and barge preparationcosts, independent survey costs, positioning costs, taping of hatches,and extra supervisory costs.Two single unit vessel operators also supplied comments on cost recoveries.One simply believed that an operator should be able to recover all costsassociated with the operation of a vessel. The other specifically mentionedrecovery of positioning costs as a noncovered cost item.After reviewing the comments received in response to the second SNPRM,and those submitted as a result of the public hearing, MARAD concedes thattug/barge operators have legitimate port and cargo handling costs thatare unique to their operations.However, the second SNPRM allowed for the inclusion of all appropriateport and cargo handling expenses and need not be changed. Operators shouldtake care in reporting the required port and cargo handling informationto MARAD so that all appropriate expenses are included. If MARAD determinesthat such costs are allowable, they will be included.This would apply to any costs incurred for operations by single unit vessels.However, with respect to positioning time, break-out and layup costs, MARADhas consistently maintained that the deviation to engage in a preferencevoyage is a management decision, and costs for such decisions are for theaccount of the company, not the Government. As to oil-to-grain cleaningcosts, the preference cargo programs are intended to be support programsfor vessels of the appropriate type. Accordingly, MARAD will not allowcosts such as oil-to-grain cleaning, positioning voyages, positioning time,or break-out, or layup costs.<ITAG tagnum="84">Return on Working Capital</ITAG>In their initial comments, two commenters stated that the return on workingcapital should be 100 percent, based upon the ongoing difficulties thatthe operators have in recovering payment of freight from third world nations.Recovery is generally slow, and an operator may well be into or have completedother voyages before full payment for a prior voyage is received. The themeof slow payment was reiterated by many of the public hearing attendees.The attendees also pointed out that the final 10 percent of freight duethem is often outstanding for long periods of time and seldom is paid infull. MARAD believes there is a demonstrable delay involved in the presentcollection process. Since the operators are not receiving their freightpayment until near the end of the voyage or afterward, utilization of a100 percent working capital factor is appropriate. As such, MARAD has modifiedthe proposal to include a return that recognizes 100 percent of workingcapital expended.<ITAG tagnum="84">Delay Factor</ITAG>Two commenters expressed opinions that the delay factor built into theoperating cost category is not sufficient to cover actual delays. Bothcited unusual weather delays, port congestion, and weather among othercauses of delay. In addition, they pointed out that certain charter termsalmost always have a greater delay factor associated with them. (One operatorbelieved that, at a minimum, 35 percent is appropriate, while another assertedthat a 50 percent factor would be most appropriate.) One commenter alsopointed out that because of their lashing system, tug/barge units mustslow substantially and go into towing modes at very low speeds while atsea in heavy weather.MARAD has been using certain port delay factors that have proven satisfactoryover a long period of time. It will continue to look at types of cargocarried and charter terms for guidance in determining a factor for delays.In this regard, this rule requires the submission of data on preferencecargoes carried. If the voyage data indicates greater delays over time,the delay factors will be modified appropriately.MARAD concedes that in heavy weather tug/barge units which are not fullyintegrated must slow considerably in a towing mode and that an additionaldelay factor is warranted. Procedures will be modified to utilize a 10percent weather delay factor for these units.<ITAG tagnum="84">Confidentiality</ITAG>Two commenters believed that the confidentiality of data submissions cannotbe effectively maintained. Additionally, one of the commenters believedthat MARAD does not need the requested data and that is an imposition onthe operators to be required to provide the data. The first commenter statedthat the risk of disclosure, either accidentally or through the Freedomof Information Act (FOIA), is too great and that there exists a substantialrisk of competitive harm through the release of what it believes to behighly sensitive and confidential information.The second, however, stated that the confidentiality problem might be addressedthrough embodiment of confidentiality provisions in the regulation. Inthe SNPRM, the issue of confidentiality was discussed in the preamble ofthe regulation but was not incorporated in the regulation. Several operatorsraised this issue at the public hearing. Most did not question the necessity,but nearly all were concerned of public exposure of the data.Considering the position taken by the GAO in its report of June 18, 1985,the requirement for data submission in this regulation is justified. However,there are other considerations. Contrary to the belief of the first commenterMARAD does not now have readily available the comprehensive body of dataneeded to calculate guideline rates except as voluntarily submitted byvessel operators. This is due, in part, to the participation in these programsof operators who have no other reporting requirements to MARAD.MARAD concedes that the possibility of a leak is always present and currentlyexists in any program which requires the submission of confidential data.However, the incidence of intentional and accidental leaks of proprietaryinformation is extremely low. Defense of confidential material from discoveryunder the FOIA is also generally quite successful, except in extreme instanceswhere limited discovery has been ordered by the courts.MARAD acknowledges that there is merit in the suggestion that confidentialityprovisions should be embodied in the regulation. MARAD believes that forthese procedures to be effective, MARAD is essential, that operators submitto it proprietary, privileged, commercial and financial information thatoperators would not otherwise disclose in the ordinary course of business.Accordingly, the data submission requirements have been amended to incorporateconfidentiality provisions similar to those contained in the regulationsat 46 CFR part 232, Uniform Financial Reporting Requirements. In this regard,MARAD will make an initial, rebuttable, presumption that all financialand operating data submitted is confidential within the meaning of 5 U.S.C.552(b)(4). MARAD will contact the operators as required for confirmationof data confidentiality in the event of a request under FOIA for releaseof any data submissions. MARAD emphasizes that submitters can also helpprotect data from inadvertent disclosure by clearly marking the data submittedas confidential.<ITAG tagnum="84">Procedures and Definitions</ITAG>Two commenters stated that parts of the proposed rule are not clear. Onewanted the procedures for escalating cost data and determining variableinterest rates more clearly defined, and the process for implementationof the rule clearly set forth. In addition, several tug/barge operatorssuggested that a definition of a fully integrated tug/barge unit (ITB)be included in the regulation.Further, one commenter believed that the entire process for determiningthe guideline rates is based on unsupported assumptions and does not meetthe judicial requirements established in <T3>Aeron Marine Co. </T3>v. <T3>U.S. </T3>695 F.2d. 567 (D.C. Cir. 1982).Under the regulations, escalation of cost data will be done yearly forwage and non-wage items of expense. Wage items will be escalated on July1 of each year by the wage index used by MARAD to escalate subsidizablewage costs for ODS purposes. Non-wage items will be escalated on January1 on a similar basis. With regard to variable interest rates, MARAD willuse the rate in effect at the time of the rate calculation. Both of theserequirements are incorporated in the regulation.With respect to the definition of an integrated tug/barge unit, MARAD agreesthat a definition that will identify ITB's is required for the proper applicationof delay factors. Pushing mode ITB's have operational characteristics andseakeeping capabilities similar to single unit vessels of similar size,and most are comparable in size to moderately sized single unit vessels.In this regard, the Coast Guard also views pushing mode ITB's as similarto single unit vessels of the same size. Accordingly, for the purpose ofthe regulations, MARAD is adopting the definition of Pushing Mode ITB'scontained in enclosure (1) to the U.S. Coast Guard's Navigation and VesselInspection Circular 2-81, change 1 (NVC 2-81 change 1).With regard to the requirements of <T3>Aeron</T3> v. <T3>U.S.,</T3> it appears that the commenter's claim was that various componentsof the rate determination are based on unsupported assumptions. The commenterasserted that the number of operating days in a year, the working capitalrequirements, overhead, and loading and discharge factors are unsupportedassumptions. MARAD feels this criticism is unfounded. All of the itemsreferred to above are discussed in detail elsewhere in this rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Participation</ITAG>Some commenters believed that the regulations will discourage participationof U.S.-flag operators in the preference trades. One states that the uncertaintygenerated by the rule will discourage new investment in and modernizationof the U.S. merchant marine. Another stated that the rule would discourageparticipation of American-flag operators in preference trades, reduce theavailability of U.S.-flag vessels, and defeat the intent of Congress inestablishing the requirement that 75 percent of certain preference cargoesbe carried in U.S.-flag ships. MARAD believes that the foregoing commentsrepresent unsubstantiated speculation. The purpose of the various requestsfor comments and the public hearing was to achieve a rulemaking that isworkable and fair to the operators, the Government, and the shipper agencies.MARAD believes that as a result of the rulemaking process, this purposehas been achieved, and that the worst case scenarios envisioned by thecommenters will not materialize.<ITAG tagnum="84">Miscellaneous Comments</ITAG>A number of comments were expressed by a single operator only. These commentsare discussed below by operator.American Trading Transportation CompanyATT has expressed two general comments on the proposed regulations. First,ATT believes that MARAD should not calculate a precise rate and that absoluteaccuracy is not required by statute or Congressional intent. Second, ATTstated that MARAD should calculate guideline rates on the basis of industrysurvey data already available to it and require data submissions and calculatea specific rate only when the agency believes that an operator has submitteda rate that is outrageously unfair and unreasonable.Contrary to ATT's comment on precise rates, MARAD believes that it wasindeed Congress' intent to have clearly defined procedures for calculatingguideline rates, based on the best cost information obtainable. Lackingthis, MARAD and the shipper agenies could not comply with the statute inevaluating bids as fair and unreasonable. To this end, a precise rate ismost certainly required. Further, as pointed out earlier, MARAD's lackof precise and verifiable data has been criticized by the GAO, and MARADintends to correct this shortcoming.Liberty Maritime Corp.First, Liberty believed that the 70 percent floor limitation on the vesselcapacity used to calculate the per ton guideline rate is anticompetitiveand will discourage the carriage of smaller lots of cargo in larger vessels.Second, Liberty stated that there should be a trial period during whichboth MARAD and the individual operators should share in the process ofcalculating guideline rate, with MARAD disclosing to each operator howits individual rate was determined. The trial period would be used to finetune the rate calculation process.MARAD notes this regulation does not prohibit an operator with a largecapacity vessel from bidding on smaller preference cargo lots. However,this regulation does emphasize the uneconomical aspect of such arrangements.It is MARAD's position that the Government should not pay what amountsto an excess premium rate when vessels carry substantially less than theircargo capacity. Accordingly, the 70 percent limitation is fair for ratecalculation purposes and will be retained.As to a trial period, MARAD believes that the procedures contained in thisregulation are clear and, further, that they have already been subjectedto an extended period of comment and review. A trial period is not deemednecessary.American Gulf Shipping, Inc.AGS commented that the entire regulation should be withdrawn at this timefor further study.As noted above, this regulation has already been subjected to extensivestudy and review. Through the regulatory process, MARAD believes that asound methodology has been achieved.Falcon Shipping GroupFalcon commented that if the proposed regulations result in a decreasein participation in the preference trades by U.S.-flag operators, a greaternumber of defaults may occur on vessels that have obtained financing guaranteesunder title XI of the Act. As previously discussed, MARAD believes thatthese concerns are purely speculative. MARAD does not concur that suchresults are inevitable or even likely.Gulfcoast Transit CompanyGTC believed that the title XI rate of interest should not be used in calculatingthe interest cost segment in the capital portion of the guideline rate.GTC stated that this rate is not available to many operators using non-titleXI financing and is lower than the rates those operators can obtain. Asa result, interest costs may be understated.The regulation calls for the use of the operators' actual interest ratein calculating interest costs in the capital component of the rate. Thetitle XI rate is only to be utilized in cases where the actual interestrate is not available.OMI Corp.OMI has suggested that depreciation alone is not sufficient to encourageinvestment in replacement vessels and has suggested that an additionalbonus be included in the guideline rate for replacement vessels. MARADdoes not concur. MARAD believes that the depreciation allowance is normallyset aside for replacement of assets and is adequate for this purpose. Anadditional allowance is considered unnecessary. In addition, any new replacementvessel entering service would receive its own depreciation allowance. Accordingly,no additional allowance will be included for replacement of vessels.Keystone ShippingDuring the course of the hearing, Keystone stated that there should bespecial provisions in the capital portion of the rate for capitalized leases.Similar comments were made on behalf of the Berger Group with referenceto previous comments submitted on an earlier NPRM. MARAD considers capitalleases to be an alternative form of financing. As a rule, the cost of suchleases should be adequately reflected in the existing capital calculationin the rate structure. It is, therefore, necessary for any operator utilizinga capitalized lease to report the capitalized cost of that lease and theimputed interest rate. Accordingly, MARAD does not believe any alterationis necessary to the guideline rate structure, although reporting requirementswill be modified to specify that, where appropriate, the required leaseinformation be provided.<ITAG tagnum="84">Non-MARAD Issues</ITAG>During the course of the public hearing, and in several of the supplementalcomments provided after the hearing, several issues were raised that arebeyond the scope of MARAD's authority. These issues primarily involvedinequitable terms in charter parties and abuses by various parties to thecharters. One of these subjects was the inadequacy or unfair demurrageand dispatch provisions in the charter parties. Another involved the timingor seasonality of shipments, i.e., heavy vessel utilization at certaintimes of the year with widespread slack time during other periods. WhileMARAD can sympathize with the operators in regard to these matters, theyare beyond the scope of this regulation. However, the salient commentson these matters have been referred to the appropriate shipper agenciesfor review and action, and MARAD has instigated a dialogue on these issueswhich is currently ongoing.<ITAG tagnum="84">Revised Rate Methodology</ITAG>The guideline or fair and reasonable rates to be established by MARAD willapply only to the waterborne portion of cargo transportation and will consistof four components: (1) Operating costs; (2) capital costs; (3) port andcargo handling costs; and (4) brokerage and overhead. The operating costcomponent of the fair and reasonable rate for each participating bulk vesselwill reflect actual vessel operating costs based on the historical datasubmitted in accordance with this rule. MARAD will escalate the operatingcosts yearly to the current period utilizing escalation factors for wageand non-wage costs. To the extent vessels are time chartered or leased,operators shall submit both operating and capital costs, including capitalizedcost and imputed interest rate for vessels subject to capital leases. Ifthese items are unavailable, MARAD will construct appropriate cost factors.All eligible annual operating costs will be added together for each vesseland divided by the total number of operating days for that vessel to yielda daily operating cost. The cost will be escalated to the current yearand multiplied by estimated total voyage days to yield the operating costsegment for the voyage.Fuel will be figured on the basis of actual reported fuel consumption atsea and in port. The actual fuel consumptions of each vessel will be multipliedby the corresponding projected number of voyage days at sea and in portto yield total fuel consumed. Current fuel prices will be applied to fuelconsumed to produce the fuel segment of the operating cost component. Thetotal of the fuel and non-fuel operating cost segments will be added togetherto yield the operating cost component for the voyage.The capital cost component will be calculated individually for each participatingbulk vessel, and will consist of an allowance for depreciation and interest,and a reasonable return on investment. Depreciation will be straight-linebased on a 20-year economic life utilizing a residual value of 2.5 percent.However, if the owner acquired an existing vessel, the vessel will be depreciatedon a straight-line basis over the remaining period of its 20-year economiclife, but not fewer than 10 years. Capitalized improvements will be depreciatedstraight-line over the remainder of the 20-year period, but not fewer than10 years, commencing with the capitalization date for those improvements.For the purpose of calculating interest expense, it is assumed that originalvessel indebtedness is 75 percent of the owner's capitalized vessel costand that principal payments are made in equal annual installments overa 20-year period. To compute the interest cost, the owner's actual interestrate will be applied to the constructed outstanding debt on the vessel.Where the owner has a variable interest rate, the owner's rate prevailingat the time of calculation will be used. In cases where there is no interestrate available, MARAD will select an appropriate interest rate. A currentlong-term interest rate (the Title XI rate if available) will be used foroperators without vessel debt.Return on investment will have two components, return on equity and returnon working capital. The rate of return will be based upon a five-year averageof the most recent rates of return for a cross section of transportationindustry companies, including maritime companies. Equity is assumed tobe the vessel's constructed net book value less constructed principal.Working capital is the dollar amount necessary to cover operating and voyageexpenses.The annual depreciation, interest, and return on equity will be dividedby 300 operating days to determine a daily amount. The total of these elementswill be multiplied by estimated voyage days and added to the return onworking capital to determine the capital cost component used in the fairand reasonable rate calculation.The port and cargo handling cost component will be determined for eachvoyage on the basis of the actual cargo tender terms for the commodity,load and discharge ports, and lot size. The costs will include applicablefees for wharfage and dockage of the vessel, canal tolls, cargo loadingand discharging, and all other voyage costs associated with the transportationof preference cargo, except bagging and stacking of cargo at discharge.Costs used to determine the port and cargo cost component shall be basedon the most current data from all available sources and verified from datareceived on completed cargo preference voyages.To determine the brokerage and overhead component of the fair and reasonablerate, the components for operating, capital, and port and cargo handlingwill be totaled and multiplied by an 8.5 percent allowance for broker'scommissions and overhead. The total of these four components is dividedby cargo tons (but not less than 70 percent of the vessel's deadweight)to determine the fair and reasonable rate.When an operator, whose vessel is to carry or has carried preference cargo,subsequently arranges to transport an additional (backhaul) cargo for thenext leg of the vessel's roundtrip itinerary, MARAD will reexamine theguideline rate that was calculated for the preference voyage. This reexaminationmay result in the originally calculated guideline rate being recalculated,incorporating the additional voyage itinerary, costs and revenues whichoccurred as a result of the carriage of the additional (backhaul) cargo.This, in turn, can possibly result in the vessel operator being liablefor repayment of some portion of the revenue it derived from the preferencecargo, if MARAD's recalculated guideline rate is less than the rate perton received by the operator from the preference cargo. MARAD will so notifythe sponsoring shipper agencies in all such cases for appropriate actionin this regard.If a vessel is scrapped or sold after discharging a preference cargo, theguideline rate will be adjusted to reflect the termination of the voyageafter discharge. If the rate received by the operator for the preferencecargo exceeds the adjusted guideline rate for the one way voyage, the operatoris required to repay the difference in ocean freight to the shipper agency.The civilian Federal agencies chartering full vessel quantities of cargosubject to the preference laws secure guidance from MARAD as to fair andreasonableness of U.S.-flag rates and as to the eligibility of U.S.-flagvessels for these cargoes. In this context, MARAD's approval of a vessel'seligibility is directly contingent upon compliance by the vessel's operatorwith the required submission of the cost data specified in the proposedrulemaking.In special circumstances, such as a rapid change in vessel technology acceleratingthe end of numerous vessels' economic lives, certain procedures prescribedin this rule may be waived, so long as the procedures adopted are consistentwith the Act and with the intent of these regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Analysis of Regulatory Impact</ITAG>This regulation has been reviewed under Executive Order 12291, and it hasbeen determined that this is not a major rule. It will not result in anannual effect on the economy of $100 million or more. There will be noincrease in production costs or prices for consumers, individual industries,Federal, State or local governments, agencies, or geographic regions. Furthermore,it will not adversely affect competition, employment, investment, productivity,innovation, or the ability of United States-based enterprises to competewith foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets.While this rulemaking does not involve any change in important Departmentalpolicies, it is considered significant because it addresses a matter ofconsiderable importance to the maritime industry and may be expected togenerate significant public interest. MARAD has estimated the potentialeconomic impact of this rulemaking based on a sample of actual fixtures.If in instances where the actual fixture exceeded the guideline rate calculatedusing this rulemaking and the actual fixture was reduced to the guidelinerate, freight charges paid by the government would have been reduced by0.75%. In 1988, estimated freight charges paid by government agencies coveredby this rule was about $300 million. Under conditions characterizing thestudy period, total savings are estimated to be $2.25 million annually.The additional administrative costs to the government and the cost of additionaldata requirements on operators is estimated to be $4,347 annually. Thiscost is less than the annual $2.25 million savings and therefore the proposedchange is justifiable on a cost basis. Because the economic impact shouldbe minimal, further regulatory evaluation is not necessary. Moreover, theMaritime Administration certifies that this regulation will not have asignificant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.This regulation does not significantly affect the environment. An environmentalimpact statement is not required under the National Environment PolicyAct of 1969. It has also been reviewed under Executive Order 12612, Federalism,and it has been determined that it does not have sufficient implicationsfor federalism to warrant preparation of a Federalism Assessment.This regulation does contain a requirement for the collection of informationthat has been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) forreview under the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>), and has been approved (OMB approval No. 2133-0514).<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 46 CFR Part 382</ITAG>Agricultural commodities, Cargo preference, Cargo vessels, Government procurement,Grant programs_foreign relations, Loan programs_foreign relations, watertransportation.Accordingly, 46 CFR chapter II is hereby amended by adding a new part 382,to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 382_DETERMINATION OF FAIR AND REASONABLE RATES FOR THE CARRIAGEOF BULK AND PACKAGED PREFERENCE CARGOES ON U.S.-FLAG COMMERCIAL VESSELS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">382.1 Scope.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">382.2 Data Submission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">382.3 Determination of fair and reasonable rates.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">382.4 Waiver.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Secs. 204 and 901 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936,as amended (46 App. U.S.C. 1114, 1241); 49 CFR 1.66.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 382.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Scope.</ITAG>These regulations prescribe the type of information that must be submittedby operators interested in carrying bulk and packaged preference cargoes,and the method for calculating fair and reasonable rates for the carriageof dry (including packaged) and liquid bulk preference cargoes on U.S.-flagcommercial vessels, except less than full cargoes on liner vessels, pursuantto section 901 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936, as amended.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 382.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Data Submission.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General.</T3> The operators shall submit information, described inparagraphs (b) and (c) of this section, to the Director, Office of ShipOperating Assistance, Maritime Administration, Washington, DC 20590. Tothe extent a vessel is time chartered, the operator shall also submit operatingexpenses for that vessel. All submissions shall be certified by the operatorsand are subject to verification, at MARAD's discretion, by the Office ofthe Inspector General, Department of Transportation. MARAD's calculationsof the fair and reasonable rates for U.S.-flag vessels shall be performedon the basis of cost data provided by the U.S.-flag vessel operator asspecified herein. Failure of a vessel operator to submit the required costdata will result in MARAD being unable to construct the guideline ratefor the affected vessel, which may result in such vessel not being approvedby the sponsoring Federal agency.(b) <T3>Required information for each vessel.</T3> The following informationshall be submitted not later than 120 days following the effective dateof this part for the previous calendar year and shall be updated not laterthan April 30 for each subsequent calendar year. In instances where a vesselhas not previously participated in the carriage of cargoes described inandSection; 382.1, the information shall be submitted not later than thesame date as the offer for carriage of such cargoes is submitted to thesponsoring Federal agency, and/or its program participant, and/or its agentand/or program's agent, or freight forwarder.(1) Vessel name.(2) Vessel DWT and net registered tonnage for the Suez and Panana Canals.(3) Date built, rebuilt and/or purchased.(4) Normal operating speed.(5) Daily fuel consumption at normal operating speed, in metric tons (U.S.gallons for tugs) and by type of fuel, per day.(6) Fuel consumption in port while pumping and standing, in metric tons(U.S. gallons for tugs), by type of fuel, per day.(7) Total capitalized vessel costs (list and date capitalized improvementsseparately), and applicable interest rates for indebtedness (where capitalleases are involved, the operator shall report the imputed capitalizedcost and imputed interest rate).(8) Operating cost information, such information to be submitted, by vessel,in the format stipulated by 46 CFR 232.1, Form MA-172 Schedule 301. Tug/bargeoperators shall submit such information separately for each tug and bargeemployed in the preference trade. Information shall be applicable to themost recently completed calendar year.(9) Number of vessel operating days pertaining to data reported in paragraph(b)(8) of this section for the year ending December 31. For purposes ofthis regulation an operating day is defined as any day on which a vesselor barge unit is in a seaworthy condition, fully manned, and either inoperation or standing ready to begin operations.(c) <T3>Required port and cargo handling information.</T3> The following portand cargo handling costs shall be provided for each cargo preference voyagewithin 60 days of the termination of the voyage, identifying the vessel,cargo and tonnage, and round-trip voyage itinerary including dates of arrivaland departure at port or ports of loading and discharge.(1) <T3>Port expenses.</T3> Total expenses or fees, by port, for pilots, tugs,line handlers, wharfage, port charges, fresh water, lighthouse dues, quarantineservice, customs charges, shifting expense, and any other appropriate expense.(2) <T3>Cargo expense.</T3> Separately list expenses or fees for stevedores,elevators, equipment, and any other appropriate expenses.(3) <T3>Extra cargo expenses.</T3> Separately list expenses or fees for vacuvatorsand/or cranes, lightening (indicate tons moved and cost per ton), grain-to-graincleaning of holds or tanks and any other appropriate expenses.(4) <T3>Canal expenses.</T3> Total expenses or fees for agents, tolls (lightor loaded), tugs, pilots, lock tenders and boats, and any other appropriateexpenses. Indicate waiting time and time of passage.(d) <T3>Other requirements.</T3> Unless otherwise provided, operators shalluse 46 CFR part 232, Uniform Financial Reporting Requirements, and 46 CFRpart 272, Maintenance and Repair Reporting Instructions, for guidance insubmitting cost data. Data requirements stipulated in paragraph (b) ofthis section that are not included under those reporting instructions shallbe submitted in a similar format. If the operator has already submittedto MARAD, for other purposes, any data required under paragraph (b) ofthis section its submission need not be duplicated to satisfy the requirementsof this regulation.(e) <T3>Presumption of confidentiality.</T3> MARAD will initially presume thatthe material submitted in accordance with the requirements of these regulationsis privileged or confidential within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4).In the event of a subsequent request for any portion of that data under5 U.S.C. 552, MARAD will inform the submitter of such request and allowthe opportunity to comment. The submitter shall claim confidentiality atthat time by memorandum or letter, stating the basis, in detail, for suchassertion of exemption to disclosure, including, but not limited to, statutoryand decisional authorities. Those parts not so claimed will be subjectto initial determination by the Freedom of Information Act Officer.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control No.2133-0514)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 382.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Determination of fair and reasonable rates.</ITAG>Fair and reasonable rates for the carriage of preference cargoes on U.S.-flagcommercial vessels shall be determined as follows:(a) <T3>Operating cost component.</T3> An operating cost component, based onactual operating costs of each participating vessel, shall be determinedon the basis of operating cost data for the calendar year immediately precedingthe current year that has been submitted in accordance with andSection; 382.2.The operating cost component shall include all operating cost categories,as defined by 46 CFR 232.5, Form MA-172 Schedule 301, Operating Expenses.(For purposes of this rule, charter hire expenses are not considered operatingcosts.) Such data shall be escalated by MARAD yearly to the current periodutilizing escalation factors for wage and nonwage costs applied to thosecost categories in escalating operating subsidy costs for the same period.Fuel costs shall be determined individually based on the actual fuel consumptions,at sea and in port, for each vessel and current fuel prices in effect atthe time of the preference cargo voyage(s).(b) <T3>Capital component_</T3> (1) <T3>General. </T3>A capital cost component shall be constructed for eacheligible vessel consisting of vessel depreciation, interest, return onworking capital, and return on equity.(2) <T3>Items included.</T3> The capital cost component shall include:(i) <T3>Depreciation.</T3> The owner's capitalized vessel cost, including capitalizedimprovements, shall be depreciated on a straight-line basis over a 20-yeareconomic life, unless the owner has purchased or reconstructed the vesselwhen its age was greater than 10 years old. To the extent a vessel is charteredor leased, the operator shall submit the capitalized cost and imputed interestrate (in the event these items are not furnished they shall be constructedby MARAD). When vessels more than 10 years old are purchased, a depreciationperiod of 10 years shall be used. Capitalized improvements made to vesselsmore than 10 years old will be depreciated over a 10-year period. Whenvessels more than 10 years old are reconstructed, MARAD will determinethe depreciation period. The residual value of the vessel shall be assumedto be 2.5 percent of total capitalized cost.(ii) <T3>Interest.</T3> The cost of debt shall be determined by applying thevessel owner's actual interest rate to the outstanding vessel indebtedness.It shall be assumed that original vessel indebtedness is 75 percent ofthe owner's capitalized vessel cost, including capitalized improvements,and that annual principal payments are made in equal installments overthe 20-year economic life. If an actual interest rate is not available,MARAD shall select an appropriate interest rate. Where an operator usesa variable interest rate, the operator's actual interest rate at the timeof calculation of the guideline rate shall be used. A current long-terminterest rate (the title XI rate if available) will be used for operatorswithout vessel debt.(iii) <T3>Return on working capital.</T3> Working capital shall equal the dollaramount necessary to cover 100 percent of the operating and voyage costsof the vessel for the voyage. The rate of return shall be based on an averageof the most recent return of stockholders' equity for a cross section oftransportation companies, including maritime companies.(iv) <T3>Return on equity.</T3> The rate of return on equity shall be the samerate as described in paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section. For the purposeof determining equity, it shall be assumed that the vessel's constructednet book value, less outstanding constructed principal, is equity. Theconstructed net book value shall equal the owner's capitalized cost minusaccumulated straight-line depreciation.(3) <T3>Voyage component.</T3> The annual depreciation, interest, and returnon equity shall be divided by 300 vessel operating days to yield the dailycost factors. Total voyage days shall be applied to the daily cost factorsand totaled with the return on working capital for the voyage to determinethe daily capital cost component.(c) <T3>Port and cargo handling cost component.</T3> MARAD shall calculatean estimate of all port and cargo handling costs on the basis of the reportedcargo tender terms. The port and cargo handling cost component shall bebased on the most current information available verified by informationsubmitted in accordance with andSection; 382.2(c), or as otherwise determinedby MARAD.(d) <T3>Brokerage and overhead component.</T3> An allowance for broker's commissionand overhead expenses of 8.5 percent shall be added to the sum of the operatingcost component, the capital cost component, and the port and cargo handlingcost component.(e) <T3>Determination of voyage days.</T3> The following assumptions shallbe made in determining the number of preference cargo voyage days:(1) The voyage shall be round-trip with the return in ballast, unless thevessel is scrapped or sold immediately after discharge of the preferencecargo. In this event, only voyage days from the load port to the dischargeport, including time allowed to discharge, shall be included. In the eventa backhaul cargo is obtained, an adjustment to allowable voyage days shallbe made.(2) Cargo is loaded and discharged as per cargo tender terms interpretedin accordance with the ``international rules for the interpretation oftrade terms'' (INCOTERMS).(3) Total loading and discharge time includes the addition of a factorto account for delays and days not worked.(4) One extra port day is included at each anticipated bunkering port.(5) An allowance shall be included for canal transits, when appropriate.(6) Transit time shall be based on the vessel's normal operating speed,and shall include for single unit vessels and fully integrated tug/bargeunits (ITB's), as defined by the definition of Pushing Mode ITB containedin U.S. Coast Guard Navigation and Vessel Inspection Circular 2-18, change1, enclosure (1), an additional five percent to account for weather conditions.An allowance of ten percent shall be added for all other tug/barge units.(f) <T3>Determination of cargo carried.</T3> The amount of cargo tonnage usedto calculate the rate shall be based on the charter party terms. However,in no case shall less than 70 percent of deadweight be used for rate calculationpurposes. In instances when separate parcels of preference cargo are bookedor considered for booking on the same vessel, whether under a single programor different programs, a guideline rate for each parcel shall be providedbased on the combined voyage.(g) <T3>Total rate.</T3> The fair and reasonable rate shall be the total ofthe operating cost component, the capital cost component, the port andcargo handling cost component, and the broker's commission and overheadcomponent divided by the amount of cargo to be carried as determined byparagraph (f) of this section, expressed as cost per ton.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 382.4 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Waiver.</ITAG>In special circumstances and for good cause shown, the procedures prescribedin this part may be waived in keeping with the circumstances of the present,so long as the procedures adopted are consistent with the Act and withthe intent of these regulations.<ITAG tagnum="21">By order of the Maritime Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: November 22, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">James E. Saari,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-27846 Filed 11-28-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-81-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>