<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89804-0002 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-04-89.f2.A1001</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 229</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Reg. CC; Docket No. R-0648]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 7100-AB01</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The Board is publishing amendments to its RegulationCC, Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks (12 CFR Part 229). Therule changes will alleviate the operational difficulties and additionalrisks associated with the acceptance for deposit of bank payable throughchecks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE:</T2> The effective date for the amendments to andSection;229.38 of the regulation and commentary is February 1, 1990. The effectivedate for the amendments to andSection; 229.36 of the regulation and commentaryis February 1, 1991.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Louise L. Roseman, AssistantDirector (202/452-3874), Gayle Thompson, Manager (202/452-3917), or KathleenM. Connor, Senior Financial Services Analyst (202/452-3917), Division ofFederal Reserve Bank Operations; Oliver Ireland, Associate General Counsel(202/452-3625), or Stephanie Martin, Attorney (202/452-3198), Legal Division;for the hearing impaired <T3>only:</T3> Telecommunications Device for the Deaf, Earnestine Hillor Dorothea Thompson (202/452-3544).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> The Board has adopted two amendmentsto Regulation CC, which: (1) Require bank payable through checks to beconspicuously labeled with the name, location, and first four digits ofthe routing number of the bank on which the check is written and the legend``payable through'' followed by the name and location of the payable throughbank; and (2) Place the risk of loss for return of bank payable throughchecks being returned by a nonlocal payable through bank on the bank onwhich such checks are written, to the extent that the return from the nonlocalpayable through bank took longer than would have been required if the checkhad been returned expeditiously by the bank on which it is written. Thetest for expeditious return would be based on the two-day/four-day testin andSection; 229.30(a)(1) of the regulation.These amendments will become effective on February 1, 1991, and February1, 1990, respectively.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>As adopted in May 1988, Regulation CC provided that checks written on anaccount at one bank\1\<NOTE/> but payable through another bank were to be considered localor nonlocal under Regulation CC and the Expedited Funds Availability Act(``Act'') based on the location of the bank designated as the payable throughbank. This treatment of ``bank payable through checks'' was consistentwith the scheme set forth in the Act to permit banks to place longer holdson checks that must be sent to nonlocal banks for collection because suchchecks generally take longer to collect and return than checks sent tolocal banks for collection and, therefore, could pose greater risks fordepositary banks. In addition, treating the payable through bank as thepaying bank would have facilitated the handling of these checks by depositarybanks because it would have permitted them to use automated equipment toread the routing number of the payable through bank encoded on a check,which indicates the check processing region in which the payable throughbank is located. Availability could have been assigned for the check automaticallyon the basis of that number. \1\<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>Regulation CC defines<T3> bank</T3> to include all depository institutions, including commercialbanks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions. A <T3>depositary bank</T3> is defined as the first bank to which a checkis transferred. A<T3> paying bank</T3> is the bank by which a check is payable for the purposeof determining whether a check is local or nonlocal for determining availability.Shortly after the Board adopted Regulation CC defining the payable throughbank as the paying bank and thus allowing bank payable through checks tobe treated as local or nonlocal according to the location of the payablethrough bank, the Credit Union National Association (``CUNA'') and oneof its member credit unions brought suit asserting that this rule was contraryto the provisions of the Act. The suit asserted that such checks, in particularcredit union share drafts, should be treated as local or nonlocal on thebasis of the location of the bank on which they are written, rather thanthe location of the payable through bank. CUNA believed that the treatmentof bank payable through checks adopted by the Board would have an adverseeffect on the acceptability of these checks as a form of payment becausemost credit union payable through checks would be treated as nonlocal,even though they would generally be deposited in a bank local to the creditunion. CUNA argued that if these checks were generally treated as nonlocal,a large number of credit unions that offer payable through share draftaccounts would be disadvantaged. On July 28, 1988, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbiaruled that under the language of the Act, payable through checks shouldbe treated as local or nonlocal on the basis of the location of the creditunion on which they are written rather than the location of the payablethrough bank. On August 18, 1988, the Board adopted interim amendmentsto Regulation CC to implement the court's decision and requested commenton the interim rule pending consideration of a longer term response tothe court's interpretation of the Act (53 FR 31290, August 18, 1988). Theinterim rule applied the court's decision to all bank payable through checksrather than only those written on credit unions. One hundred fifty-five comments were received on the interim rule. Theoverwhelming majority of these commenters objected to the treatment ofbank payable through checks as local or nonlocal based on the locationof the bank on which they are written, asserting that the rule createsoperational difficulties and increased risks for depositary banks. Manyof the commenters suggested various means of addressing these operationalproblems and risks. On November 2, 1988, the Board adopted the interim rule, with minor technicalchanges, as a final rule, and also published for comment proposed amendmentsto Regulation CC designed to alleviate the operational difficulties andincreased risks resulting from the new rule. (53 FR 44324, 44335, November2, 1988.) These proposed amendments were based on specific suggestionsof the commenters on the interim rule and on subsequent discussions withindustry representatives and the Industry Return Item Advisory Group, whichincludes representatives of commercial banks, savings and loan associations,and credit unions. The Board issued the proposals for comment to gain furtherinformation concerning whether the proposals were necessary to facilitatecompliance with the revised regulation and to improve the check systemby speeding the collection and return of payable through checks, and whetherthey would impose undue burdens on the banks on which bank payable throughchecks are written. The four proposals for which the Board requested comment would: (1) Require bank payable through checks to bear a routing number in theMICR (Magnetic Ink Character Recognition) line local to the bank on whichthe checks are written, and to be presentable locally; (2) Require bank payable through checks to be conspicuously labeled withthe name, location, and nine-digit routing number of the bank on whichthe check is written and the legend ``payable through'' followed by thename and location of the payable through bank; (3) Authorize direct presentment to the bank on which the payable throughcheck is written; and (4) Place the risk of loss for return of bank payable through checks beingreturned by a nonlocal payable through bank on the bank on which such checksare written, to the extent that the return from the nonlocal payable throughbank took longer than would have been required if the check had been returnedexpeditiously by the bank on which it is written.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion </ITAG>The Board received a total of 763 comments from the public on the proposedamendments to Regulation CC.\2\<NOTE/> The following table shows the comments received by categoryof respondent:<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ This number does not include comment letters from FederalReserve Banks and duplicate comment letters from the same bank.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L0,tp0,p0,8/9,g1,t1,i1,s100,4 </C> <H1> </H1><H1> </H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">Commercial banks and bank holding companies <D>264 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Savings and loan associations <D>7 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Credit unions <D>451 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Trade associations <D>23 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Corporations <D>5 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Government Agencies <D>3 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Members of Congress <D>10</D></ITAG></ITAG>Generally, commercial bank commenters supported all four proposals, butparticularly stressed the need to require that bank payable through checksbear a routing number local to the bank on which such checks are written.Credit union commenters strongly opposed this proposal, as well as theproposal authorizing direct presentment to the banks on which payable throughchecks are written. Credit union commenters generally did not oppose implementationof the proposal to require bank payable through checks to be conspicuouslylabeled with specific information related to both the bank on which thecheck is written and the payable through bank and the proposal to shiftthe risk of loss to banks issuing payable through checks for return ofsuch checks from nonlocal payable through banks, to the extent that thereturn of a payable through check from the nonlocal payable through banktook longer than would have been required if the check had been returnedexpeditiously by the bank on which the check is written. A summary discussionof the Board's analysis of each proposed amendment follows. Require bank payable through checks to be conspicuously labeled with thename, location, and nine-digit routing number of the bank on which thecheck is written and the legend ``payable through'' followed by the nameand location of the payable through bank. In order for banks to be ableto manually identify payable through checks from other check deposits anddetermine by visual inspection the appropriate hold, rather than rely onthe routing number encoded on the check to determine availability, theBoard proposed that certain information pertaining to the payable throughbank and the bank on which the check is written must be included on thecheck. Other than the routing number of the bank on which the payable throughchecks are written, the information specified in this proposal is currentlyrequired by either existing law or Federal Reserve operating circular.\3\<NOTE/> This proposal would clarify that this information is requiredand would apply to all bank payable through checks, including those checkscollected outside the Federal Reserve. It would also require that suchlabeling be conspicuous, setting a minimum type size standard. In addition,through inclusion in the regulation, liability for noncompliance wouldbe established.    <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ See U.C.C. andSection; 3-120, <T3>Engine Parts, Inc. v. Citizens Bank of Clovis, </T3>92 N.M. 37, 582P.2d 809, 23 UCC Rep. Serv. 1248 (1978), and <T3>Phelan v. University National Bank, </T3>85 Ill. App. 2d 56, 229 N.E.2d374, 4 UCC Rep. Serv. 635 (1967). The Federal Reserve Operating Circularon the Collection of Cash Items and Returned Checks, as revised effectiveJuly 17, 1989, states that banks should not send to a Reserve Bank forforward collection a check that ``does not set forth on its face the nameof the paying bank and a city and state address of the bank that is locatedin (1) the same Reserve Bank check processing region as, and (2) a ReserveBank availability zone that provides the same (or slower) availabilitythan the address associated with the routing number in magnetic ink onthe item.'' The Board specifically requested comment on the cost savings and operationalbenefits to depository banks and the costs to banks using payable throughchecks that would result from adoption of this proposal. Of the 295 commentletters addressing this issue, 214 commenters supported this proposal and81 opposed it. The commenters in support of the conspicuous labeling requirement statedthat identification would aid in compliance with the availability requirementsof Regulation CC. They noted that the additional information could facilitatemanual handling of payable through checks, although it would not permittheir identification on an automated basis. The Bank Administration Institutestated, ``While this proposal would not appreciably reduce risk, it wouldaid in compliance with Regulation CC hold rules. According to a recentBank Administration Institute study, over 80 percent of financial institutionshave adopted `case-by-case' hold policies. Under such a policy, the depositorybank applies holds in selected cases, rather than as a general rule. Undera case-by-case policy, the employee placing the hold must be able to identifylocal and nonlocal checks accurately by visual inspection. Conspicuouslabeling as described in this proposal would aid in this process. Fullidentification of the payable through bank by name and location would alsoassist in resolving exceptions in interbank check clearings, such as misrouteditems.'' The Independent Bankers Association of America indicated thatcommunity bankers would gain immediate operational benefits from this proposal.A small number of commenters noted that this proposal would prove helpfulwhen processing damaged checks. Wells Fargo Bank, San Francisco, California,stated, ``The alternative of printing identifying information on the faceof the check helps when dealing with checks where the MICR line is damagedor destroyed * * *.'' For example, the name and location of the payablethrough bank may be needed in those cases where the routing number on thecheck cannot be properly read. The majority of commenters that supported the conspicuous labeling proposalindicated that they preferred adoption of the proposal to require payablethrough checks to bear a routing number in the MICR line local to the bankon which the checks are written. Marine Midland Bank, New York, New York,commented, ``This alternative is better than no change in the form in whichpayable through drafts are issued, but it does nothing to reduce the unreasonablyhigh operational costs of identifying bank payable through checks.''Some credit union commenters stated that this proposal was not objectionableprovided they would be given a reasonable period of time to handle thereprinting of their share drafts. The Credit Union National Associationgenerally supported a revised version of this proposal. CUNA commentedthat ``only the first four digits of the credit union's routing numbershould be required. The additional digits will not facilitate identificationof items as local or nonlocal; in fact, they will only further clutterthe drawee area and complicate identification by consumers and bank tellers.Inclusion of all nine digits will also promote direct presentment of payablethrough share drafts to credit unions * * *.'' The Independent BankersAssociation of America supported this proposal, but noted, ``Most communitybankers indicated that including another nine digit routing number on theface of the check could result in unnecessary confusion for the tellermaking the identification.'' The Board had noted, in its request for comment on this proposal, thatan ancillary benefit to requiring that the nine-digit routing number ofthe bank on which the check is written be printed on the face of the checkis that it would provide information needed to establish arrangements forautomated clearinghouse (ACH) transfers to or from an account_informationthat is generally obtained from a check of the customer requesting theACH service. The Board believed that the identification on the face ofthe check of the routing number of the bank on which the check is writtenwould facilitate sending ACH transfers to the account-holding bank ratherthan to the payable through bank, which generally rejects the transfer.A major payable through bank, however, indicated to Board staff that ithandles ACH transfers for a number of credit unions for which it also performspayable through processing and that inclusion of the nine-digit routingnumber of the credit union could cause ACH transfers to be misdirectedto the credit union. Inclusion of only the first four digits of the routing number of the bankon which the payable through check is written would be sufficient to permitdepositary bank personnel to assign local or nonlocal availability to thesechecks because these digits identify the check processing region in whichthe bank on which the check is written is located. This would eliminatethe need to refer to a list of cities and towns in the depositary bank'scheck processing region to determine if the location of the bank on whichthe check is written is local for purposes of Regulation CC. The Boardbelieves that requiring the identification of the entire nine-digit routingnumber, rather than only the first four digits, on the face of bank payablethrough checks would not provide any incremental significant benefits,and has modified the proposal to require inclusion of only the first fourdigits of the routing number of the bank on which the check is writtenon the face of the check. CUNA also stated, ``Because of the advantage to consumers, CUNA urges arequirement that the drawee area of all checks contain the first four digitsof the drawee's routing number.'' The Board does not believe it is necessarythat the requirement apply to all checks because tellers and consumerscan determine local or nonlocal availability by referring to the firstfour digits of the routing number in the MICR line for all checks otherthan bank payable through checks. A few commenters suggested that the Board should specify where the requiredinformation is to be placed on the face of the check. The Board has providedin the commentary to andSection; 229.36 that the required information isdeemed conspicuous if it is located in the title plate \4\<NOTE/> on the check. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The title plate appears in the lower left quadrant onthe face of the check, below the amount line and above the memo line, andgenerally includes the name and location of the paying bank. The Board proposed that the rule become effective one year after adoption.A small number of commenters discussed the appropriate effective date forthis proposal. Bank commenters either supported the proposed one year implementationperiod or requested an effective date of less than one year. Credit unioncommenters generally stated that they would need additional time for theirmembers to use existing check stock and reorder the new checks. The CreditUnion National Association stated, ``A more reasonable effective date ofthis proposal would be two years after adoption of the amendment to allowcredit union members to use their current supply of share drafts.'' Whileon average customers reorder checks annually, additional time would allowfor the check printers to make title plates and for credit union membersto reorder checks. The Board believes that eighteen months will providesufficient time for both the manufacture of new plates and check reorders.The 81 commenters that opposed the conspicuous labeling proposal statedthat it encourages manual handling. A number of commenters indicated thatthey opposed this proposal because they believed that the proposal requiringa local routing number in the MICR line is a better solution. First VirginiaBanks, Inc., Falls Church, Virginia, stated, ``First Virginia does notfavor this proposal as it places the burden of recognizing payable throughchecks on the teller. This proposal invites human error and RegulationCC violations and will only act to delay item processing, because thesechecks will have to be handled as exception items.''Maryland National Bank, Baltimore, Maryland, stated that this proposal``does not permit the automated processing of payable through draft checkswhich is critical to maintaining the integrity of the payment system. Thiswould create an indeterminate degradation of customer service at the branchlevel of financial institutions and a corresponding increase in expensesdue to the visual inspection required which would be eventually passedon to the customer.'' A small number of commenters discussed the costs of this proposal. Thesecommenters indicated that without the concurrent adoption of the proposalrequiring a local routing number in the MICR line, the costs to banks wouldbe prohibitive because they would have to manually process the payablethrough checks. Bank One, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, stated, ``* * * sight reviewwould significantly increase a bank's processing costs because it wouldrequire adding employees to the teller proof or transit operation.'' BankOne estimated $225,000 per year as ``the labor expense we would incur ifwe have to visually inspect all items deposited, and manually make floatadjustments for share draft or payable through items.'' A number of commenters expressed concern that the labeling requirementcould have an adverse impact on the acceptance of payable through drafts.The Chicago Clearinghouse Association, Chicago, Illinois, commented, ``Thisrequirement would make obvious visual distinction between a regular checkand a payable through check and would be detrimental to institutions usingpayable through checks. The distinction may create negotiability problemswith merchants and consumers who may not understand the reasons for suchobvious labels. Because of the label, some merchants may not honor payablethrough checks as cash items.'' The specified information is already required,however, except for the first four digits of the routing number, whichis necessary for the depositary bank to determine availability. Consequently,the Board does not believe the labeling requirement will cause negotiabilityproblems for payable through checks. The requirement that specified information be printed on the face of thecheck does not address the potential risks of bank payable through checksbecoming attractive vehicles for fraud because it does not accelerate thecollection of payable through checks. Under this proposal, the bank onwhich the payable through checks are written or its customers would incurcosts to reissue its checks. Given an eighteen month lead time, the costof reissuance should be minimal. This proposal would not require any bankto move its payable through check processing to a different bank. The Board is adopting an amendment to Regulation CC that would requirebank payable through checks to be conspicuously labeled with the name,location, and first four digits of the routing number of the bank on whichthe check is written and the legend ``payable through'' followed by thename and location of the payable through bank. This rule becomes effectiveeighteen months after final adoption. Place the risk of loss for return of bank payable through checks beingreturned by a nonlocal payable through bank on the bank on which such checksare written, to the extent that the return from the nonlocal payable throughbank took longer than would have been required if the check had been returnedexpeditiously by the bank on which it is written. Commenters on the interimrule expressed concern regarding the potential risk of losses and increasedexposure to fraud for depositary banks resulting from the revised rule.They indicated that checks considered local for determining availabilityshould also be considered local for determining whether the checks arereturned expeditiously so that the risks to depositary banks would notbe increased by the revised rule. Two hundred eighty comment letters addressedthis proposal. Two hundred twelve commenters supported this proposal and68 commenters opposed the proposal. The commenters in support of this proposal stated that it would assignrisk in the payment system to the appropriate cause of that risk. The AlamoSavings andamp; Loan Association, San Antonio, Texas, stated, ``Even if noneof the other proposed amendments are approved, this one must be, becauseit is inappropriate to allow issuers of `payable through' checks to accruethe benefits of the definition of local checks from an availability standpoint,but not be responsible for liabilities inherent in the delayed return ofunpaid checks from nonlocal `payable through' banks.'' The Citizens andSouthern Georgia Corporation, Atlanta, Georgia, commented, ``It is reasonableand fair to place the risk of loss on the institution responsible for delayingthe return process beyond the time normally required for local checks.''In an effort to determine the risks confronting a large regional bank dueto the adoption of the rule establishing the bank on which a payable throughcheck is written as the paying bank for determining funds availability,Sovran Financial Corporation, Norfolk, Virginia, conducted an extensivesurvey of payable through checks in June and July, 1988. Sovran explained,``From the survey, we determined that Sovran_in the states of Maryland,the District of Columbia, and Virginia would process nearly $1 billiona year of payable through items drawn on one of the two major nationalprocessors of such items. We projected the annual volume of these itemsto be 10.2 million. Visual inspection of these items disclosed that almostone half are issued by geographically local institutions. However, becausethe payable through bank_or the processing bank_has the opportunity toreturn the items to us in the Board's prescribed nonlocal time frame, thequestion of whether the issuing bank is geographically local is irrelevant.We applied the actual rate of dishonor for these items, which we had trackedover a two year period, to the dollar and volume data gathered. We determinedthat <T3>at a minimum, </T3>based on a one day delay (we make the funds availableto the customer in three days, but we receive the return on the fourthday) our annual exposure from these items would be $9 million.'' The majority of the bank commenters that supported the proposal shiftingthe risk of loss to the bank on which the payable through check is writtenrecommended that this proposal should be adopted immediately as an interimmeasure until the proposal requiring a local routing number in the MICRline could be implemented. The Citywide Bank of Denver, Denver, Colorado,stated, ``Until such time as (the proposal requiring a local routing numberin the MICR line) can be fully implemented, our bank strongly recommendsyour (proposal shifting the risk of loss to the bank on which the payablethrough check is written) * * * be instituted for the protection of alldepositary banks. There does not seem to be a time factor requirement toimplement this approach and the cost factor on the norm, would be minimal.''Some bank commenters that supported this proposal expressed concern aboutthe practice of claiming a loss under this proposal. The Chicago ClearinghouseAssociation commented, ``We are in favor of assigning risk in the paymentsystem to the appropriate cause of that risk, but are concerned about thepracticality of claiming a loss under the current proposal. With so manyschedules for availability and collection, proving responsibility for losswill be difficult. This makes it unlikely that any but large-dollar losseswill be contested. We suggest that a method be developed within the normalreturn system for a depositary bank to claim a loss and receive compensation.''Prime Bank, Grand Rapids, Michigan, stated, ``The Federal Reserve shouldtake measures to accommodate these banks who have suffered such liabilityand losses to easily recoup these losses from the payable bank.'' Some credit unions expressed limited support for the proposal shiftingthe risk of loss to the bank on which a payable through check is written.The Family Community Credit Union, Charles City, Iowa, commented that thisproposal ``is also a proposal that could be workable for credit unions.Either one of these proposals (the conspicuous labeling proposal or theproposal shifting the risk of loss to the bank on which the payable throughcheck is written) would not require the expense, equipment and staff thatthe other two would require.'' The Chase Manhattan Corporation, New York, New York, a major payable throughprocessor, stated, ``Of the four approaches the Board has proposed, Chaseprefers this approach because it would provide an effective means of protectingdepositary banks from the risk of loss for return of bank payable throughchecks without dismantling the present efficient and cost effective payablethrough system.'' Some commenters suggested that the proposal be modified to limit the riskthat could be allocated to the bank on which the check is written. TheCredit Union National Association generally supported a modified versionof the proposal. CUNA commented, ``Credit unions should only assume actualdirect losses caused by a delayed return from a payable through bank; thatis, only losses of amounts that exceed the $100 next-day availability ruleand are under the $2,500 amount covered by the large-dollar item noticerequirements of the Regulation.'' Under the proposed rule to shift the risk of loss, the bank on which thecheck is written would only be responsible for losses that occurred betweenthe time that the check would have been required to be returned if returnedexpeditiously by that bank and the actual time that it takes to returnthe check from the payable through bank. If the payable through bank complieswith the current notice of nonpayment requirement for returned checks of$2,500 or more and the depositary bank takes action to minimize its riskupon receipt of the notice, no loss should occur that could be allocatedto the bank on which the check is written. If the depositary bank takesno action upon receipt of the notice, it may be liable for losses incurredunder the liability provisions of andSection; 229.38(a). Thus, the Boarddoes not believe it is necessary to modify the rule to address CUNA's suggestionthat liability should only apply to those checks that are less than $2,500and thus not covered by the notice of nonpayment requirements.CUNA also suggested that the allocation of liability be limited to onlythose amounts that exceed the $100 next-day availability rule. The Actand Regulation CC require depositary banks to provide next-day availabilityfor the first $100 of the aggregate amount of a customer's check depositsmade during a banking day. The proposed rule would only shift the riskof loss to the bank on which the check is written in cases where the losswould not have occurred if the check had been returned under the localtime frame. If losses occurred because the depositary bank made funds availablefor withdrawal before it could learn of a local return, such losses wouldnot be shifted to the bank on which the payable through check is written.In addition, because a customer's check deposit may include a mixture ofpayable through checks and other checks, the Board does not believe itwould be appropriate to release the bank on which the payable through checkis written from liability for the first $100 of a day's deposit. The Board had specifically requested comment on what standard(s) shouldbe applied to determine whether the return from a nonlocal payable throughbank took longer than would have been required if the check had been returnedexpeditiously by the bank on which the check is written. Regulation CCrequires banks to return checks expeditiously. It allows banks to utilizetwo tests to determine whether a check has been returned expeditiously.Under the two-day/four-day test, a check is returned expeditiously if alocal check is received by the depositary bank on or before the secondbusiness day after the banking day on which the check was presented tothe paying bank or if a nonlocal check is received by the depositary bankon or before the fourth business day after the banking day on which thecheck was presented to the paying bank. Under the forward collection test,a check is returned expeditiously if a paying bank sends the returned checkin a manner that would ordinarily be used by a bank in the paying bank'scommunity to collect a check drawn on the depositary bank. Generally, thistest would be satisfied if a transportation method or collection path isused for returns that is comparable to that used for forward collection.Several bank commenters indicated concern over the practicality of claiminga loss under the proposal, indicating that it would be particularly difficultto prove responsibility for loss under the forward collection test. Severalcredit union commenters, including CUNA, suggested that both tests be applicable.The Board believes that the two-day/four-day test provides a measurablestandard to ascertain whether the return of the payable through check isexpeditious. In contrast, the determination of whether return of a checkis expeditious under the forward collection test is made based on the mannerby which the paying bank returned the check, rather than the time withinwhich the depositary bank received the return. Since a payable throughbank nonlocal to the bank on which the check is written would not use thesame manner of return as that used by the bank on which the check is writtento collect checks, the forward collection test could not be used as a standardfor expeditious return by the payable through bank. Bank commenters opposed to the proposal shifting the risk of loss to thebank on which the payable through check is written stated that this proposaldoes not address the operational problem of identifying payable throughchecks. Eastover Bank for Savings, Jackson, Mississippi, stated, ``Shiftingthe risk of loss is not enough. This will simply lead to many operationaldifficulties in identifying these checks and will not aid in reaching thegoal of a more speedy check collection and return processing system.''First Virginia Banks commented, ``First Virginia does not favor this proposal,as it will only serve to increase Late Return Claims, litigation expenses,and does not allow for expedited processing of these items.''A number of credit union commenters that opposed the proposal expressedconcern about its implementation. The Southern Nevada State Savings andamp;Credit Union, Las Vegas, Nevada, described this proposal as complicatedand unmanageable. It commented, ``* * * strict time limits would have tobe imposed on the receiving banks as well as a detailed record keeping,timed, system that would record the flow of the items. Otherwise, anytimethere was A DISPUTE for a loss, we've never had one in 20 years, the receivinginstitution could simply claim a delayed prccessing schedule. A trackingmechanism would be required.'' A small number of credit union commenters stated that they did not thinkthis proposal was necessary. The Navy Federal Credit Union, Merrifield,Virginia, commented, ``We are not aware of any evidence of actual losseswhich would justify the presumed need. Without further justifications,no change to the liability assignments is recommended.'' A few credit unioncommenters indicated that the payable through bank should be responsiblefor the loss instead of the credit union.The Board is adopting the proposal shifting risk of loss to the bank onwhich the payable through check is written. The test for expeditious returnunder this final rule will be based on the two-day/four-day test underandSection; 229.30(a)(1) of the regulation. The Board also requested comment on the appropriate lead time for implementationof the proposal. Although CUNA indicated that a one-year lead time wouldallow credit unions that issue payable through drafts sufficient time tomodify their insurance coverage to cover any increased risk of loss, CUNAcommented that the risk of loss associated with bank payable through checksis virtually nonexistent. On the other hand, many bank commenters indicatedthat this proposal should be implemented immediately. The Board believesthat insurance coverage can be obtained in less than one year. In any event,variations in the effective date of this proposal should have minimal effecton the banks on which payable through checks are written. Therefore, thisproposal will become effective six months after adoption. Require bank payable through checks to be presentable locally and beara local routing number in the MICR line. Commenters on the interim ruleexpressed concern about the operational problems posed by the court rulingand interim amendments. They indicated that the Board should require creditunions to encode their own routing numbers on their checks or that of alocal payable through bank. The Board specifically requested comment on the cost savings to depositarybanks and the costs to banks issuing payable through checks so that thebenefits and costs of this proposal could be more fully assessed. Sevenhundred twenty-two comment letters addressed this proposal. Two hundredeighty-two commenters supported this proposal and 440 commenters opposedthis proposal. The commenters in support of the proposal to require a local routing numberin the MICR line, predominantly banks, described it as the only practicalsolution to their operational problems and risk concerns. Several supportersalso noted that the proposal would reduce confusion for the consumer. TheAmerican Bankers Association stated, ``Currently, there is no practicalor comprehensible way to describe to a consumer how to distinguish betweenlocal and nonlocal checks and payable through checks except to advise themgenerally to inquire when they deposit a payable through check. The proposalwill allow consumers simply to refer to the MICR line to ascertain whethera deposit is subject to a local or nonlocal check hold.'' Several commenters in support of this proposal discussed how it relatesto the intent of Regulation CC. The Independent Bankers Association ofAmerica commented, ``We believe that requiring a local payable throughbank is most consistent with the Act's linkage between the availabilityof funds and the time it takes to collect and return a check.'' Great WesternFinancial Corporation, Beverly Hills, California, stated, ``By requiringbank payable through checks to be presentable locally and bear a localrouting number in the MICR line, Great Western believes that the problemsassociated with the acceptance for deposit of payable through checks willbe addressed, the intent of Regulation CC will be upheld and the best interestsof the consumer will be served.'' Continental Bank, Chicago, Illinois, stated, ``Any proposal that does notallow banks to rely on the MICR line will slow the automated check clearingprocess considerably and thus retard the goals set by EFAA. As the Boardobserves, payable through checks account for less than 3% of the processedcheck volume * * *. Any proposal that does not allow a bank to rely onthe MICR line will slow down the processing of the 97% remainder of thechecks which today are being efficiently processed. (This proposal) notonly confirms the axiom, `if it ain't broke, don't fix it,' it also encouragescredit unions to process their items in a manner that will enhance thegoals of EFAA. * * * (This proposal) thus places the cost of expeditiouslyprocessing payable through checks on the segment of the industry that enjoysthe benefit, and in addition, encourages high speed automatic processingof checks consistent with the goals of EFAA.'' Commenters explained that the primary benefit of this proposal would beto eliminate problems in determining proper availability by allowing banksto rely on the routing number encoded in the MICR line. The Bank AdministrationInstitute stated that this proposal is ``the most comprehensive solutionto the problem. It reduces risk by providing a local clearing and returnmechanism for checks that must be treated as local for check holds. Italso simplifies compliance because depository institutions would be ableto rely on the routing number to identify the local check processing region,either by visual inspection or automated means.'' First Virginia Banksstated, ``First Virginia favors this proposal as it allows for automatedprocessing and expedites the check collection. It will eliminate as muchhuman intervention as possible and allows payable through checks to behandled in mainstream processing and not as exception items.''Without the ability to rely on the routing number to determine whethera check is local or nonlocal and thus determine the appropriate holds,a bank must develop alternative procedures to identify payable throughchecks and place the appropriate holds on such checks. These proceduresinclude (1) having the teller identify and outsort payable through checksas they are deposited so that holds can be manually applied; and (2) identifyingthe routing numbers of nonlocal payable through banks \5\<NOTE/> and assigning local availability on an automated basis toall checks destined to these routing numbers.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ A survey by Board staff identified 65 routing numbersthat are used on bank payable through checks. Bank commenters noted that requiring a local routing number in the MICRline was the only proposal that placed the time and expense of processingpayable through checks on the bank on which the checks are written. BranchCounty Bank, Coldwater, Michigan, commented, ``The requirement to makebank payable through checks bear a local routing number is the only onewhich places the time and expense of processing where it rightly belongs.''Bank commenters stated that it was difficult to estimate the operationalcost savings that would result if this proposal were adopted. AmSouth Bank,Birmingham, Alabama, estimated that its annual dollar cost in teller staffingto   implement a manual inspection approach to payable through checks wouldbe $6,607,500. Bank One stated, ``There is a cost avoidance (through requiringa local routing number in the MICR line) of about $225,000 per year. Thisis the labor expense we would incur if we have to visually inspect allitems deposited, and manually make float adjustments for share draft orpayable through items.'' Citicorp, New York, New York, stated, ``As forthe costs associated with the proposal, it is practically impossible toprovide meaningfully accurate figures; it is not unreasonable, however,to project some figures based on the check collection process itself. Forthe banking industry nationwide (not including credit unions and the processors),Citicorp estimates that it would take a teller approximately two/threeseconds to determine whether or not an item is payable through draft andwhether or not it is local based on an examination of the check itself.* * * Factoring in the number of tellers employed, their hours, salary,other benefits and the approximate total number of items processed by allbanks in the course of a year, we would project a cost figure of five hundredmillion dollars * * * for the banking community to comply with the regulationas amended as a result of the <T3>CUNA </T3>suit_absent adoption of the proposed amendments.'' This estimate, however, assumes that all banks apply differential holdsto deposits of local and nonlocal checks, as permitted in the regulation.According to a study conducted by the Bank Administration Institute, 83percent of all banks provide immediate or next-day availability with theoption to apply holds on a case-by-case or exception basis. The BAI studyis corroborated by surveys conducted by trade associations in coordinationwith the Federal Reserve, which indicated that 75 percent of banks provideimmediate or next-day availability with the option to apply holds on acase-by-case or exception basis. Applying case-by-case holds generallyentails manual intervention to determine those checks on which holds shouldbe imposed. Thus, the need for a method to apply automated holds appearsto be limited to a minority (approximately 20 percent) of banks. Even thoughonly a small number of banks place differential holds, these banks areoften large and represent a greater proportion of all checks deposited.By imposing differential holds for local and nonlocal checks, these bankshave indicated a high level of concern about the risk of making funds availablefor withdrawal before learning whether a check has been returned. The Boardrecognizes that by not adopting the proposal requiring local routing numbersfor payable through checks, a depositary bank electing to grant local availabilityfor all checks drawn on the routing numbers of nonlocal payable throughbanks would increase this risk by granting local availability for checksthat would not be subject to the local schedules under the regulation.In addition, banks applying differential holds are subject to litigationrisk and  could be liable for exceeding the maximum availability schedulesif they do not grant local availability for a payable through check bearinga nonlocal routing number. Inaccurate assignment of availability couldresult when a teller makes errors in outsorting payable through checksor when the bank fails to accurately identify all nonlocal banks actingas payable through banks for local banks. The Board believes that a depositarybank can control these risks through its diligent application of the processit chooses to use in applying holds to assure that it grants local availabilityfor payable through checks issued by local banks. Commenters in support of the proposal requiring local routing numbers alsoindicated that they would receive faster availability and incur lower collectioncosts for payable through checks drawn on local banks under this proposalthan they can receive when sending the checks to the nonlocal payable throughbank for collection. Suntrust Service Corporation, Orlando, Florida, stated,``Current volume from Suntrust Service Corporation Florida Operations tojust the New York and Minneapolis share draft processors is approximately6,500,000 items per year at a cost over $20,000.00 per year for transportationexpenses.''Some bank commenters noted that this proposal would limit delayed disbursement.These commenters indicated that the credit unions using nonlocal payablethrough banks have an unfair float advantage over other banks. The LitchvilleState Bank, Litchville, North Dakota, commented, ``For the credit unionsto have special treatment is to give the banks and savings and loans unfairtreatment. Please make the laws the same for all.'' The president of theCitizens Bank of Oviedo, Oviedo, Florida, commented, ``* * * I think itshould be illegal for any financial institution to carry its clearing accounton the other side of the country so they can take advantage of float.''Payable through banks have indicated that many collecting banks receiveavailability for payable through checks drawn on a nonlocal payable throughbank equivalent to that for checks collected locally by sending the checksdirectly to the nonlocal payable through bank. The payable through banksindicated that these ``direct send'' arrangements can only be cost effectivefor the collecting banks when sufficient volumes are being delivered toone presentment point and that maintenance of the payable through systemis necessary to achieve these critical volume levels.The majority of the banks commented that the potential risk of loss andincreased exposure to fraud is also difficult to quantify. Bank of Americastated, ``The greatest potential savings, however, would not be operational.It would result from the reduced exposure to fraud losses * * *. Whilewe have not attempted to estimate the fraud potential, as the processorof an estimated $850 million per year in payable through share drafts,our exposure is evident.'' Florida National Bank, Jacksonville, Florida,commented, ``* * * this proposal would eliminate the likelihood that thesechecks would become vehicles for check fraud. It would reduce the collectiontime, reduce overall float, as well as reduce the risk for depository banks.''The 440 commenters that opposed the proposal, predominantly credit unions,indicated that requiring payable through checks to bear a local routingnumber in the MICR line was totally unacceptable and that its burden andhigh costs would far outweigh any benefits. Several commenters questionedthe justification for the proposal. United States Senators Rudy Boschwitzand David Durenberger commented, ``* * * the Federal Reserve has yet todemonstrate that a drastic step such as local MICR number is necessaryin order to address perceived problems with the payable-through system.There are other solutions that should be explored before destroying a systemthat works well for credit unions.'' The Arizona Credit Union League, Inc.,Phoenix, Arizona, stated, ``* * * there is no evidence that the proposedchanges are warranted. Indeed there are no cases of fraud or embezzlementon record that suggest problems with the payable through system to thedegree suggested by the proposed regulations.'' CUNA commented that thisproposal would ``reduce efficiencies of the check collection system bycreating thousands of additional endpoints.''Commenters expressed concern that this proposal could lead to the dismantlementof all national and regional payable through systems and thereby resultin the loss of the efficiencies gained through economies of scale achievedfrom these systems. They explained that the payable through share draftprogram was initiated as a means for credit unions to provide a checkingsystem to their members at a reasonable cost. Many credit unions statedthat they are able to provide checking services only through the use ofpayable through processors, which provide efficient processing at a costmuch lower than in-house processing. The Sherwin-Williams Employees CreditUnion, Chicago, Illinois, stated, ``Credit unions on a national or regionalpayable through program should not be forced to abandon their cost efficient,truncated system. This system has worked well for almost 15 years and hasallowed thousands of credit unions to offer share drafts to millions oftheir members.'' The Alpena Alcona Area Credit Union, Alpena, Michigan,commented, ``* * * the dismantlement of the payable through system woulddeprive members of a viable service, and at the same time increase theoperational costs of the credit union_all without significant advantage.''The Motorola Employees Credit Union, Schaumberg, Illinois, stressed thatit chose Travelers Express as its payable through processor because thepayable through program is both efficient and economical. It noted thatit would be too costly to convert to in-house or local processing or toarrange for local intercept points.Commenters expressed concern that local processors would not be able toprovide the truncation services currently provided by the major payablethrough processors. They described the current truncation system as verycost efficient. Handamp;E Telephone Federal Credit Union, Rochelle Park,New Jersey, noted that it previously used local banks to clear its checksbut switched to a national processor that was superior. Problems with itslocal bank included: ``(1) The return of actual checks to us which resultedin a mountain of paper and work to organize data; (2) poor reporting capabilitiesand longer time lags for information availability; and (3) more costlyservice charges.''Credit union commenters cited two costs of implementing the proposal requiringlocal routing numbers on payable through checks. First, credit unions andother banks issuing payable through checks would be required to eitherconvert to in-house processing or establish a local presentment point fortheir payable through checks. They commented that these alternatives wouldbe so costly that the continued share draft service would not be cost effectiveand would result in their imposing excessive fees on their members. Manycommenters stated that an in-house system would not be economically feasiblebecause of their small size and volume. The IBEW Federal Credit Union,Knoxville, Tennessee, commented that conforming ``to the proposed amendmentswould be cost prohibitive due to increased processing costs, risk involved,and additional staff and data processing needs.''The City of Huntington Federal Credit Union, Huntington, West Virginia,indicated that a local bank estimated that it would charge approximately$30,000 per year to process the credit union's share drafts, compared toan annual charge of approximately $10,300 assessed by Chase Manhattan Bankto perform similar services. Another credit union estimated that currentshare draft account fees charged to credit union members would triple ifthe credit union closed and they were forced to use local banks. A thirdcredit union with 850 share draft accounts indicated that its per accountcost would increase an estimated $41.41 annually as a result of this proposal.A credit union that uses the Travelers Express payable through draft processingservice stated that its average per item cost is $.06 and the time requiredto receive and post accounts is less than one hour per day. This creditunion estimated that this proposed amendment would require the purchaseof additional equipment costing approximately $20,000 and the additionof one staff person at approximately $15,000 per year. Commenters also noted that a second type of cost associated with the proposalis the cost of reissuing checks to customers. In addition to the cost ofreissuing check stock, a change in routing number requires the additionalcost of dual processing during the transition period when the processormust process checks with both the old and new routing numbers. The costassociated with dual processing will vary based on the time required toreplace check stock. The Board believes that banks can minimize this timethrough diligent instruction to its customers in reordering and using newchecks. These costs would either be borne directly by the customer, whowould have to pay for new check stock, or indirectly by the customer throughincreased service charges imposed by the bank that bore the cost of replacingthe check stock. In addition to the cost/benefit analysis, the Board considered the competitiveimplications of this proposal. This analysis included competitive factorsvis-a-vis credit unions vs. commercial banks. Credit union commenters indicatedthat because this proposal has the effect of limiting a credit union'schoice of payable through bank, its adoption could prompt local banks toraise their fees. In addition, many credit unions believe that local banksmay not have the incentive to keep costs down for the credit union issuingpayable through checks because many of these local banks are competingfor the same customer accounts as those held by the credit union. The RedfordTownship Community Credit Union, Redford, Michigan, stated, ``This proposalwould eliminate most of the competition which is a healthy situation forcost control.'' Some credit unions indicated that they had no local processing options.The Fort Harrison VAF Federal Credit Union, Fort Harrison, Montana, stated,``* * *  there is no Montana-based processing point at this time and onecould not be set up within the one year deadline.'' The Jackson USDA FederalCredit Union, Jackson, Mississippi, commented that ``there are no banksin the state of Mississippi that we know of that will process share draftsfor credit unions.'' The manager of the Jackson USDA FCU contacted twolocal banks about processing share drafts and was informed that their marketstudies indicated there would be insufficient credit union share draftvolume to make the share draft processing profitable. Other comments indicated that the competitive issues between commercialbanks and credit unions are broader than the issues raised by these payablethrough check proposals. Bank commenters indicated that the credit unions'tax-free status and liberal common bond restrictions give the credit unionsan unfair advantage in competing for customers, which is only exacerbatedby the credit unions' ability to issue payable through checks. Commenters also noted that this proposal would have an anti-competitiveeffect on consumers by limiting choice of bank. The majority of small creditunions that commented on this proposal indicated that they would have todiscontinue their share draft programs if the proposal were adopted becausethey would be unable to finance the increased human and equipment resourcerequirements. They expressed concern that they would no longer be ableto offer a low cost checking alternative to lower income customers. ThePennsylvania Mennonite Federal Credit Union, Scottdale, Pennsylvania, stated,``In this day when the U.S. Congress is considering `lifeline banking'and providing basic financial services that ordinary people can afford,we find it incongruous for a major organization such as the Federal ReserveSystem to mandate regulations which will either increase the cost of theseservices to our members or result in their discontinuance altogether.''The Newark Aerospace Federal Credit Union, Heath, Ohio, commented, ``Alifeline no service charge share draft account might no longer be availableto many of our members because of increased cost. If we could not affordthe necessary equipment, 2,200 members would lose their share draft accountsand be forced to open checking accounts at banks. Recent reports indicatethe average checking account costs the consumer close to $200 annually.''Congressmen Frank Annunzio and Bruce Vento stated, ``We believe the Boardhas consistently failed to balance the adverse effects such a proposedamendment will have on the medium to small credit unions and their life-lineservices, such as share drafts. Instead the Board cited unsubstantiatedallegations of fraud and operation difficulties as its basis for requiringsuch a proposed amendment to Regulation CC.'' Credit unions and payable through processors noted that this proposal wouldhave an anti-competitive impact by limiting processing choice. The DearbornFederal Credit Union, Dearborn, Michigan, stated, ``Dearborn Federal believesthat every credit union should have the right to choose the most efficientand cost effective system available.'' The Chase Manhattan Corporationstated, ``If this approach were implemented, the Federal Reserve Systemwith its extensive processing facilities and resources in every check processingregion would have a competitive advantage over private sector providersin offering a national truncation service.'' The Board believes that provision of truncation services by the FederalReserve Banks and other private sector providers should help facilitatethe payable through system by expediting the delivery of check informationto the payable through bank, thereby allowing the payable through bankto provide more efficient, cost-effective payment services to credit unions.The Federal Reserve encourages private sector participation in providingtruncation services, and the Reserve Banks developed their truncation servicein coordination with private sector truncation service providers throughthe National Association for Check Safekeeping, which has expressed aninterest in supporting the payable through system by means of truncation.A few commenters noted that this proposal could be difficult to enforcebecause some credit union members order their own drafts from printingcompanies and they would be individually responsible for ensuring thattheir drafts have the proper routing number in the MICR line. A small numberof commenters identified as another potential problem that some  memberswould be reluctant to throw away unused drafts even if new drafts wereissued free of charge. The National Association for Check Safekeeping (NACS) proposed an alternativeto this proposal. NACS proposed use of the 8000 series of routing numbersto identify checks that are payable through a bank nor located in the samecheck processing region as the issuer of the check. NACS noted that theonly current use of the 8000 series is for travellers checks. Under the NACS proposal, the first digit of the routing number would bethe number 8, identifying the 8000 series. The second and third digitswould identify the check processing region of the bank on which the checkis drawn. These two digits could be the number 01 through 48, identifyingone of the 48 Federal Reserve check processing regions. The fourth andfifth digits would identify the check processing region of the payablethrough bank. Again, the two digits could be 01 through 48 identifyinga check processing region. The sixth, seventh, and eighth digits wouldidentify the particular payable through bank(s) within each check processingregion. The ninth digit would be the check digit. NACS stated, ``Depositary banks could easily examine the 8000 series numberand determine two things. Banks can determine where to send the check forcollection and the funds availability to assign. Only banks using payablethrough processors in another check processing region will be eligiblefor an 8000 series routing number.'' Use of the 8000 series of routingnumbers would enable banks to use automated equipment to read the MICRline to assign funds availability. Several commenters urged the Board tofirst research the NACS proposal further if the Board planned to adoptthe proposal to require that payable through checks bear a local routingnumber in the MICR line. If the NACS proposal was determined to be an effectivealternative, the commenters urged the Board to issue the proposal for publiccomment to determine whether it could provide the same benefits to depositarybanks as the local routing number proposal without disrupting the nationalpayable through system. Board staff discussed the NACS proposal with industry representatives,equipment vendors, and check processing staff at the Federal Reserve Banks.Equipment vendors indicated that use of the 8000 series would require equipmentupgrades at collecting banks, and that purchase and installment could takeup to two years. Federal Reserve Bank staff indicated that this proposalcould impact sort patterns, memory capacity for look-up tables, and processingschedules. Adoption of the NACS proposal would also require reissuance of all payablethrough checks. Because the Board is adopting the conspicuous labelingrequirement at this time, later adoption of the NACS proposal would requirebanks issuing payable through checks to reissue their checks twice. Tworeissuances would be costly and burdensome for these banks and their customers.Adoption of the NACS proposal would only benefit the approximately 20 percentof banks with blanket hold policies. The proposal would not provide incrementalbenefits to the large majority of banks that generally offer same-day ornext-day availability. The NACS proposal would, however, impact all collectingbanks because they would have to upgrade equipment to process these checks.Since this proposal would only benefit the minority of banks with blankethold policies and would be burdensome for credit unions and collectingbanks, the Board believes there is not sufficient justification to issuethe NACS proposal for public comment. Sovran Financial Corporation also suggested an alternative to the proposalrequiring payable through checks to bear a local routing number in theMICR line. Sovran recommended that the ``Board consider setting a specifictime limit_two years_by which all issuers of payable through items wishingto obtain better acceptability for their items in the local marketplacemust convert to using a local paying agent for the items, and to ensurethat the items bear the routing number of the local paying agent. Thoseinstitutions which believe the costs of increased acceptability outweighthe benefits will still have the opportunity to use a distantly locatedpayable through bank, but collecting banks will also have the opportunityto grant nonlocal funds access to depositing customers for these items.''The Act does not give the Board the authority to lengthen the availabilityschedules, which would be the result of this proposed alternative. Travelers Express Company, Minneapolis, Minnesota, recommended two alternativesto the proposal requiring a local routing number in the MICR line. Travelerssuggested using position 44 in the MICR line to identify whether payablethrough checks are local or nonlocal. The Board believes that, while itwould be possible to use position 44 to identify whether or not a checkis a payable through check, manual intervention would still be necessaryto determine whether such check is local or nonlocal. Thus, this alternativewould provide only marginal benefit to depositary banks and should notbe pursued at this time. A second suggestion by Travelers Express was to implement ``a requirementthat payable through banks notify their local Federal Reserve of everyrouting number that includes items that would be considered local. TheFed could then publish a directory of these numbers. This would permitautomation for the vast majority of the items at issue.'' As previouslyindicated, Board staff developed a list of 65 routing numbers that areused on bank payable through checks. The Board believes that, because banksmay begin to offer or discontinue payable through services at any time,maintaining the accuracy of such a list and disseminating updated informationto all depositary banks would be difficult.Some commenters discussed the appropriate lead time for implementationof the proposed requirement that bank payable through checks bear a localrouting number in the MICR line. The majority of the commenters noted thatthe proposed one year implementation time period was too short. Oak RidgeGovernment Federal Credit Union, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, commented, ``Myonly suggestion would be that the implementation date be extended from12 to 24 months. Any credit union that has gone through the conversionprocess already will tell you that it is impossible to accomplish in 12months, and that is <T3>after </T3>the decision is made. The decision whether to go with alocal third party processor or in-house can take 3 to 6 months.'' The Board did not find reason to believe that the benefits of implementingthe proposal to require payable through checks to bear a local routingnumber in the MICR line outweigh the reported costs of implementation,and thus is not adopting this proposal. Authorize direct presentment to the bank on which payable through checksare written. Currently, the law is unclear as to whether a bank payablethrough check can be presented directly to the bank on which it is writtenor whether such checks must be presented to the payable through bank. Expresslypermitting such checks to be presented directly to the bank on which theyare written would enable banks to have such checks collected and returnedlocally, and thus would avoid delays in collection and return that mightoccur when the depositary bank sends the checks to nonlocal payable throughbanks. The Board specifically requested comment on the cost and operational burdenof this proposal on banks that use payable through checks, the potentialcost savings to depositary banks, and the appropriate lead time for implementationof this proposal if adopted. Six hundred thirty-seven comment letters addressedthis proposal. One hundred seventy-two commenters supported the proposaland 465 commenters opposed it. The commenters in support of this proposal commented that direct presentmentwould minimize the potential for fraud. National City Corporation, Cleveland,Ohio, commented, ``To the extent that the proposal is employed, it wouldallow banks to determine the collectibility of checks/drafts in less timethan otherwise would be the case, thereby reducing the risk of loss.''The majority of the commenters that supported the direct presentment proposalindicated that they preferred the adoption of both the proposal requiringa local routing number in the MICR line and the direct presentment proposal.A number of commenters indicated that they would like to have the optionof direct presentment but did not indicate if they would actually presentdirectly to the bank on which the checks are written, rather than to thepayable through bank, if this proposal were adopted. The Chicago ClearinghouseAssociation stated, ``The Association supports direct presentment of payablethrough items to the paying institution as an optional method of collectingsuch items * * *. In many cases, the option of direct presentment wouldbe effective for speeding the forward collection process. However, we recognizethat some collecting banks may not wish to exercise this option.'' A small number of commenters suggested that the Federal Reserve shouldfacilitate direct presentment. The United States League of Savings Institutionsstated, ``Having the Federal Reserve make direct presentments overcomesthe cost prohibitiveness of having individual depositary banks making apresentment. Concentrating payable-through check volume at District FederalReserve Banks makes this direct presentment alternative much more feasible.''Continental Bank commented, ``Our support for this option is also contingenton the Fed expanding its current fine-sort option to facilitate the directpresentment of payable through checks to the `paying bank'. If this Fedexpansion is not achieved, there would be no economical way to get thepayable through checks presented directly to the individual credit unions.''Bank commenters noted that direct presentment would be used primarily bybanks that have both the resources to perform this function and the volumeto justify the expense. The Key State Bank, Owosso, Michigan, commented,``Allowing banks to present the items directly to a local credit unionis only practical if sufficient volume allows a separate `break out' ofthese items and ample capacity in the bank's equipment is available fora separate sort of these items.'' Commenters noted that direct presentment would be useful in the case oflarge-dollar checks. The Bank Administration Institute commented, ``Directpresentment does make sense, however, in the case of large dollar items.It is not uncommon for banks to single out large dollar checks for specialhandling. By presenting these items directly, a bank can often reduce floatby accelerating the collection of funds. It also allows banks to determinethe collectibility of items more quickly, reducing the risk of loss.''A small number of commenters noted that adoption of this proposal wouldsimply clarify current law that provides that bank payable through checkscan be presented directly to the credit union. The American Bankers Associationstated, ``Currently, old case law and Article 3 of the Uniform CommercialCode (UCC) might suggest that a `drawee bank' (payor bank) may properlyrefuse to pay a check made payable through a particular bank when the checkis not presented to the drawee by that bank. However, we believe that section4-204(2) of the UCC * * * already authorizes collecting banks to send itemsdirectly to the payor bank. The Board should resolve this ambiguity bystating that banks may present directly to the bank on which the checkis written.''The credit union commenters that opposed this proposal indicated that theydid not have the operational capabilities to handle direct presentment.The Salt River Project Federal Credit Union, Phoenix, Arizona, commented,``Permitting depositary institutions to present a payable through sharedraft directly to credit unions for payment will create additional operationalproblems, especially for small credit unions. Many do not have the personnelnor the cash on hand to respond to direct presentment. They also do notown the equipment to handle direct presentment, and would be reduced tothe equivalent of clearing all share drafts by hand! This was the reasonthe payable through system was set up in the first place, to allow creditunions to offer a transaction account, without the costly capital investmentin personnel and equipment. The proposed changes would destroy their abilityto offer transaction accounts by destroying the system that allowed themto offer those accounts in the first place.'' The Credit Union National Association commented that this proposal would``dismantle the credit union payable through system, thereby eliminatingshare draft accounts for members of 1,500 to 2,000 small credit unions.Many small credit unions that could afford a local processing option wouldbe put out of the share draft business because they simply cannot handledirect presentments. (Many of them are not capable of handling their ownon-us items without depositing them in another financial institution.)''A number of credit union commenters discussed the cost implications ofdirect presentment. The Billings Health Affiliated Federal Credit Union,Billings, Montana, stated, ``I have 3 full time employee's (sic), includingmyself, who handle 2,500 members. We could not begin to do the direct presentments.Expenses involved would be a new safe which would run about $8,000 to $10,000.00.A new staff person at $12,000.00 per year and any expenses incurred throughpurchase of new electronic equipment. My net income YTD for 1988 is $20,699.04.I am sure you can see that to make the required staff increases and equipmentpurchases would just not be feasible. We would most definitely have todrop our program.'' A few credit union commenters discussed the transportation costs of thisproposal. The Missouri Credit Union League, St. Louis, Missouri, commented,``If this proposal is adopted, credit unions receiving a direct presentmentfrom a depositary bank would have to arrange for timely delivery of theseitems to the payable through processor. Besides being a logistical problemit also creates an economic burden. At a minimum, checks would need tobe sent by overnight courier service since timely delivery is a key issue.This would result in a minimum daily cost per credit union of approximately$14. The daily cost to Missouri credit unions would be $1,400 under thismethod. For large cash letters, credit unions would need to consider `nextflight out' arrangements. The daily cost for this type of courier servicewould be $1,000.''The majority of the credit union commenters stressed the same reasons foropposing the direct presentment proposal as they used in explaining theiropposition to the proposal requiring a local routing number in the MICRline. These commenters cited the cost, lack of operational capability,and the potential dismantlement of the national payable through programif this proposal were adopted. These reasons are more fully articulatedin the discussion of the proposal requiring bank payable through checksto bear a local routing number in the MICR line. Bank commenters opposed to this proposal commented that this proposal doesnot facilitate the assignment of availability on an automated basis. TheMaryland National Bank commented, ``Although we conceptually support (thedirect presentment proposal) * * * we could not support this option interms of an actual implementation for the following reason: Again, thisoption would not permit the automated processing of the credit union drafts.We believe that any option which may require special nonautomated checkhandling will only weaken the check collection system.'' The Bank of Boston,Boston, Massachusetts, stated, ``The Bank believes that this proposal isunworkable since it does not relieve depository institutions from the oneroustask of manual identification of bank payable-through drafts.'' Bank commenters also noted that direct presentment was only feasible forlarge organizations because the majority of banks would not receive enoughshare draft volume from one credit union in one day to make direct presentmentworthwhile. The Alamo Savings Association of Texas commented, ``This isnot a practical alternative because of the transportation and settlementsystems that would have to be developed to accommodate such direct presentment.''A small number of bank commenters discussed the cost implications of thedirect presentment proposal. Provident National Bank, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,commented, ``It is also not a feasible alternative because of the largenumber of credit unions and the costs associated with direct presentment(transportation, cash letter processing and transaction costs). In additionto these costs are the costs associated with the manual outsorting of itemsand the manual intervention in those systems used to assign availabilityto customer deposits.'' The Sovran Financial Corporation stated, ``* * * to operationally effectdirect presentment, we must manually sort through checks (in the case ofone major payable through bank, some 30,000 items per day) to separateout those drawn on local institutions. To preserve some semblance of anaudit trail, the items drawn on the distant payable through processor.would have to be rerun on our high speed check sorting equipment, and anothercash letter created. The smaller groups of items drawn on individual localissuing institutions would similarly have to be rerun. Depending on theinternal cost structures of individual banks, the incremental per-itemcost to rerun these items could range from $0.005 to $0.012 cents per itempass. We estimate, given current annual volumes of payable through draftscleared through one major national payable through processor, that reprocessingthese items would cost us approximately $70,000 per year_excluding anyforward presentment fees that we might also incur. Reconcilement and adjustmentcosts due to errors following from such a manually intensive endeavor wouldrise as well.'' Bank of America estimated that the cost of sorting thechecks manually for direct presentment would be $800,000 per year. Very few commenters commented on the appropriate lead time for implementationof this proposal. Suggested time frames ranged from immediately upon adoptionof the amendment to three to four years after adoption. The Board believes that there is not sufficient justification to clarifyby regulation that a bank payable through check can be presented directlyto the bank on which it is written. Therefore, the Board has not adoptedthis proposal. <T3>Miscellaneous Recommendations. </T3>A number of commenters suggestedalternatives other than the proposals issued by the Board. A small numberof commenters noted that they disagreed with the Board's decision not toappeal the court ruling and urged the Board to appeal the ruling. FirstPennsylvania Bank, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, stated, ``* * * we urgethe Board to reconsider their previous position on this matter and to appealthe Federal court ruling concerning the treatment of payable through checks.''Some commenters recommended that the Board should seek amendments to theAct. The United BN Credit Union, St. Paul, Minnesota, stated, ``Save thetaxpayers money by sending your proposals for comment to all Congressmenand suggest they amend the law. They could amend the law to say checksdrawn on local banks are local checks and checks drawn on nonlocal banksare nonlocal checks, PERIOD.'' The Board supports an amendment to the Actthat would amend the definition of ``originating depository institution''to mean the branch of a depository institution on which a check is drawnor through which a check is payable. If this amendment were enacted, thepayable through bank would be defined as the paying bank in the regulationfor the purpose of determining whether a payable through check is a localor nonlocal check.A number of commenters requested the Board to require that bank payablethrough checks be deposited with a special deposit slip in order to receivelocal availability. Marine Midland Bank commented, ``If the proposal toMICR encode a routing number which is local to the paying bank is not adoptedby the Board, Marine would request the Board to consider permitting banksto require that bank payable through checks be deposited in person witha special deposit slip to a bank employee in order to get availabilityaccording to the schedule for local paying banks, if the paying bank isnot in the same check processing region as the payable through bank.''This would require an amendment to the Act because, under the Act, theBoard does not have the authority to lengthen the availability schedulesby requiring the use of special deposit slips as a condition for providinglocal availability to certain payable through checks. A small number of commenters recommended that the Board should documentthe fraud, if any, caused by payable through checks and, if necessary,suspend the regulation for payable through checks. The Missouri CreditUnion League commented, ``Since the Fed has the authority to suspend theRegulation for certain classes of items, this appears to be more than adequateprotection for the participants in the check collection system. Ratherthan be proactive without cause, a more prudent approach is to be reactivewith cause.'' The Independent Bankers Association of America recommended ``that the Boardadopt an amendment to Regulation CC requiring credit unions with payablethrough share draft programs to respond on a timely basis, to all inquiriesfrom depositary banks on items over $500.'' A similar proposal was issuedfor public comment in December 1987, which would require banks issuingcashier's or teller's checks or certifying checks to respond to such inquiries.Several commenters on that proposal indicated that the provision wouldnot protect depositary banks completely because many forgeries and counterfeitswould go undetected. They also noted that depositary banks would not knowwhere to direct the inquiry within the paying bank to obtain reliable information,or may not be able to contact or receive a response from the paying bankwithin a reasonable time. Therefore, the Board does not believe this proposalshould be issued for public comment. A number of credit union commenters requested that the Board delay considerationof these proposals to allow sufficient time to evaluate the effects ofRegulation CC on the check collection system. CBI Oak Brook Federal CreditUnion commented, ``* * * give the new system a year to function and gathersome facts and figures on nonlocal payable-through-bank returns. Theremight be better ways to solve this liability problem in the future (ifit exists) than the proposals that have been made.'' A number of depositarybanks have expressed concern about their ability to comply with the revisedregulation, and the Board believes it is appropriate to adopt amendmentsat this time. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis </ITAG>The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires an agency topublish a final regulatory flexibility analysis when it promulgates a finalrule. Two of the requirements (5 U.S.C. 603(a) (1) and (2)) of a finalregulatory flexibility analysis, (1) a succinct statement of the need for,and the objectives of, the rule and (2) a summary of the issues raisedby the public comments in response to the initial regulatory flexibilityanalysis, a summary of the assessment of the agency of such issues, anda statement of any changes made in the proposed rule as a result of suchcomments are contained in the supplementary material above. A third requirement of a final regulatory flexibility analysis (5 U.S.C.604(a)(3)) is a description of each of the significant alternatives tothe rule consistent with the stated objectives of applicable statutes anddesigned to minimize any significant economic impact of the rule on smallentities which was considered by the agency, and a statement of the reasonswhy each one of such alternatives was rejected. As described in the abovepreamble, the Board included in its initial proposal several alternativerules, and requested and received comment on the cost and risk associatedwith each alternative for all affected entities, both large and small.After considering the comments and the costs and benefits of the variousalternatives on the affected entities, the Board adopted a final rule whichit believes will have the minimum impact on small entities, generally creditunions, while still achieving the objectives of the rule. The reasons forthe Board's final determinations are more fully described above. The Boarddid not, however, either propose or adopt an exemption from coverage forsmall institutions that use payable through checks. The purpose of therules published today is to alleviate the operational difficulties andrisk associated with the acceptance of payable through checks by depositarybanks. This purpose would be defeated if the rules did not apply to smallinstitutions that use payable through checks because the operational andrisk problems for their checks would remain. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 229 </ITAG>Banks, banking; Federal Reserve System.For the reasons set out in the preamble, 12 CFR Part 229 is amended asfollows: <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 229_AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS AND COLLECTION OF CHECKS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 229 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Title VI of Pub. L. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552, 635, 12U.S.C. 4001 et seq.</ITAG>2. In andSection; 229.36, the heading is revised and a new paragraph (e)is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.36 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Presentment and issuance of checks. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(e) <T3>Issuance of payable through checks. </T3>A bank that arranges for checkspayable by it to be payable through another bank shall require that thefollowing information be printed conspicuously on the face of each check:(1) The name, location, and first four digits of the nine-digit routingnumber of the bank by which the check is payable; and(2) The words ``payable through'' followed by the name and location ofthe payable through bank.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">This provision shall be effective February 1, 1991, and after thatdate banks that use payable through arrangements must require their customersto use checks that meet the requirements of this provision.3. In andSection; 229.38, paragraph (d) is redesignated as paragraph (d)(1),a new heading is added to paragraph (d), and a new paragraph (d)(2) isadded to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.38 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Liability. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) <T3>Responsibility for certain aspects of checks</T3>_(1) * * * (2) <T3>Responsibility for payable through checks. </T3>In the case of a checkthat is payable by a bank and payable through a paying bank located ina different check processing region than the bank by which the check ispayable, the bank by which the check is payable is responsible for damagesunder paragraph (a) of this section, to the extent that the check is notreturned to the depositary bank through the payable through bank as quicklyas the check would have been required to be returned under andSection; 229.30(a)had the bank by which the check is payable_ (i) Received the check as paying bank on the day the payable through bankreceived the check; and (ii) Returned the check as paying bank in accordance with andSection; 229.30(a)(1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Responsibility under this paragraph shall be treated as negligenceof the bank by which the check is payable for purposes of paragraph (c)of this section. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>4. Appendix E_Commentary to Part 229 is amended to read as follows: a. Section 229.36 is amended by revising the heading and adding a new paragraph(e). <ITAG tagnum="74">Appendix E_Commentary </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.36 Presentment and issuance of checks </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>(e) Issuance of payable through checks. </T3>If a bank arranges forchecks payable by it to be payable through another bank, it must requireits customers to use checks that contain conspicuously on their face thename, location, and first four digits of the nine-digit routing numberof the bank by which the check is payable and the legend ``payable through''followed by the name and location of the payable through bank. The firstfour digits of the nine-digit routing number and the location of the bankby which the check is payable must be associated with the same check processingregion. (This section does not affect andSection; 229.36(b).) The requiredinformation is deemed conspicuous if it is printed in a type size not smallerthan six-point type and if it is contained in the title plate, which islocated in the lower left quadrant of the check. The required informationmay be conspicuous if it is located elsewhere on the check. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">If a payable through check does not meet the requirements of thisparagraph, the bank by which the check is payable may be liable to thedepositary bank or others as provided in andSection; 229.38. For example,a bank by which a payable through check is payable could be liable to adepositary bank that suffers a loss, such as lost interest or liabilityunder Subpart B, that would not have occurred had the check met the requirementsof this paragraph. The bank by which the check is payable may be liablefor additional damages if it fails to act in good faith.</ITAG>b. Section 229.38 is amended by redesignating the first three paragraphsof paragraph (d) as paragraph (d)(1); by adding a new heading to paragraph(d); by adding a new paragraph (d)(2) to follow newly redesignated paragraph(d)(1); and by revising the last paragraph of paragraph (d) to read asfollows: <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.38 Liability </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>(d) Responsibility for certain aspects of checks.</T3>_(1) * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) <T3>Responsibility for payable through checks. </T3>This paragraph providesthat the bank by which a payable through check is payable is liable fordamages under paragraph (a) of this section to the extent that the checkis not returned through the payable through bank as quickly as would havebeen necessary to meet the requirements of andSection; 229.30(a)(1) (the2-day/4-day test) had the bank by which it is payable received the checkas paying bank on the day the payable through bank received it. The locationof the bank by which a check is payable for purposes of the 2-day/4-daytest may be determined from the location or the first four digits of therouting number of the bank by which the check is payable. This informationshould be stated on the check. (See andSection; 229.36(e) and accompanyingCommentary.) Responsibility under paragraph (d)(2) does not include responsibilityfor the time required for the forward collection of a check to the payablethrough bank. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Generally, liability under paragraph (d)(2) will be limited in amount.Under andSection; 229.33(a), a paying bank that returns the amount of $2,500or more is not returned through the payable through bank as quickly aswould have been required had the check been received by the bank by whichit is payable, the depositary bank should not suffer damages unless ithas not received timely notice of nonpayment. Thus, ordinarily the bankby which a payable through check is payable would be liable under paragraph(a) only for checks in amounts up to $2,500, and the paying bank wouldbe responsible for notice of nonpayment for checks in the amount of $2,500or more. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Responsibility under paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) is treated as negligencefor comparative negligence purposes, and the contribution to damages underparagraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) is treated in the same way as the degree ofnegligence under paragraph (c) of this section.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,July 28, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jennifer J. Johnson, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Secretary of the Board. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-18098 Filed 8-3-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6210-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>